THE SINFVLL MAN'S SEARCH: OR SEEKING OF GOD. Preached by Henry Smith, and
published according to a true corrected Copy, sent by the Author to an
Honorable Lady.



LONDON, Printed for Cuthbert Burby. 1592.

THE SINFVLL MAN'S SEARCH.
JOB. 8.5.6.7. 5. If thou will early seek unto God, and pray to the Almighty.

6. If thou be pure and upright: then surely he will awake unto thee, and
make the habitations of thy righteousness prosperous.

7. And though thy beginning be but small: yet thy latter end shall greatly
increase.


IN a sick and evil affected body (dearly beloved) we usually see
preparatiues ministered, that the maladies may be made more fit and pliable, to
receive wholesome medicines. The like, yea and greater regard ought we to
have of our solues, which being not crasie only, or lightly affected with
sin, but sick even unto death: had need to be prepared with threats and
exhortations, comforts and consolations, one way or other, that they may be
made fit not to receive the preparatiue, but the perfection of happy
salvation. And for this cause have I made choice of this part of Scripture, as
of a light to shine unto us in darkness, a direction to our steps, and a
Lantern to our paths; while we wander through the boistrous waves of this
wicked world. The Text is plain, and object to every man's capacity,
naturally budding into blossoms: The first containing our duty which we are
to perform toward God: The second, Gods promises, if we perform this duty.

Our duty toward God is implied in these three conditions. First, If thou will early seek unto God. Secondly, If thou will pray unto the Almighty.
Thirdly, If thou be pure and upright: Division.
so that the whole consists on these three points. First, what it is that God
requires, namely, a diligent and speedy search in these words: If thou will
seek early. Secondly, how thy search is to be made in prayer, in these
words. If thou will pray to the Almighty. Thirdly, what effect these things
ought to work in us, a purity and sincerity of life, in these words: If thou
be pure and upright.

As our duty toward God consists in three points, so Gods blessings toward
us, is also threefold answerable to the same. First for seeking, he promises;
he will awake unto thee. Secondly, for praying unto him, he will make the
habitations of thy righteousness prosperous. Thirdly, for being pure and
upright, he will make thy latter end increase exceedingly: yea, though thy
beginning be but small.

First therefore concerning the search, Concerning the search.
it is a work both in desire and labor to be joined to God. In the Psalm
this stands for the burden of the song: Psalm. 107.
They called upon the Lord in the time of their trouble and he delivered them.
It is but Ask and have, Math. 6.
seek and find, knock and it shall be opened unto you. Saving that here
these things are to be regarded, to wit: how, by whom, and when we must seek
the Lord. How? First, Matt. 17, 20 Eccle. 35.
faithfully: for if ye have but as much as a grain of Mustard seed, and say
unto this mountain, remove, it shall remove, and nothing shall be impossible
unto ye. Then next, humbly, for it is the humble petition that pierces the
skies and that showed the Publican to depart home to his house, more justified
then the boasting Pharisie: and they alone that be humble and meek find rest
for their souls. And last of all, continually, for we must not faint in well
doing: because the reward is not promised to him that does, but to him that
continues to do. Gal. 6. 1 Thessalonians. ^.


But we may long seek and never find, except we seek the father by the
son: For no man knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son
shall disclose him, he is the way, 1. Tim. 2.
the truth, and the life, and no man comes to the Father but by him. There is
one God, 1. John 2.
and one mediator betwixt God and man: the man Christ Jesus. So that if we
sin, we have an advocate, Jesus Christ the just, and he is the propitiation
for our sins, only let us seek the Lord while he may be found.

And to this end the word Seeking is used in this place, that we may learn,
that as the heavens, and the planets, and the whole frame of nature, were
ordained to finish their course by motions and operation: so man, as he was
ordained to a most blessed and happy end, should attain thereunto, not by
sloth and idleness, but by an earnest seeking of the same. The kingdom of
heaven is like unto a treasure, Mat. 13, 14.
which cannot be found without seeking and digging for it. It is like the
precious Pearl, for which the wise Merchant was content not only to seek, but
to sell all that he had to buie it. God has placed us here in this world as
husbandmen, to plough up the fallow of our hearts; as laborers to work in his
vineyard: as trauailers to seek a country, as soldiers to fight the
battle of the Lord against the flesh, the world, and the devil. And for this
purpose has he proposed unto us, an untilled land, a vineyard, a triple enemy
to fight against: that we might remember, that we must till the ground, if we
will reap the fruit: that we must prune the Vine, if we will drink of the
grape: that we must fight if we will overcome. Prou 28.
He that tilleth the land (says the wise man) shall be satisfied with bread:
but he that follows idleness, shall be filled with poverty. Idleness is a
moath or canker of the mind, and the fruits thereof are wicked cogitations,
evil affections, and worse actions: corrupt trees without fruit, Jude. 1.
Pro. 24.
twice dead, and plucked up by the root, engendring in the mind a loathing of
God and godliness.

Eschew therefore idleness I beseech ye, and by the want ye find in others,
learn instructions for your selves. Be not forgetful how busy your enemy
is, if he find ye idle: first he puts ye in mind of some vanity: then
offers opportunity to practice: then he craves consent; and if ye grant
him that, he triumphs by adding practice: he leaves no means unattempted,
whereby he may subvert and bring ye to perdition. Genesis 3.
To one (as to Eua) he promises the knowledge of good and evil: Another he
seduceth with lying speeches, Exo. 7.27.
as he did Pharaoh the king, whom he deceived by false Prophets. To the Jews
he pretended the Temple of the Lord. 1. King 13.
To the Heathen he showed universalities and antiquities. And to omit
particulers, 1. Chro. 28
he leaves no mean unattempted, whereby he may entangle the souls of the
simple, and wrap them in the snares of death. Fly idleness therefore, and
seek virtue, and the way thereof: seek learning as for a jewel, make diligent
search and inquisition after her: seek early and seek late. In the morning
sow thy seed, and in the evening let not thy hand rest: seek him in the day
of trouble, and he will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify him. Seek him;
there is the commandment: he will deliver thee; there is the promise: and
thou shall glorify him; there is the condition. To disobey the commandment
is rebellion, to distrust the promise is infidelity, to refuse the condition
is vile ingratitude. Wherefore let us seek, and seek earnestly, with a
fervent spirit, and humblenes of heart; and let us persuade our selves, that
there is no seeking without finding, no opening without knocking.

Iam. 1.17.
For every good and perfect gift is from above, descending from the father of
lights. And as for many causes we are to seek to God, and to God alone, so
especially for these four.

First, because we have nothing of 1. Cor. 2. Romans 1.
Art thou wise in thine own conceit? O remember that the wisdom of the world
is foolishnes with God! O consider that the natural man understands not the
things of God! these things are hid from the wise and prudent, and are
revealed to babes and sucklings. Alas, what were man if he were once left to
himself? a map of misery, and a sinck of calamity. Alas, how were he able
to resist the fiery darts of the adversary, 2. Pet. 5. Reave. 12.
who continually goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour?
Here ye may note first his malice, for he dailye accuses us before the
chief Judge of the Kings benche: when he cannot prevail in this court, but
sees his bills of accusation repelled: then he remooueth the matter to the
Court of our own consciences, where on the one side he lays the books of
the law and statutes made against sin: on the other side, the bills of
accusation brought in against us out of the books of the law, alleging these
strict places against us: The soul that sins, shall dye the death: Curssed
is he that abides not in every point of the law, to do it. On the other
side, he brings in consciences to witness against us, and then infers
this hard conclusion: Therefore there is no hope of salvation.

Then if he see that we appeal from justice to mercy, and say; At what time
soever a sinner repents, the Judge puts all his wickedness out of his
remembrance, he deals with us as crafty worldlings deal in matters of
law, who when they see their matters pass against them in higher Courts:
bring down their case into the country, to be decided by the neighbors,
who, either for their simplicity cannot, or for their favor dare not judge of
the truth of the matter.

So our adversary, though GOD himself do discharge us, though our conscience
testify our innocence: yet he accuses in the third Court before men, where
he is bold to power out his whole venom, and poison of his malice against
us, and to forge what lies, and slanders, and Libels he list, because he
knows they shall be received as true. Thus he accused Christ Jesus our
blessed Lord and Savior before Poncius Pilate, and caused diverse false and
untrue witnesses to come in against him.

Luke 11. Ephe 6. Reave. 12.
but he is mighty therefore he is termed a Lion, the power of darkness, the
great Dragon, which drew to the earth the third part of the stars of heaven:
that is, with earthlye temptation to have overthrown them, which seemed to
shine in the Church of God as Lamps and stars. O then how easy is our
overthrow, if the Lord did not hold us up, which shine not as stars in
heaven, but creep like worms on earth!

some by the sword, burning other with fire, hanging some on the Gallows,
drowning some in Rivers, stabing some with forkes of Iron, pressing others to
death with stones, devouring many thousands of the tender Lambs of Christ's
flock.

To this malice, might, and rage, is Ioh. 1.
in the night he sows Tares, and in the day he hinders the growth
thereof.

He proceeds after further, and enforce us, sometime by changing himself
into an Angel of light, he endeavors to betraye our souls into his hands,
and in whatsoever estate he finds us, he thereby takes occasion to lay
siedge to our souls.

Thus ye see noted in a word, the force of our adversary, examine now your
selves, whether ye have any thing in your selves, and you shall find nothing
but weakness and corruption. It is God that gives strength to the mighty,
wisdom to the prudent, and knowledge to the understanding: he teaches David's
hand to fight, and his fingers to battle, Psalm. 144.
he gives strength to his arms to break a bow, even a bow of steel:
wherefore let neither the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man in
his strength: but let him that glories, glory only in the Lord.

Secondly, we are to seek unto God alone, because none is so present as he:
for God because he is almighty, and with his power fills both heaven and
earth, is present always with them that fear him, and ready to succor them
in distress. The Lord is near to all that call upon him in truth, he hears
our gronings and sighs, and knows what things are necessary for us before we
ask.

The third reason why we must seek and pray to the Almighty.

The fourth reason why we must their trust in him. Can there be any more
willing to help us then Christ? whose whole head was sick, and whose heart
was heavy for our sakes? yea, in whose body, from the sole of the foot to
the crown of the head, was nothing but wounds, and swellings, and sores? but
alas this was nothing to that he suffered for our sakes.

He was compassed about with fears and horrors, till his sweat was drops of
blood, and his bones bruised in the flesh: he was whipped, and scourged, and
chastised with sorrows, till he cried out in the bitterness of his soul: O
Lord, if it be possible let this cup pass from me. The heavy hand of God was
so grievous upon him, that it bruised his very bones and rent his reins a
sunder: he could find no health in his flesh, but was wounded, yea, wounded
to the death, even the most bitter death upon the cross. His tender fingers
were nailed to the cross, his face was wrinkled with weeping and wailing, his
sides embrued and gored with his own blood. spurting and gushing fresh from his
ribs, the shadow of death was upon his eyes.

O what grief could be like to this, or what condemnation could be so
heavy, since there was no wickedness in his hands? since he was the brightness of
his fathers glory, and the son of righteousness that shined in the world: as
to see his days at an end, to see such throbing, sighs, and careful thoughts
(without cause of his) so deeply engraven in the tables of his breast. But was
this all? no my brethren, since his excellency was such above al creatures, that
the world was not worthy to give him breath, it was a greater greef unto him,
to see himself made a worm and not a man, a shame of men, and contempt of the
people; to see his life shut up in shame and reproaches, how could it but shake
his bones out of joint, and make his heart melt in midst of his bowels: who was
ever so full of woe? and who ever bin brought so low into the dust of death? upon
whom did the malice of Satan ever get so great a conquest?

This though it were exceeding, yet it was not all, no, it was but a taste of
grief in comparison of the rest: behold therefore (if your watrie eyes will
suffer ye to behold) the depth of all miseries yet behind: the sin that he
hated he must take upon his own body, and bear the wrath of his father
powered out against it. This is the fullness of all pains that compassed him
round about, which no tongue is able to utter, nor heart conceive: the anger of
the father burns in him, even to the bottom of hell, and deep sincke of
confusion: it wrapped him in the chains of eternal death: it crucified him,
and threw him down into the bottomless pit of calamity, and made his soul
by weeping and wayling to melt into these bitter tears trickling from his
eyes. O God my God, why have thou forsaken me?

O that my head were a Well of waters, and a fountain of tears, that I might
weep day and night at the remembrance hereof: but least I linger too long
about one flower, while I have many to gather, I will conclude this point thus
in a word. Since Christ has suffered these, and an infinite number such like
torments for our sakes: it is blasphemous once to dream or imagine any to be
more willing to help us then he: nay, he is more ready to hear our prayers,
then we to offer them unto him, insomuch that he complains by the Prophet
Esaias: I have been found of them that sought me not, Esaias. 65.
all the day long have I stretched out my hand unto a rebellious people, which
walked in a way that was not good, even after their own imaginations. And unto
Jerusalem he says. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Math. 23.
how often would I have gathered you together, as the Hen gathers her
Chickens, and you would not? wherefore to end this point: Seek for knowledge
as for a treasure, and for wisdom, as for the wedge of gold of Ophir. No
mention shall be made in comparison of it, of Corrall, Gabish, or that precious
Onix, Job. 28
For wisdom is more precious then Pearls. But above all things, seek it
where it may be found, and where is this place of understanding? Surely man
knows not the path thereof: the depth says, it is not in me; the sea says,
it is not in me: death and destruction say, we have heard the fame thereof
with our ears: all creatures say, it is not with us: but God understands the
way thereof, and unto man he says: The fear of the Lord is the beginning of
wisdom, Prou 9.
and to depart from evil is understanding.

Psalm. 32
Early, even in a time when he may be found. Let us redeem this day, which
we have foreslowed so many days, wherein we have so long hardened our hearts:
let us take up this day, and make it the day of our repentance; let us make it
a day of newnes of life, as it is the first day of the new year: let even this
moment be the last of a sinful life, and the first day to godliness. And as
the wise man says: Make no long tarrying to turn unto the Lord, Eccle. 5.
and put not off from day to day, for suddenly shall the Lords wrath break, and
in thy security thou shall be destroyed, and shall perish in the time of
vengeance.

Art thou a Magistrate, placed in high room and authority, and seated in the
throne of dignity? then use not this thy might to wrong and oppression, grind
not the faces of the poor, swell not with pride, despising his low estate:
Amos. 8
Sell not thy righteousness for silver, preferring the Merchants of Babylon,
before the Citizens of Jerusalem.

Art thou a private laboring man? Do thy duty truly, be subject, and live
in dread to displease the good Magistrate. 1-Pet. 3.
Art thou old, and have consumed the flower of thy youth in wantonness?
Break off the course, and frame thy self to sobriety: give the water no
passage, no not a little: for if it have never so little issue, it will
ouer-flow thee; and if thou do slack the reins never so little, thy sins
will carry thee (like a wild horse) through brambles and bushes, and will
leave no soundness in thy flesh, work this reformation in thy self betimes,
even to day, even this first day of the new year: If ye will hear my voice,
harden not your hearts.

Art thou young, and do begin to flourish like the young Palm tree? O
consider, that the only way to retain the blossom of thy beauty, and to
keep thy flower from withering, and thy leaf from fading away: is to seek
earlye unto GOD, and to apply thy mind to understanding; to prevent the
morning watches, and to give thy body to be moystened of the morning dew! For
beside the good hours that are well employed in some good study and holy
exercise: earlye rising brings health to the body, and increases the number
of thy days.

Seek therefore, and seek early, consecrate your selves Nazarites unto the
Lord, touch no unclean thing, give no provocation to the flesh. Strive with
the Cock in watchfulnes, Eccle. 12.
and rise with the chirping of the birds: sacrifice your body a sweet smelling
sacrifice unto the Lord. This sacrifice is like a sacrifice of fine flower: it
is like the fat taken from the peace offering: yea, it is better then any
sacrifice, Eccle. 32, 47.50
it is like the flower of Roses in the spring of the year, and as the Lillies
by the springs of waters, and as the branches of Frankensence in the time of
Summer: and as a vessel of massy gold beset with precious stones, as a fair
Olive that is fruitful, and as the tree that grows up to the clouds. Having
spoken of the Search, it follows that I speak of the manner how it is to be
made: In prayer, by these words; If thou pray unto the Almighty.

I showed ye before the force of our adversary; receive now a Sheeld against
his force, even the shield of prayer. He is not to be resisted by ringing an
hallowed bell, not by sprinkling of holy water, not by the relikes of saints,
not by our own works and merits, for these are weapons of his own making: but
by an earnest seeking to GOD, which search and seeking must be made by prayer,
against which his poisoned venom takes no effect.

It is his malice that accuses? prayer pleads thy case before God; and
repelleth all his accusations: for all the prophets do witness, Math. 2.
that whatsoever we ask in prayer, if we believe we shall receive it. It is his
rage and fury that should terrify us? nay, that prayer that strengthened
Sampson to rent a young Lion, as one should have rent a Kid, having nothing in
his hand, shall smite and shut up the mouth of this Lion. As for his
policy, and walking up and down, seeking to devour us: it cannot prevail,
Iam. 5.25.
for the prayer of the faithful shall save them, and the Lord shall raise them
up; and if they have committed sin, it shall be forgiven them: and after this
conflict ended, they shall triumph for ever with Jesus Christ our Savior.

But in any case, see you unite to your prayer, knowledge, that ye be not
seduced to offer your petitions to strange gods, as Saints, stocks or stones.
John. 16.
Then consent, that we ask only in the name of Christ Jesus, not for any
desert of our own: for whosoever believes in Christ, shall have remission of
sins, Acts. 15.1^
he shall not perish; but have life everlasting, he shall not come into
judgment, but shall pass from death to life. Lastly, a confidence, which is,
a certain persuasion of Gods favor and mercy toward us: this is that prayer,
of which the Lamb testifies; Math. 18.
that whatsoever we ask by this prayer, it shall be given to us by God the
father. A thing (dearly beloved) so precious, that nothing is more accepted in
heaven, nothing more grateful to God: a service commanded of God himself,
taught by Christ our Savior, and frequented by the Angels: a thing of more
force with God, then any oration of the eloquent.

Have thou not heard how the Sun stood still in the firmament, Iosu. 10.
and was not suffered to run his course? Joshua and Ezechias prayed, and the
Sun stood still. 2. King. 20
Have thou not heard of the stopping of the Lions mouths? Dan. 6.
Daniell prayed, and his prayer stopped the Lions greedy and devouring throtes.
the waters of Jorden were dried up, yea the Israelites prayed, and the waters
stood about them like unto a wall. Have thou not heard of the dividing of the
red sea? Exodus 24.
the Israelites prayed, and Have thou not heard how the fiery furnace lost
his heat? Dan. 3.
the three children prayed, 1. King. 8.
and the fire lost his heat. Have thou not heard how the heavens were opened
and shut? Elyas prayed, and the heavens were shut up three years; Elyas
prayed, and the clouds powered down rain from heaven.

O sure Fortress, more forcible then any engine, and stronger then the gates
of hell, and to conclude the sum and substance of all in few words: the only
thing whereby mortal men have the clouds, and the stars, and the Angels, and
all the powers of heaven at commandment. Iud. 5.
For as Deborah sung in her song: They fought from heaven, even the stars in
their courses fought against Sisera: so all creatures have been subject to the
prayers of the faithful, to revenge the Lords quarrel, to help the Lord,
to help the Lord against the mighty. Prayer has ever bin the cognizance,
and the victory, and the triumph of the faithful: for as the soul gives
life to the body, so prayer gives life to the soul.

O that I could engraue the love of it in your hearts, as with a Diamond, and
so instill your minds, that my words might be pricks unto your consciences,
and thereby give ye occasion to pray often. It is a wonderful matter to be
able to persuade men, but if prayer be able to persuade the living God: oh how
great is the force thereof? it goes through the clouds, and cease not till it
come near, and will not depart, till the most high have respect thereunto. O
that you would therefore pray often, and learn of Christ (the most absolute
pattern of our life) to pray continually. He prayed in his baptism, Luke. 9.
Luke 5 Luke. 6. John. 11. Math. 26. John. 18. Luke. 22. Luke 23. Math. 19.
in the wilderness, in preaching, in working of miracles, in his passion, on
the mount, in the Garden, in his last supper, in commending his spirit to God
at al times, and in all places, that he might leave unto us an example of the
same.

It follows; and to pray to the Almighty. To those three former reasons
which I brought, why we must seek and pray to God alone: I added this as a
fourth, because there is none so able to help us as the Lord. Psalm. 39
He that puts his trust in the Lord, shall be as mount Sion. Romans 8.
If God be on our side, who can be against us? It is God that justifies, who
condemns? 2. Tim. 4
The Lord destroieth the counsel of the Heathen, he makes their devises to
be of no effect. Christ is the Angel of great counsel, Psalm. 33 Esaias. 9.
Prou. 2.
wisdom and understanding, and there is no devise against the Lord.

The world (notwithstanding is come to that frame, that every man has gotten
him a strange kind of belief. Some believe not the law but the prophets: some
be persuaded in the supremacy, but not in the sacrament: some in free will,
but not in merit: some in invocation upon saints, but not in purgatory; some
in pilgrimages and pardons, but not in Images: some like the doctrine well
enough, but not the preachers: the most believe little, yet many believe
somewhat, few believe all: therefore to deal plainly, because plain dealing is
best, you must not believe by the halfes; I mean, you must not repose some
trust in God, and some in Saints, but all in the Lord. Psalm. 10 5.
The Gods of the Gentiles they have mouths and speak not, eyes and see not,
ears and hear not, then what can be looked for at their hands? But the Lord
is strong and mightic, a merciful God: and therefore through the Scriptures,
he is called a Rock, a Fortress, Psalm. 18
a strong Tower, a Sheeld, a horn of salvation, a refuge, the Lord of
Hoastes, with other such like appellations, that we might be assured, that our
help and deliverance comes from the Lord.

Put thou any trust in man, whose breath is in his nosthrils? Curssed is he
that makes man his strength, Iere. 77.
and flesh his arm. 2. King. 16
Surely Pharaoh, and all princes are a broken staff, on which if a man lean,
it will strike into his hand and pierce it, and lay him groueling in the dust:
It is better therefore to trust in the Lord, Psalm. 118.
then to put any confidence in Princes. Think thou that Angels, or Saints,
or Images, can help thee? O foolish and impious piety, to attribute more unto
the Angels, then they dare arrogate unto themselves. The Angel in the
Revelation, Reave. 19
forbids John to worship him. As for the Image, we read, that to turn the
glory of the incorruptible God, into the similitude of a corruptible creature,
is idolatry. Romans 1.
Well may I then affirm with Moses, Deu. 27.
curssed be the Image and the Image maker. The conclusion therefore of this
point, is this, that we seek the Lord and his strength ever more, that we pray
unto God in humility and sincerity, and in full assurance of faith
continually: who without end is to be sought, because without end he is to be
beloved.

The third thing contained in our duty is, what effect this seeking and
praying ought to work in us, comprehended in these words: If thou be pure and
upright. If the clouds be full, they will power forth rain upon the earth:
and impossible is it, that a man that seeks after God and prays to the
Almighty, should not bring forth the fruits of a godly life; for if the tree
be good, the fruits cannot be bad: and if the head of the water be pure, it
will send forth pure waters into the Cesterns. Wherefore as good motions are
stirred up by prayer, so must they be fostered by practice of life, according
to that of the Apostle: Quench not the spirit, 1. These. 5.
nor grieve the holy one of God, by whom ye are sealed to the day of
redemption.

He quenches dearly beloved the spirit, Ephe. 4.
which being once lightened with the sparckles of faith, and felt Gods motions
in his heart: does neglect to increase the one to a flame, and the other to
good works in his life, but with the dogs turns to his vomit, and with the
Sow that was washed, to her wallowing again in the mire. Therefore (beloved)
love and seek the Lord, pray to the Almighty, be pure and upright in
conversation, fly from sin as from a serpent; for if thou come near, it
will bite thee. The teeth thereof are as the teeth of a Lion, to slay the souls
of men, and all iniquity is as a two edged sword, the wounds that it gives
cannot be healed. I dare not scand as I would upon these points, fearing
tediousnes: wherefore let this suffice for the former general part, concerning
the duty we owe unto God.

Now Gods promises for the performance hereof, yield unto us most plentiful
matter of doctrine and consolation. First, of his justice, that as he will
suffer no sin unpunished: so he will leave no good work unrewarded, but
gives to every several action his several hyre, and just recompense of
reward. Shall the hour come, in which all that are in their graves shall
hear a voice, and come forth: they that have done well, to the resurrection
of life, they that have done evil, to the resurrection of condemnation? Shall
the Lord search Jerusalem with Lanthorns? Shall all foul corners be swept,
and all pleits and wrinckles be unfolded? Shall the sea, grave, death and hell,
give up all that is in them? and shall all the dead (both great and small)
stand before GOD, when the books are opened? and shall every man have praise
of God according unto his deserving? Shall we then discern between the
vessels of honor and of wrath, between Sheep and Goats, the just and
unjust? Finally, shall there be an infallible, general, and incorrupt
judgment, wherein the book of al our offenses shall be laid wide open? Now
God be merciful unto us: Psalm. 2.
be favorable O Lord, be favorable. But to proceed, is it thy nature (O
Lord) to gather up the wheat, Math 13.15 30, 41
and burn the tares; to cut down all frutlesse trees, and cast them into the
fire: yea, into a fiery furnace, that never shall be quenched; into an utter
darkness, where is weeping, wayling, and gnashing of teeth; then be
favorable O Lord, be favorable.

Does not the Lord spare David a king and a prophet, for murder? does he
not spare the Sichemites for adultery; nor Absolon for treason? nor Saul for
tyranny? nor Elie for negligence? nor Achab, Jeroboam, nor Iezabell for
cruelty? nor Herod, Nabuchadnezar, and Lucifer for pride; nor Paraoh for
incredulity: then be favorable O Lord, be favorable to us, in whom almost
every one of these sins do dwell and remain.

Did the Lord for corruption ouerflow the world with water? did he burn Sodom
for her villainy? did he cast Adam and Eve out of Paradise, for eating of the
forbidden fruit? did he stone a poor wretch to death, for gathering chips on
the Sabbath day? then be favorable O Lord, be favorable unto us. But does
not the Lord spare the Cedar tree for his height? nor the Oak for his
strength? nor the Poplar for his smoothnes? nor the Laurel for his greennes?
No verily, from the Cedar that is in Lybanon, even to thy Hysope that grows
out of the wall, yea, every one that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn
down and cast into the fire: it is a righteous thing with God, to render
vengeance to those that disobey him, and to destroy such as have forsaken the
law by everlasting perdition.

Behold, Reave. 1.7.
the Lord shall come in the great and latter day of judgment, when none shall
escape his judgment seat, 2. Cor. 5.
with clouds shall he come, and every eye shall see him, even they which
pierced him through, shall also wayle before him, being summoned all to appear
most fearefullye before his imperial throne of Majesty: then be favorable O
Lord, be favorable. Alas, with whateies shall we miserable sinners behold him,
so gloriously sitting in his royal kingdom, with all his mighty and holy
Angels, and whole number of Saints, 2. Pet. 3.
sounding with the voice of the archangell, and trumpet of God: causing the
heavens to pass away with a noise, and the elements to melt like wax, and the
earth to burn with the works thereof? yea, with what eyes shall we behold
him, when we see the Sun darkened, the Moon eclipsed, and the stars fall
down from heaven? But alas when he takes the furbished blade into his hand,
when he is ready to throw the fiery thunderbolts of his wrath, when he
summoneth before him the worm that never dies, the fire that never shall be
quenched, to revenge on the wicked: into what a plight are they then driven?
then leave they off; be favorable O Lord, be favorable, and say to the
hills: O ye mountains, come and cover us, O ye waters, come and ouerwhelme
us: woe, woe, woe, how great is this darkness? The godly on the other side, are
bathed in such streams of bliss, and advanced to such happiness, as neither
tongue can utter, nor heart conceive.

The second thing we have to note in his promises, is his mercy, which
exceeds all his works. For God, though he have given a curse of the law
against sinners, yet seeing Christ for the penitent has borne the curse,
whereby his justice is not impaired: he is content to accept our weakness as our
strength, to recompense our imperfections with reward of greatest perfection,
and that which we can perform but in small part, he is content to accept as
whole: not for any desert of ours, but in the satisfaction of his son, who
paid with the seal of his own blod, the ransom for our sins, he has
cancelled the hand writing that was against us. Wherefore we are to pray unto
God, that whenever our sins shall come in question before him: that he would
look upon Christ Jesus, the true loking glass, in who^ he shall find us most
pure and innocent, and to shine most clearly in the righteousness which he has
given us by faith: so that we appear not in our own righteousness, but in the
righteousness of the lamb, who having taken away the sins of the world, and
having made us as white as snow, though we were as red as Crimson: says, he
will be merciful to our iniquities, and will remember our sins no more. Of
him do all the Prophets bear witness, that through his name, all that
believe, shall receive remission of their sins. Again drink ye all of
this, for this is my blood, which is shed for the remission of sins. Christ
gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from the curse of the
law, even according to the will of his father. Christ bare our sins in his
own body on the tree, that we being delivered from sin, might live in
righteousness: by whose stripes we are healed, for we were as sheep going
astray, but are now returned to the shepherd and Bishop of our souls. It is
no more but believe, and be saved; believe and receive remission; believe, and
lay of thine own righteousness, and inuest thy self with the righteousness of
the unspotted Lamb.

David was young, and after was old: yet in all his days he never saw the
righteous forsaken. Sometimes he scourges his children; but like a loving
father: he lays no more upon them then they are able to bear; for he
afflicts them for his own justice, because they are sinners; for his
wisdom, to exercise their faith; for his mercy, to cause them to repent: but
this is the end of all, he helps them in their distresses, he reuengeth
himself upon his enemies, and gives to his people rest and quietness. O that
we would therefore praise the Lord, and forget not all other his singular
benefits: O that we would confess, that his mercy endures for ever.

The third thing to note in his promises, is his bountiful kindness, in
requiring so small a thing, with so great and liberal blessings: and binds
himself by obligation (as it were) that as sure as we perfome the one, so he
will not fail to accomplish the other.

The fourth, is his patience and long suffering, which is not slacknesse, as
some men account slacknesse: but is patience, because willingly he would have
no man to perish, but gladly would have all men come to repentance. He is
content to stay our leisure, till we seek and pray unto him: and never
smites, till there be no hope of redress.

The fist, is his love, in that he is content to stir us up to holy
exercises, and purity of life, and to allure us with fair promises of aid,
and prosperous increase of all his blessings in this world. The particular
examination of these blessings, would require a large discourse, then (fearing
tediousnes) I dare presume to trouble ye withal: wherefore a word of each,
and so I end.

Touching the first, where it is said, God will awake up unto thee, it is a
greater benefit then the words import: for it signifies not only that he will
hear thee; but that he will also do what thou desire, and satisfy thy
request. As long as the sinner sleeps, the Lord is said to be a sleep: but
as soon as the sinner awaketh from sin, Psalm. 78.
God will arise (says David) and his enemies shall be scattered: and they
that hate him, shall fly before him, as the smoke vanishes before the wind,
and as the wax melts against the fire, even so shall the wicked perish at the
presence of God. Wherefore, as Paul exhorted the Ephesians, so I exhort you:
Awake thou that sleep, stand up from the dead, Ephe. 5.
and Christ shall give thee light: awake unto God and God will awake unto thee,
and Christ even the son of God, the bright morning star, shall give thee the
light of life.

In the second, he promises abundance of worldly blessings, in recompense of
prayer, for it is said: He will make the habitations of thy righteousness
prosperous: Reave. 22.^
that is, Psalm. 112.
the Lord will make peace within thy walls, and prosperity within thy
palaces: Deu. 28.
he will command his blessings to be with thee in thy store house, and in
all thou set thy hand unto: he will open unto thee his good treasures, even
the Heavens to give rain on thy land in due season. Thou shall lay up gold,
Job. 22.
as the dust, and the gold of Ophir, as the flint of the river: Job. 29.
thou shall wash thy paths with butter, and thy rocks shall power out rivers
of Oil: thou shall call salvation thy wall, and praise shall be in thy gates.
Psalm. 128.
Lo, thus shall the man be blessed that fears God.

Lastly, for being pure and upright: he will make thy latter end greatly
increase, and that thou may the less mistrust his promise, he will do it,
though thy beginning be but small.

Here (brethren) ye see what a sea of matter is offered me, whereunto if I
would commit my self, I might discourse unto ye, what strange events (by
Gods providence) have happened in the world, what great Kings and Potentates
have been plucked down from their thrones, and what contemptible persons in
the eye of the world, have been advanced to their rooms. How Mardocheus a
stranger was exalted into Hamons place: Hest. 8.
how Joseph and Daniell, Genesis 30.
the one a bondman in Egypt, the other a Captive in Babylon, Dan. 6.
were made Princes in those kingdoms. But because I will not overmuch
transgress the bonds of modesty, or hold ye longer then in this place I have
been accustomed: only remember what the Prophet says; He raises the needy
out of the dust, and lifts the poor out of the mire, Psalm. 113.
that he might set him with the Princes, even with the princes of the world.

Remember the example of David, whom the Lord chose, and took from the Ewes
great with young: that he might feed his people in Iaacob, Psalm. 78.
and his inheritance in Israel. Remember the example of Job, Job. 42.
how the Lord turned the captivity of Job, as the rivers in the south, how he
blessed the last days of Job more then the first, how he gave him sheep, and
Camels, and Oxen, Psalm. 126.
and she Asses in more abundance then he had before; Psalm. 42.
how he increased him with sons and daughters, even to the fourth
generation, so that he dyed being old and full of days. Remember even our
own estate, for whom the Lord has done great things already: as created
us, and redeemed us, and sanctified us, and not long since delivered us from
the gaplng jaws of those that sought to suck our blood. Upon some he has
bestowed humilitye, whereby their minds are adorned with virtue: honor upon
others, whereby their persons are invested with majesty: upon others
comeliness, whereby the other two are graced: upon others Orchards which they
planted not, or at least to which they gave no increase: upon others, increase
of virtuous children, whereby their posterity is preserved: upon others, the
free passage of his word, which along time had been obscured by ignorance,
the mother of devotion, as the shauelings call it, but under a stepdame of
destruction as we perceive it: and though he bestow but some one or two of
his blessings upon us, yet how much are we bound for these blessings, Reave.
9.
to sing praise, and honor, and glory, unto him that sits upon the
throne, and unto the Lamb for ever. But upon whom he has bestowed all
these blessings: O how strictlye by good cause are they bound to magnify the
Lord, and to rejoice in God their Savior. Examine then your own consciences,
I beseech ye, whether GOD has bestowed all these blessings upon you, or no,
and if he have: O what great cause have ye to come before his face with
praise, Psalm. 95. Psalm. 96
to sing loud unto him with Psalms, to worship and to fall down before him,
to give unto the Lord the glory of his name, to bring an offering of thanks
giving, and to enter into his Courts with praise. And yet who knows, whether
the Lord has greater blessings for ye in store, ye may be sure he will pull
down the mighty from their seat, and exalt the humble and meek, Surely, the
Lord does use virtue as a mean to bring us to honor, and whosoever you
shall see endued with the virtues of this text, I mean, with seeking unto God,
with prayer and purity of life: ye may be sure there is a blessing reserved
for him of the Lord, yea, such a blessing, as though his beginning be but
small, yet his latter end shall greatly increase.

God increase the love of these things in our hearts, and make us worthy of
Christ's blessings, which he has plentifully in store for us: that after he
has heaped temporal blessings upon us, he would give us the blessing of all
blessing, even the life of the world to come.

The time is spent, etc. let us end with prayer, etc.

FINIS.
MARY'S CHOICE. With prayers written by the same Author. By Henry Smith.



LONDON ^^inted by T. Scarlet, for Cuthbert Burby, 1592.

MARY'S CHOICE.
LVKE. 10.38, 39, etc. 38 Now it came to pass as they went, that he entered
into a certain town, and a certain woman named Martha, received him into her
house.

39 And she had a sister called Marie, which also sat at Jesus feet, and
heard his preaching.

40 But Martha was combered about much serving, and came to him, and said,
Master, do thou not care, that my sister has left me to serve alone? bid
her therefore, that she help me.

41 And Jesus answered, and said unto her, Martha, Martha, thou carest and art
troubled about many things:

42 But one thing is needful, Marie has chosen the good part, which shall not
be taken away from her.


AS Christ had showed himself loving unto Lazarus and his sisters, John. 11.
in raising him from the death of the body, and then from the death of the
soul: so do they here show their thankful minds to Christ again, the one by
receiving him into her house, and the other by entertaining him into her heart.
As he was God he was received of Mary: as he was man he was received of
Martha. They both desired to entertain our Savior as Jacob and Esau desired
to please their aged father, Genesis 27.
but Mary made choice of the better part, and was preferred before her sister,
as Jacob sped soonest of most dainty Venison, and prevented his brother of the
blessing. And although the care of Martha in the entertaining of Christ be not
to be misliked; yet Mary's diligence in hearing his doctrine is of purpose
preferred, to teach us, that it is much better with Marie to study in the
word, Math. 6, 33
and first to seek the kingdom of God, then with Martha to labor in the
world, and to neglect that heavenly kingdom. And yet notwithstanding, such is
the corruption of this rustie age, that our greatest care is to provide for
this present life, as the rich man, Luke 12. that enlarged his barnes wherein
to put his store for many years: but we never or very late remember to provide
for the life to come, like that other rich man, Luke 16. that never thought of
heaven, till he was tormented in the flames of hell.

In the 11. of John, Christ is said to love his whole family; and here he is
said to come unto them. For whom he loves he cannot choose but visit, Job. 2.
like the friends of Job that came to comfort him in his great adversity, yea
and the greater love he bears unto any, the oftener he will resort unto them,
yea he will come and dwell with them. Genesis 47.
John. 14.23. Like Jacob that came down into Egypt, to his beloved son
Joseph, and dwelt in Goshen. But Christ is yet more kind then Jacob was, Genesis
45.
for he came not till he was sent for with horses and Chariots, but Christ
came of his own accord to this beloved family. Thus does he always prevent
us with his blessings: before he was desired he came into the world, he
called his Apostles before they came to him, and before he was requested he
came unto this noble house. O happy house that enterteyned such a guest, but
thrice happy inhabitants to whom such a guest would vouchsafe to come! When
he came unto the swinish Gadarenes, they desired him to depart out of their
coasts, preferring their Swine above their Savior: Luke. 8.
but this godly family received him into their house, preferring their God
before their gold, and the health of their souls, before their worldly
wealth. Matthew. 8.19
They received him into their house, who had not a house wherein to put his
head. Matt. 25.
Wherein their hospitality is commended, and shall certainly be rewarded at
that dreadful day: for with this and such like works of mercy, the Lord shall
answer the sentence of judgment, which is to be denounced against the wicked,
that never exercised those works of mercy. Let us learn by their example to
be harberous and given to hospitality, which is so often commended unto us in
the Scripture, and shall be so richly rewarded at the last day. Those godly
Fathers Abraham and Lot, Genesis 18. Genesis 19.
enterteyned Angels in the habit of strangers: So we may daily entertain
Christ Jesus* in the habit of a poor man, of a blind man, of a lame man, and
whatsoever is done unto any of these that are his members, he accompteth and
accepts as done unto himself. Now as this virtue of hospitality is
commendable in all sorts of men: so is it more specially commended to the
ministers, who are expressly commanded by the Apostle among other things, 1.
Tim. 3.2
to be given to hospitality. Number. 35.
Unto the Levites in the time of the law, the Lord appointed cities of
refuge, to signify that the Ministers house should be the poor man's harbor,
and his store their treasury: but the true ministers of our days have no
cities of refuge for others, for they have none for themselves: they have not
wherewith to relieve the wants of others, for they have not to relieve their
own.

When Martha had thus enterteyned Christ as he was man into her house, Marie
began to enterteine him as he was God into her heart, she sat at his feet to
hear his preaching, for no sooner was Christ come into the house, but that he
took occasion to teach and instruct the family, and in steed of bodily food
which they bestowed upon him, to give unto them the food of the soul. Thus
does he always show himself a thankful guest, into what house so ever he
enters, he leaves better things behind him then he finds, he loves not to
be in Zacheus debt for his dinner, Luke. 19.
for instead thereof he brings salvation to his house, neither does he
leave his supper unpaid for here, for instead thereof he bestows upon
them a heavenly sermon. This should be the exercise of faithful ministers when
they are invited to great feasts, that as they are called the salt of the
earth, Matthew. 5.13
which serves to season the meats to make them sauery, and preserve them from
putrefaction, so they should season the table talk with some godly conference,
to minister grace unto the hearers, Ephe. 4, 29.

These sisters were godly women, and both earnest favorers of Jesus Christ,
and yet in the manner of their devotion there is such difference, that the
worldly affection of the one may in some sort be misliked, in respect of the
godly exercise and practice of the other: Martha is sore encumbred with much
serving, where a little service had been sufficient: But Marie is attentive to
hear the word of God which never can be heard sufficiently.

Matthew. 5.
Marie sits to hear the word, as Christ used to sit when he preached the
word, Luke. 4.
to show that the word is to be preached and heard with a quiet mind. John. 8.
In a still night every voice is heard, and when the body is quiet, the mind
most commonly is quiet also. But Martha is troubled with other affairs, and
therefore unfit to hear the word: as the ground that is surcharged with
stones, Math. 5.13.
or ouergrowne with weeds and thorns, is unfit to receive the seed, or yield
any fruit to him that tilleth it. As often therefore as we come to hear the
word of God, we must not come with distracted minds, we must not trouble our
selves with the cares of this life, Luke. 8.14.
which (as our savior says) are thorns to choke the word, and to make it
unfruitful. Exodus 3.
For as Moses was unfit to talk with God till he had put off his shoes,
Mark. 1^.
and the blind man unfit to come to Christ till he had thrown away his
cloak, so we must think our selves unfit to hear the word, and unapt for
every heavenly exercise, til we have put off our shoes, that is, our worldly
cogitations and affections, and till we have cast away our cloak, that is, all
lets and impediments which might hinder us from profiting in our profession.

When our minds are quiet, Luke. 3.
we are fit to deal with heavenly matters, therefore the Doctors conferred
sitting in the Temple: and God delights to deal with us when we are most
private: Genesis 18.
he appeared to Abraham sitting in the door of his Tent. The holy Ghost came
down upon the Apostles, Acts. 2.
and filled all the house where they were sitting. The Eunuch sitting in his
charret, Acts. 8.
was called and converted by Philips preaching.

Marie sat at Jesus feet, yet sat she not sleeping as many sit at the
Preachers feet, but she sat at Christ his feet and heard his word. As Paul
was brought up at the feet of Gamaleell, Acts. 22.
and was perfectly instructed in the law of the Fathers.

Her humility is commended, in that she sat at Jesus feet, to show that the
word is to be heard with all humility: her diligence and earnestnes
appears, in that she would not depart to help her sister, to signify that
the hearing of the word must be preferred before worldly business.

Her diligence and humility, serves to condemn our negligence, and contempt
of Christ and his word: we do not sit at Christ his feet, nay we rather set
Christ at our feet, when we are so negligent in hearing of his word.

We are as slow to come to the Church, Genesis 8.
as the Raven was to come to the Arc, and as loath to spend any time in the
service of God, Exodus 8.32.
as Pharao was loath to let the Israelites go to serve the Lord. If a
commodity were to be seen whereout some profit might arise, how careful
would we be to procure it? what pains would we take to get it? Absalon was
not more desirous of a kingdom, 2. Sam. 15.
then the rich men of our time are desirous of golden gain. But if it be a
matter of cost or trouble, if they cannot hear the word preached without
some hinderance to their worldly business, and some extraordinary charge to
their pursse, then like the Gadarenes, Luke. 8. Matt. 13.45
they are content to take their leave of Christ and his word, and had rather
loose that heavenly Pearl, then they would part from their earthly pelf.

Thus in Christ we have the pattern of a good Pastor, and in Marie the
pattern of a good hearer: Let Ministers learn by his example, to take all
occasions to preach the word, 2. Tim. 4.2.
to be instant in season and out of season, and let Christians learn by her
example, Matthew. 6.
first to seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and then to provide
for the things of this life.

While Marie was careful for the food of the soul, Martha was curious to
provide food for the body, her greatest care was to enterteyne Christ and to
make him good cheer, to testify her thankful mind unto him that had done
so great things for them, he had raised her brother Lazarus from death to
life, therefore he was worthy to be well enterteyned. 1. King. 17.


If Elias deserved to be well dealt withal at the hand of his hostess,
whose son he had restored to life: 2. King. ^.
or Elysa deserved such enterteynement for her sons reviving; then surely
our Savior Christ was worthy to be welcome hither, where he had raised
Lazarus out of his grave, wherein he had line by the space of four days
before. John. 11.
It was well done therefore of Martha to show her thankful mind unto
Christ, but it was not well done at that time to show her self thankful in
that manner, it was then time to hear the word: for at that time Christ
preached the word, it was no time for her to spend that time in other
affairs, and to neglect the greatest affair, the means of her own salvation.

It was not unlawful for Martha to labor, no more then it was unlawful for
Peter to sleep, but when Christ was preaching, it was no time for her to be
so busy in serving, no more then it was time for Peter to sleep when Christ
willed him so earnestly to watch and pray. Matthew. 26.
When Christ preached out of Symons ship to the people that stood upon the
shore, Luke. 5.
it was no time for Peter to play the Fisherman. But when Christ had left
speaking and commanded him to launch into the deep, then it was time for Peter
to let down the net. There is a time wherein we ought to labor in our
vocation, and a time wherein we ought to hear the word, and as we may not
utterly neglect our lawful callings, to follow sermons, so must we not
bestow the Sabbath which is consecrated to the service of God, in following the
works of our vocation. Eccle. 3.
All things have their appointed time (says the wise man) Eccle. 3. and every
thing is seemly in his convenient season; but when things are done
preposterously and out of order, there follows confusion.

Although Martha did not hear Christ, yet did she labor for Christ: many in
our days will neither labor for Christ, nor hear of Christ, but as the
Israelites were wearye of their journey in the wilderness, Number. 21.
and lothed that heavenly Manna, so these men are weary of every godly
exercise, and are soon cloyed with the word of God. Matthew. 25.
The five foolish Virgins wasted their Oil to no purpose, and while they went
to buie, were excluded the marriage, and these foolish men spend this time of
grace vainly and wantonly, as though after this life there were no time of
justice and vengeance to be feared. The day serves for their pride or profit,
the night is spent in sport and pleasure, and no time is left to hear the
word. When we are praying they are playing; when we are preaching they are
eating and drinking, like the old world, Genesis 6. Luke. 17.
that eat and drank, that married wives, and gave in marriage while Noah was
preparing the Arc, for the saving of his household. And as Baals Priests
wounded themselves to serve their Idol, Hebr. 11. 1. King. 18.
so these men take dangerous courses, and strangely trouble themselves to serve
the devil.

Now Martha finds her self agreeued, and begins to envy her sisters
exercise, Genesis 37.
as Joseph's brethren enuyed him for his dreams, and the sons of Ishai that
disdained their brother David for his forwardness in the combat with Goliath.
1. Sam. 17.


These two sisters, that in other things agreed so well together, in this do
differ so much, that Christ must have the hearing of the matter, and decide the
controversy; Martha plaieth the Plaintiff and accuses her sister; Marye the
defendant, answers by her Advocate, and Christ himself that took upon him
the office of an Advocate, is become the Judge, and gives sentence on Maryes
side; Martha complains of her sisters slothfulness, and seems after a
sort to blame our Savior for winking at it, requiring him to see the matter
redressed speedily. But Christ first reprooueth Marthaes curiosity, and then
excuses, yea and commends Mary's care. In Martha it appears how willing
we are to please our selves in our own conceits, and how ready to conceive
amiss of others doings, yea sometime to prefer our own defects, before the
perfections of other men. If David chasten his soul with fasting, Psalm. 69.
it shall be turned to his reproof; if he put on Sackcloth to testify his
contrition, they jest at him, and the drunkards make songs of him: Luke. 7.33.
if John Baptist be temperate in his apparel and diet, they will say he has
a devil. Acts. 25
If Paul answer discreetely for himself, he shall be charged to be mad with
overmuch learning; Luke. 7.34.
yea if our Savior Christ himself frequent the company of sinners, to
reclaim them from sin, they will not stick to call him a friend and
companion of Publicans and sinners. Among us, if there be any that be more
forward in religion then the rest, and more diligent to hear the word, as
Marie was, there shall not want some or other to censure them at their
pleasure, yea to find fault and to condemn them for so doing: yet are not
the godly to be discouraged herewith, or to desist from their godly exercises:
for as the Lord answered for Mary when she held her peace; so the Lord will
defend their cause, and take their part against their adversaries. The Lord
cannot abide to hear his servants ill spoken off, but is always ready to
maintain their right, and to answer for them. Genesis 31.24.
He will not suffer Laban to speak an ill word to his servant Jacob. And if
Aaron and Myriam murmr against Moises, Number. 12.
the Lord will punish it with leprosy, what a comfortable thing is this to
the godly, that the king of kings will take their parts, and will not suffer
them to sustain any wrong. He is a most sure and trusty friend, that will
not abide his friend to be backbited or ill spoken of, but either he will
answer in their defense, or he will find some means to stop the mouths,
and restrain the slanderous toungs of their enemies, as sometime he stopped
Balaams passage, Number. 22
when he went to curse his people, and caused the dumb beast to speak, and
to reprove the madness of the Prophet, rather then he would have his people
to be curssed. 2. Pet. 2.1^


The repitition of Marthaes name, argues the vehemency and earnestness of
this admonition. The Lord is feign to be very earnest and importunate with us,
before he can reclaim us. Genesis 22
So when God spoke unto Abraham, he calls him twice by name; Christ called
Peter thrice by name, John. 21. to cause him make his three-fould confession,
to make amends for his threefold denial. And when the Lord spoke unto Samuel,
1. Sam. 3.
he called him four several times by name before he answered; for such is
the great mercy of GOD, that he is content to admonish us often of our duty,
and such is the dullness and perverseness of our crooked nature, that we
cannot be gained by the first admonition: but the Lord must call us often and
earnestly, before we will harken unto him.

There are two things in this speech of Christ to be observed. The first is his
modest reprehension, of Marthaes immoderate care: the other is, his friendly
defense of Mary's choice.

Though Martha was very careful to entertain Christ in the best manner, yet
if he perceive any thing in her worthy of reprehension, he will not stick to
tell her of it: he will not sooth her in her saying, nor smooth her in her own
conceit, for all the trouble and cost that she bestows upon him. If we be
often invited to some man's table, and kindly enterteyned, it would be
vnkindlye taken, if we should find fault with any disorder, but forasmuch as
all Christ his actions are the instructions of Christians, therefore every
Christian, but especially Preachers, whom it more specially concerns, must
learn by this example how to behave themselves, when they are invited to great
feasts: namely to speak their conscience freely when they see a fault. The
best requital that we can make for our good cheer, is to give good counsel
and wholesome admonition to them that inuit us. When Christ dined with the
Pharisey, Luke. 11. and was misliked for not washing before dinner, he took
occasion to reprove their hypocrisy, their outward show of holiness, which
was the sin of the Pharisees: and at another time he notes them, for preasing
to the chief places at banquets, Luke. 14.
and shows what modesty is to be observed in sitting down to meat, and
what guests should be bidden to our table. So should Preachers behave
themselves toward those that inuit them to great feasts, where they see
perhaps some fault or disorder, either in the Master of the house, or in some
other of the guests; to say unto them thus or otherwise, as the case
requires: I will warn you of one thing that will do you good, that you would
leave your usury and extortion, your covetousness and oppression, that you
would leave your swearing and blaspheming the name of God, that you would
forbear to profane the Lords Sabbath, that you would leave your pride and
excess in your diet and apparel: that you would forbear to speak ill of
any behind their backs, or to bear any malice or hatred to any of your
neighbors. These are the faults which are easy to be espied almost in every
place, and these are the faults which the faithful minister of Christ Jesus
should not leave unreproved wheresoever he comes, 1. King. 18.
but as Elias told Ahab of his Idolatry, though he were his king, and John
Baptist told Herod of his adultery, Math. 14 Mark. 6.20
though he did many things for him, and heard him gladly: so should the
preacher reprove the people for their notorious offenses, notwithstanding some
favors and courtesies received from them.

If Christ had cause to find fault with Martha for her too much diligence in
his enterteinement, it seems he was not curious of his diet, but would have
been content with simple cates: he was no delicate or dainty guest, he did
not affect or delight in sumptuous banquets, or costly fare, he rather
requires a religious heart, a constant faith, a willing mind to hear the
word, Luke. 11.28.
with an earnest care to live thereafter. These are the things wherein the Lord
delights, these are the iuncates which he desires, and which he prefers
before all earthly cheer. Thus is Martha reprehended for her curiosity: now
let us see how Marie is excused and commended for her godly care. One thing is
necessary (says Christ) and what is that one thing? even to hear the word
preached, Romans 1.16.
which is the power of God to salvation, to every one that believes. A man may
better want all things then that one needful thing, and yet we desire all other
things, and neglect that one thing which is so needful. This one thing has
Marie chosen; and therefore has chosen the better part. Marthaes part is good
because it provides for this present life: but Mary's part is better, because
it leads to eternal life. It is good to be occupied about our calling, to
get our living: but it is better to be occupied in hearing the word, which is
able to save our souls. As the head and the foot are both needful in the
body, so Marie and Martha are both needful in a commonwealth: man has two
vocations, the one earthlye by his labor, the other heavenly by his prayer.
There is the active life, which consists in practicing the affairs of this
life, wherein man shows himself to be like himself, and there is the
contemplative life, which consists in the meditation of divine and heavenly
things, wherein man shows himself to be like the Angels: for they which
labor in their temporal vocations, do live like men; but they which labor in
spiritual matters, live like Angels: When they hear the word; God speaks
unto them: when they pray, they speak unto God; so that there is a continual
conference between God and them, because they are continually exercised in
hearing or praying.

Christ loved Martha for her hospitality, as Isaac loved Esau for his Venison.
So did he love Mary for her diligence in hearing his word, as Rebecca loved
Jacob for harkning to her voice. Genesis 25, 28.
A nursse which has her breast full of milk, does love the child that sucks it
from her: and Christ which has his breast full of heavenly milk, is glad when
he has children to suck the same. 1. Pet. 2.1.2.
Let us therefore (as the Apostle wills us, 1. Pet. 2.1.2.) laying aside all
maliciousness, and all guile, and dissimulation, and envy, and all evil
speaking, as newborn babes desire that sincere milk of the word; that we
may grow thereby to be perfect men in Christ Jesus: let us breath after the
fountain of living water, which springs up unto eternal life, as the
faintie Heart desires the water brook to quench his thirst, Psalm. 4^, 1.
and for as much as many things are so troublesome, and one thing is so
needful, let us seek that one needful thing, Ecol. 12, 13.
the end of all things, even to fear God and keep his commandments, which we
must learn by hearing the word of God, Heb. 11.6.
whereby faith (without the which it is impossible to please God) is begotten
and nourished in the hearts of men. Romans 10.17


This is that good part which Marie has chosen, by so much better then her
sisters choice, because it concerns a better life, and has the fruition of
this present life. Mary has a double portion: She heard the word; 1. Tim. 4.8.
and eat of the meat, which her sister dressed, for godliness has the
promise of this life, and of the life to come. As for all other things, whether
they be honors, promotions, pleasures, and what not, they serve only for the
maintenance of this present life, which is so short, and subject to
mutabilitie: but the word of God is the food of the soul, the bread of life,
1. Pet. 1, 13
that immortal seed which brings forth fruit unto eternal life. Let the
word of God therefore be precious unto us, Luke 21, 33
because it is so permanent, for heaven and earth must pass, 1. Pet. 1, 25
but the word of God endures for ever. If we make choice of any thing beside,
it must be taken from us, or we shall be taken from it: but if we make choice of
this one thing, it shall never be taken from us neither in this world nor in
the world to come. The Lord grant that we be not only hearers but doers of the
word, James. 1, 22.
that it may be truly said of us, as Christ said of his disciples, that heard
his preaching, Behold my brother, my sister, and mother: Math. 12, 50
or as he answered the woman that commended his carnal kindred; Luke 11, 28.
Blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep the same.

FINIS.
A Godly Prayer, to be said at all times.
BEcause I have sinned o Lord, and done wickedly in thy sight, and provoked
thee to anger by my abominable wickedness, making my body which thou have
ordained a vessel for thine honor, an instrument to most detestable filthiness,
o Lord be merciful unto me, and pardon me this great wickedness: look not upon
me good father, with the eyes of justice, neither do thou draw against me the
sword of judgment, for then how shall I that am but dust, stand in thy
presence, when thy wrathful indignation comes forth as a whirlewind, and
thy heavy displeasure as a mighty tempest: seeing the earth trembles, the
depths are discovered, and the very heavens are shaken when thou art angry?
Exercise not therefore thy fury against me, that am but as chafe before the
wind, and as stubble against a flaming fire: though I have sinned grieuouslie
in thy sight, preferring my wicked desire, before thy holy commandment:
esteeming the pleasute of a moment, before eternal and everlasting joys: nay,
which is worse, making more account of vileness and vanity, and extreme
folly, and madness, then of the glory and majesty of the most excellent,
wonderful, and blessed God, nothing dreading his displeasure, whose wrath
makes the devils to quake, and burns unquenchable unto the bottomless pit
of hell; whose might is so great, that by the breath of his nosthrils he is
able in the twinkling of an eye to destroy a thousand worlds: yet am I bold,
prostrating my self before the throne of thy majesty, heartily to beseech,
and humbly to entreat thee, that thou will not deal with me according to my
merits, for I have deserved that thou should rain down fire and brimstone
from out of heaven upon me to devour me, or to open the earth underneath me, to
swallow me up quick unto hell: but thou art gracious and full of compassion,
and rich in mercies, therefore do men put their trust under the shadow of thy
wings. I have none in heaven to fly unto but thee, nor in earth, of whom I may
receive any comfort, but at thy favorable hands, which are stretched out day
and night, to receive all that by earnest repentance turn unto thee, being
ready to ease all those that are laden with the burden of their sin, and to
refresh their distressed consiences. In the multitude of thy mercies I approach
unto thee o Lord, desiring thee to look down from the height of thy
sanctuary, upon me poor and wretched sinner, and to wipe away mine offenses,
and to blotte out my misdeedes, especially this my ungracious, unclean, and
ungodly act, that it may not come up in remembrance with thee, nor be
imputed to me for ever, for 'thy sons sake o Lord, in whom thou art well
pleased, in whom thou wast fully satisfied upon the cross for my sins:
grant me free pardon and remission of that I have so foolishlie by my
exceeding frailty, committed against thee in this shameful deed. But o thou
my unclean and unthankful soul! my ungodly and rebellious heart! what did I
sinful wretch, and execrable caitife, so blindlie and desperately attempt?
How art thou become quite senseless, that thou wast so ready to anger thy
most loving God, and to provoke thy most mighty judge, that thou might
satisfy thy filthy flesh, suborned both by thine and Gods most malicious
adversary, to grieve and vex the spirit of the Lord, and to damn thy self
for ever? Has not God of his singular favor, made the heavens of old, and
placed the sun and moon in them, two glorious lights, with innumerable
stars, a wonderful workmanship for thy use and benefit? Has he not lifted
up the clouds by his strong arm, and heaped treasures of reign, hail, and
snow, to do thee service? Has he not in the midst of the world, laid the
foundations of the earth, that thou might have a stable habitation, and
might from thence behold every way, thou look the walls of his
beautiful palace. Has he not gathered the waters into one place, and made
the dry land appear, and drawn forth by his power a pure substance of air
between heaven and earth, that fishes might multiply in the seas, fowls in
great abundance, fly in the open face of the firmament, tender plants,
herbs, flowers, and tree^ in all variety, grow and fructify upon the
ground: yea creeping things, cattle and beasts increase in infinite number, in
pastures, fields, gardens, orchards, and groves; and all these to do thee
pleasure? Has he not further given thee springs and rivers, gold and silver,
pearls and jewels; even plenty of streams, stones, and metal, to furnish
thee with whatsoever for profit thou need, or for pleasure desire? Has
he not made thee Lord and ruler over all his craatures, even over the huge
Elephants, the Whale, the strong Lion, and Unicorn, and horse of war? over
the savage Tigars, Bears, and Wolves? over the mighty Eagle, Griffin, Vultur,
Ostrich, and Haulke? Art thou not clad and defended, fed and enriched, cheered
and renowned by these his creatures, and that all the parts of thy body, and
senses of thy mind might be partakers of his goodness, and with his sweetness
refreshed, comforted and delighted in great measure? Yea above all this, has
he not breathed into thy body an immortal soul, that thou might remain
with him in glory for ever? Did he not at the first frame thee like unto
himself, that he might therefore love thee as his son? Did he not cast into
thy spirit the beams of his wisdom, that thou through thy understanding
might behold him and his glory, and stirred up sparks of goodness in thy
heart, that thou might by thy affection embrace him and his bounty, and be
made perfectly blessed by his infinite happiness, who when Adam thy
ungrateful father by distrusting him that had faithfully promised, was
thoroughly able to fulfill his will* and resolutely determined, exceedingly to
advance him, having given him this whole world in testimony thereof, by
discontenting his mind with the excellent estate he was placed in of
unspeakable love, unless he might be as good as God himself, proudly
desiring to make dust the fellow of him who was from everlasting, infinitely
full of wisdom, power, grace and majesty, and had done all this at the
persuasion of the most traitorous rebel of his right gracious king, and
spiteful enemy of his most bountiful master, even then when this most
villainous conspiring with Gods notorious adversary, had deserved immortal
hatred against him, and all that pertained unto him: yea thee as yet unborn,
but contained in him, whose whole mass by this impious disobedience became by
just judgment a temple of curssed estate for ever, and for ever: thou also thy
self bringing forth fruit of contempt of his law, who is most holy,
merciful and mighty: yet even then I say, of unspeakable pity and
compassion intended, nay promised, nay labored to deliver him and thee from
that dreadful vengeance which ye had purchased by your own wicked and
ungracious demerits, and to reconcile you base abiects and vile cast awayes,
and yet stubborn and spightfull haters of the great God Jehovah, who when
there was no means to be found in heaven, nor seas, nor in the earth, nor
under the earth, but that he should damn his only begotten son, the very
brightness of his glory, who never offended him, but was an eternal delight
unto his soul, and rejoicing unto his spirit, that thou might be saved, a
gross lump of slime and clay, still vexing him by thy wickedness; yet
delivered his son into the full power of Satan, to put him to a most
shameful death, by the hands of most detestable persons, and did cast him far
away out of his favor, and threw him down into the bottomless pit of his
unsupportable wrath and indignation, that thou might be placed between his
own arms in the kingdom of heaven, in all roialtie and glory, as his dear
and entirely beloved son. Why therefore wast thou o my unholy and unthankful
nature, so ready and prone, so violent and headlong to commit things highly
displeasant in his sight, who in a manner, and as far as it was possible,
slew himself for thy safety, when he had no creature so disobedient unto him
as thee? O thou my inward soul, and spirit of my mind awake, and stand up to
defend thy self, for thou art besieged with mighty enemies, the prince of
darkness, the rulers of the air, the spiritual craftiness and policies of
hell! why arisest thou not thou sluggard? thy foes in great number are prepared
with many ambushments, having a huge army all maliciously bent, with
venomous darts to pearce through thy heart: they are entered thy hold, at all
five gates of thy outward senses: yea they have broken down thy inward doors,
and have left thee but one window toward heaven to escape by, even thy
prayers, whereto the spirit of God waighteth thy speedy coming: make have o
thou heavy with sleep, or thou art taken by thy cruel enemies, whose hands
are of iron, and their teeth of steel, to grind thy very bones to powder:
harken no longer to that stinking harlot, thy wicked appetite, which lying in
thy bosom, desires nothing but thy utter destruction; she persuades thee
that thou art in no present danger, that she may rejoice at thy miserable end.
It may be thou think o thou chief of fools, and Ox that art fed to the
slaughter, that though thou go on a little way in thy pleasant path, thou
may return back when thou will, and thy little wandering will not greatly be
regarded. O thou unwise and sottish of heart! when will thou understand? Has
the son of God endured such pain for the smallest of thy sins, and make
thou so light account of so grievous crimes? Does the law thunder curses, and
plagues, and everlasting torments against thy least inordinate motions, and
did thou not dread to perform so shameless a practice? Know thou not
that the eyes of God, and his Angels behold the doing that thou would be
ashamed to do in the presence of ungodly men, or unclean beasts? or do
thou not consider how thou did grieve the spirit of God, who has
vouchsafed of his infinite mercy, to dwell in thy body to this end, chieflye
that he might mortify thy carnal lusts? Why did thou then defile his
temple, which he has sanctified to be an house for himself to dwell in?
take heed thou drive not out so worthy and noble a guest, by such swinish and
fleshly behavior, who if he once depart, then shall thou be an hold for
devils, and legions of damned spirits, that they may stuff thee full of all
manner of iniquity, and then at length become pitch and Brimstone, to
maintain the fire of Gods scorching wrath in thy sinews, spirits, and inward
bowels, drinking out in full measure the dregs of the wine of his rage and
fury: and can thou be so blind and retchlesse, that for the vain pleasure of
sin for a little while, thou will constrain God to torment the
everlastingly, who it may be even at this instant, if thou will still try his
patience and long sufferance, will suddenly take thy spirit from thee, or come
in judgment to recompense to all sinners by his final sentence in the burning
of the whole world, the stipend of horror, shame, confusion, and utter
reprobation: and weigh with thy self, that to approach to God is the chiefest
joy of the chosen, to behold his glorious countenance in the face of his son,
whereas thy sins do separate thee from him, and make thee afraid to speak
to him by prayers, which is thy chiefest and greatest solace in this mortal
life. How much more will thy ungodliness make thee wish delay of the last
judgment, the speedy and present coming whereof is a chief proppe of our
fight, in the midst of so many troubles and temptations: and withal, remember
how the devil that roaring lion laboreth by this impure act, to make thee most
filthy and loathsome in the sight of God, and rejoices to see thy gracious
father, merciful Savior, and comfortable sanctifier, so abused and withstood,
and angered by thee whom he has wonderfully made, carefully preserved, and
dearly redeemed, and tenderly loved, that if it may be thou should by
utter apostasy, dishonor him in the face of the world, who has advanced thee
in the presence of all his Angels: and though thou be so sure in faith that
thou can not utterly fall (the consideration whereof should make thee more
dutiful, and not encourage thee in a sinful course) yet may thou by little
and little, and by often falling, bring thy self into a better liking, both of
the wicked, and of wickedness it self, whom thou ought to hate with a
perfect hatred, and then God by just judgment, cast thee into a sure sleep,
that thy filthiness may be seen of men, and thou condemned to the grief of
the righteous, and scorned to the shame of the ungodly, and in the mean
season, by provoking Gods judgment, be spoiled of thy goodly ornaments: of thy
godly desires, of religious thoughts, of zealous affections, of christian
communication, of holy endeavors, of assured persuasions of faith, of steadfast
waitings through hope; of constant suffering by patience, and hearty
reioysings from love. In the perfect consummation of which things, because al
happiness consists, beware thou careless wretch, least suddenly by thy
abominable filthiness, thou either for a time wholly deprive thy self of
comfortable feeling of these things, or much diminish thy present graces and
blessings received of the holy spirit, to the glory of God the Father. But why
do I utter my voice, or strive to make a dead carkas move? o quicken thou me
that art the fountain of life, and call thou out of heaven thy dwelling place,
that my wandering soul may hear the voice of her shepherd, and follow thee
whither soever thou leadest: nay of thy tender compassion take me up upon thy
shoulders, and carry me gently into thy fold again: for thieves have stolen
me away, and have bound my feet so that I cannot go, and they watch for me
until thou art gone, that they may carry me away quick from thy pastures: o do
thou therefore presently deliver me, and give me thy helping hand: o cast thou
down by thy spirit my raging lust, and by thy grace subdue mine untamed
affection. I am weak o Lord, and unable to resist the force of my mighty
adversary: send thy help from above, and save me out of the jaws of the
cruel Lion: thou have delivered me out of the mouth of hell; o let not the
gates thereof any more prevail against me: let me not any longer be
occupied in ungodliness, least mine enemy triumph over me, saying in his
malicious heart, there, there, so would I have it. Let this sin be far from
me o Lord, that I should defile my self any more with this notorious
wickedness: work therefore in mine heart an utter detestation of it, that I
may ever hereafter keep my self pure and unspotted for thy kingdom. Thou that
art able to make of stones children to Abraham, mollify I pray thee my stony
heart, that all manner of son like affections may be imprinted therein:
pluck up o good father these roots of bitterness, that no unsavory fruit
may come of the tree, which thou by thine own hand have planted. I desire, I
look, I call, I cry, for thy assistance, that I may conquer this unruly
motion. O blessed savior, that have granted so many petitions upon earth, to
them that were careful for the body: fulfill I pray thee, this my desire; not
for health, nor strength, nor riches, nor honor, nor for food, nor apparel,
but for thine heavenly grace and inspiration: yea let me lose all those,
rather then be left to my sinful flesh, that I should be ruled any longer
thereby. Mortify good father in me the old body of sin, and give unto me a
new body, purged from these dead works to serve the living God: renew my
spirit daily, that I may cast away these works of darkness: let it be enough
o merciful Father, that my weakness in failing heretofore, has chased, so
mightily, so graciously, and so dearly for us: we believe and know, that one
drop of his blood, is sufficient to heal our infirmities, pardon our
iniquities, and supply our necessities, but without thy grace, our light, our
strength, our guide, we are able to do nothing, but sin, as woeful experience
has taught us too long, and the example of them which are void thereof, whose
life is nothing else but the service of the world, the flesh and the devil.
Therefore good father, as thou in special favor have appointed us to serve
thee, like as thou have ordained all other creatures to serve us: so may it
please thee to send down thy heavenly spirit into this earthly mansion, to
iluminate our minds, mollify our hearts, change our affections, subdue our
reason; regenerate our wills, and purify our nature to this duty; so shall not
thy benefits, nor thy chastisments, nor thy word return void, but accomplish
that for the which they were sent, until we be renewed to the image of thy
son. Good Lord we beseech thee, look down in the multitude of thy
compassions, upon thy militant Church, this sinful Realm, thy gracious
Handmaide our dread Sovereign, her Honorable Counsel, the civil
Magistrates, the paynefull Ministers, the two Universities, the people that sit
in darkness, and all that bear thy cross. Gather us into one communion of
thy truth, and give unto every man a spirit to his calling, that we being
mindful of the account, and that we are called Christians, may firmly
resolve, speedely begin, and continually persevere in doing and suffering thy
holy will. Good Lord bless and sanctify our meeting, that no temptation
hinder me in speaking, nor them in hearing, but that thy word may be heard and
spoken as the word of God, which is able to save our souls in that day,
howsoever it pleases thee by weak and foolish things to magnify thy self.
There is no cause o God most just, why thou should hear sinners, which art
displeased with sin, but for his sake which suffered for sin, and sinned
not: in whose name we are bold to lift up our hearts, hands, and voices unto
thee, praying as he has taught us: Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

FINIS.

