SATAN'S COMPASSING THE EARTH.

BY HENRY SMITH.



LONDON Imprinted by Thomas Scarlet. 1592.

Job. 1.7.8. 7 Then the Lord said unto Satan, Whence come thou? And Satan
answered the Lord, saying, From compassing the earth to and fro, and from
walking in it.

8 And the Lord said unto Satan, Have thou not considered my servant Job, how
none is like him in the earth? an upright man, one that fears God and
eschueth evil.


I Have spoken of the question alredie, now of the answer, Compassing here
does signify tempting, and the Earth does signify all the people of the
earth: as if he should say, I come from tempting all men. It is some vantage
unto us to hear that the Spaniards are coming before they come, and what
number they have, and how they are appointed, that we may levy our forces
accordingly. But beloved, there is a greater adversary then the Spaniarde,
which brings in the Spaniards, your adversary the devil. It is good for us to
hear when he comes, that we may be in a readiness against him, as we prepare
against them. Therefore this Scripture, and this time accord well. In
Revelation 12.10. the devil is called an accuser, and now I am an accuser of
the accuser: he accuses us to God, and God accuses him to us, that when he
comes like an angel, yet we may say to him like Christ, Avoid Satan. First
give me leave to say unto you as Christ said unto his disciples, Take heed how
you hear, for that which I am to speak unto you of the devil, the devil
would not have you hear: and therefore as he is here called a Compasser, so
he will compass your eyes with shows, and your ears with soundes, and your
senses with sleep, and your thoughts with fancies, and all to hinder you from
hearing while the articles are against him, and after I have spoken, he will
compass you again with business, and cares, and pleasures, and quarrels, to
make you forget that which you have heard, as he has made you forgette that
which ye have heard before, or else to contemn it, as though you might do well
without it: as he has compassed them which do walk in the streets while
the voice of God sounds in the Churches as they pass by: therefore before
every Sermon ye had need to remember Christ's lesson, Take heed how you
hear.

Now to the matter. Satan from whence come thou? I come from compassing the
earth. Here the devil is called in like a Iayler, which keeps some in
perpetual prison, and some are bailed, and some return to prison again, and
some are executed. They which sin fearefullie, stay as it were about the
Prison, but are not bound: they which sin wittinglie are under lock, they
which sin greedely, are under lock and boltes, they which die in their sin,
are like them which are condemned, this is the bondage which we have brought
our selves unto for a fair apple. When the tempter overcame us, we were
removed out of paradise, where we were seated: when we have overcome the
tempter, we shall be translated into heaven, where he was seated, heaven
door was wide, and the way was broad before the rebellion, but when
weeknockt at the cannell door, then the good door was shut, heaven is
large, but the way to heaven must be narrovve, therefore God has set our
enemies in the gate to fight with us before we enter, that this saying might
be verified, The kingdom of heaven is caught by violence: so soon as we rise
in the morning we go forth to fight with two mighty giants, the world
and the devil, and whom do we take with v^ but a traitor? this brittle
flesh which i^ ready to yield us up to the enemy at every assault, only he
which sufferet^ Satan to compass us, does stay him from destroying us. When
God asked Caine, where is thy brother? Caine lied and said, I cannot tell.
When God asked Sarah why she laughed? Sarah lied and said, I laughed not: but
when God asked the devil from whence he came, he answered truly, I come
from compassing the earth, and yet he which speaks truth himself, taught
them to lie, as he is called the father of liers, because he teaches all
others to lie. How then? Was Caine worse then the devil, because he lied
and the other told truth. By this you may see that carnal men do not know
so much of God as the very devil knovveth, for he knevv that GOD could tell
where he had bin, but Caine doubted whether God could tell what he had done,
and therefore he made a lie. Thus, thus the devil teaches his scholars to
do worse sometimes then he will do himself, even as he would bring them (if
it were possible) into a worse plight then he is himself. The devils faith
cannot save us, no more then it can save him, the devils knowledge cannot
convert us, no more then it does convert him, and yet he would not have men
believe, that which he believes himself, nor have us understand so much as he
understands him self: for if Cain had understood so much as he, that God knew
whether he lied or no, he would have answered God truly, as Satan did, but
the devil knew that there was no dissembling with God, who knows what he asks
before he asks, therefore he told troth to God, though he lie to man: for to
lie unto him which knows, is as if one should lie to himself, but Caine was
not so well learned, he thought peradventure yet God might understand his
murder, as a these suspecteth in his heart that the judge may know his theft:
but he douted whether God did know it, and therefore he denied it like one
which is guilty, but thinks that if he confess, he shall be hanged, and
therefore though evidence and witness accuse them, yet you see many which will
not accuse themselves.

From compassing the earth. He which was called Satan before, which signifies
an adversary, is here said to compass the earth: which is to say, being put
together, an adversary compasses the earth, and therefore let the earth beware
like a City which is besieged with the adversary.

The devil has mo names then any Prince has titles, some GOD has given to
him, and some he has given to himself: but this is to be noted in the devils
names, that he never called himself a lier, nor a tempter, nor an accuser, nor
a slanderer, nor a deceiuer, nor a deuourer, nor a murderer, nor a master, nor
an adversary, nor a viper, nor a lion, nor a dragon, nor a wolf, nor a
cockatrice, nor a serpent. But when Christ asked him his name, he calls
himself Legion, which importes a multitude, as if he should brag of his
number, and here he calls himself in effect the compasser of the earth, as if
he should brag of his power. And in the fourth Chapter of Luke and sixth verse,
he calls himself the possesser of the earth, as if he should brag of his
possessions, and in the same he calls himself the quier of the earth, as if
should brag of his liberality. Thus he which is evil it self, does shun the
name, because he would not be hated, and therefore no marvel if men call evil
good, and would be counted honest, though they be never so lewd, for so will
the devil: but as God never called the devil but by those names which the
devil hated, so he never calls sinners by those names which they call
themselves, for if you observe the Scripture, there is no name of the devil,
but in some place of Scripture or other the wicked are caled by the same name,
he is called a liar, and they are called liars: he is called a tempter, and
they are called tempters: he is called a murderer, and they are called
murderers: he is called a slanderer, and they are called slanderers: he is
called a viper, and they are called vipers: he is called a lion, and they are
called lions: he is called a wolf and they are called wolves: he is called a
serpent, and they are called serpents. Thus God would they that shall be damned
should have the name of him which is damned, to put the^ in mind. Now none of
the devils names are in the book of life; and therefore liars, and tempters,
and slanderers, and murderers, and defamers are not, therefore these are the
devils names. This I note to show you how deadly God does hate sin, that
neither the devil nor his followers could ever get a good name of him, for
all his compassing, he could never compass this, to shuffle any praise of
himself into this book of life, for he does not compass heaven, but earth,
though he would compass both, the devil himself does tell us here, that he
compasses, and he tells us not why he compasses, but his name Satan that
went before, which he spoke not of, does tell us why he compasses. Because it
signifies an adversary, it gives us to understand that he compasses the
earth like an adversary. God does compass the earth like a wall to defend it:
the devil compasses the earth like an enemy to besiege it. For enemy is his
name, he is envy even to the name.

Three things I note: wherefore the devil may be said to compass the earth.
First, because he tempts all men. Secondly, because he tempts to all
sins. Thirdly, because he tempts by all means: So that whosoever sins,
wherein soever he offends, whereby so ever he is allured, the sin, and the
sinner, and the bait, are compassed, and contrived by this Archpolitique,
which calls himself a Compasser. Many have their names for naught, because
they do nothing for them, like Labans images, which were called Gods, though
they were but blocks: but the devil deserves his names, he is not called a
tempter, and a liar, and a slaunderer, and an accuser, and a deceiuer, and a
murderer, and a compasser in vain, like Saint George. which is always on
horseback, and never rides: but he would do more then by his office he is
bound to. Other are called officers because they have an office: but he is
called enemy because he shows his envy. Other are called Iusticers, because
they should do justice: but he is called a tempter because he practices
temptations. Other are called pastors because they should feed: but he is
called a deuourer because he does devour: and we call him a Compasser, because
that he does compass. Ever since he fell from heaven he has lived like
Cain, which cannot rest in a place, but is a runnagate over the earth, from
door to door, from man to man, begging for sins as the starued soul begges
for bread. He would have dwelt in heaven, and not been compassing the earth, he
should have sung with the Angels, and not bin quareling with me^, but he has
changed his calling, and is become a co^passer, that is, to lay fetters upon
men, as God has fettered him, left they should ascend to the place from whence
he is fallen. Therefore in this the Lier spoke truth, when he said, I come
from compassing the earth: as if he should say to God, I come from the
slaughter of thy servants, not to ask forgeuenes for all the souls which he
has slain alredie, but to get a commission that God would make him knight
Marshal over the world, to slay and kill as many as he hated: like the bramble,
which set it self on fire first, and then fiered all the wood.

Peter describing the devils walk, says that he goes about: The devil says
that he goes a compassing. Peter puts in, seeking whom he may devour: the
devil leaves out devour, and says no more, but that he compasses. This
circular walk is particular to the devil, and therefore may be called the
devils circuit. All other creatures go forward, but the diuil goes about,
which may well be applied to the crafty devil, because to go about, is
commonly taken to undermine: when he means he will destroy you, then we say he
will compass you: so when the devil compasses, then beware least he devour.
For the devil goes about men, as the Fowler goes about the lark, to snare
her; as the thief goes about the house, to rob it; as the iuie goes about
the oak, to kill it. The devils walk is a siege, which goes about but to find
an issue to go in: for he goes about but until he can get in to be a
possessor. He is content to be a compasser. The first name the devil has in
Scripture, is a Serpent, he is a Serpent, and so are his ways like a serpent,
which windeth himself like a circle.

As God is said to make an hedge about men, so here the devil is said to make
an hedge about men: but this is an hedge of temptations, and that is an hedge
against temptations. As David says the Angels compass us, so might he say the
devils compass us. Satan compasses, and man is compassed. Satan is like the
circumference, and man is, as it were, the Center: that is, temptations go
round about him, and he dwells in the midst of them. Thus much of
Compassing: now what he does compass.

I come from Compassing the Earth. This is the diuils pilgrimage, from one end
of the earth to the other, and then to the other again, and then back again,
like a wandering Merchant, which seeks his traffic where he can speed
cheapest. I have heard of some travelers which have gone about the earth, but
I never heard of any that had seen all parts of the earth but this old
Pilgrim Satan, which has been in heaven, and in Paradise, and in the earth,
and in the sea, and in hell, and yet has not done his walk, but like the
Sun which courseth, about the earth every day: so there is no day but Satan
sees every man upon earth: as a compass has no end, so he makes no end of
compassing. Because he is such a compasser of the world, therefore Paul
calls him The God of this world, not a piece of the world, as England, or
Irelande, or France, or Germany, or Spain, but of the world, that is, of all the countries, and cities, and towns, and villages, and houses: The Pope
talks of his kingdom, how many provinces are under his dominion, but the
devils circuit is greater then the Popes: one would think that he could never
tend half his flock, because he is vicar of so great a monarchy, and yet he
is never non resident. You may see his steps every where so brim and fresh, as
though they were printed in ashes, if God make you see your country naked, your
temples desolate, your cities ruined, your houses spoiled, you will say the
Spaniards have been here: so when you see your minds corrupted, your hearts
hardened, your wills perverted, your charity cooled, your judges bribers,
your rulers persecutors, your lawiers brablers, your marchantes usurers, your
landlords extortioners, your patrones symonistes, your pastors loyterers, you
may say the devil has been here. Seeing then these weeds grow in every
ground, you may bear the devil witness that he does compass all the earth.
If a man love his friend, he will say, I will go an hundred miles to do him
good: but if the devil hate a man, he will go a thousand miles to do him
hurt. The devil does not go his progress like a king, only for delight, but
all the way as he goes, Peter says, He seeks whom he may devour. The devil
goes a visiting, he will teach the sick how they shall recover their health,
he will whisper the poor how they shall come by riches, he will tell the
captives how they shall redeem their liberty: but to devour is the end of his
visitation. Therefore Peter called him a Lion, and said that he went about, and
told us that he sought as he went: at last he says, to devour, and there he
ends, showing that devouring is his end: now you shall hear whom he
compasses, and to what he co^passeth, and how he co^passeth When it is said
that the devil compasses the earth, it is meant that he compasses the men of
the earth: out of which I gather, first of all creatures he compasses men:
secondly, that he compasses all men, and by consequence that he compasses
good men. The devil is like an Archer, and man is his mark, and temptations
are his arows. As Peter is called a fisher of men, so the devil may be called a
hunter of men: for of al creatures his envy is only to men, because man was
made to serve God, and inherit the joys which he has lost, therefore he is
called no slear, but a manslear. When there are no men upon earth, then the
devil will compass the earth no more.

Secondly, he assaulteth al men, like Ismael, which was against all. It is
said of Saul and David, Saul has slain his thousand, and David his ten
thousand: but if you put in Satan, you may set up the number, and say, Satan
has slain his hundred thousand. As there is a legion of men, so there is a
legion of devils: that as they said Peter's angel, so they may say Peter's
devil: for Christ would not have called Peter Satan, if Satan had not backed
him: as death kills al, so the devil tempts al: when he has Eve, he
hunteth for Adam: when he has Adam, he hunteth for Cain: as the father was
tempted, so must the sons, as the mother was tempted, so must her daughters.
Every man but Christ may say, I have bin overcome, but Christ himself cannot
say, I have not bin tempted. In the Spanish inquisitio^ the protestants are
examined, but the papists slip by: but in the devils inquisition papist, and
protestant, and Atheist, and Puritan, and all are examined. He is not a captain
of forties, nor of fifties, nor of sixties, nor of hundreds, but he is general
over al which fight not under Christ's baner, he possessed the two Gergesites,
which were men, he possessed Mary, which was a woman, he possessed the man's
son, which was a child. Nimrod is called a mighty Hunter which killed beasts,
but this is a mighty hunter which killed Nimrod himself, God keep us out of
his chase. Thirdly, he warreth against the righteous, even because they are
righteous, as God makes the barren fruitful, and the fruitful to bear more
fruit: so the devil would have them serve him, which serve him not, and they
which serve him to serve him more: and therefore as the Giant encountered with
David, so the devil encou^tred with David, and with David's Lord: he which gave
him leave here to tempt Job, was after tempted himself, although the net
brake, and the bird escaped: yet as he tempted Christ thrice together, and as
he desired to sift Peter more then other, so they that follow Christ, and are
like Peter, are sifted more then other. For this viper is like the viper which
ceased upon Paul. Among many which stood by the fire, the viper chose out
Paul, and lighted upon him before all the rest: so if one be holier then
another, this viper will battle with him, and there is great reason why the
godly are tempted more then the wicked: because the wicked are his fernants,
and do tempt others.

As he tempts al men, so he tempts to al sins: for hell and the devil, are
alike, therefore as hell is never filled with sinners, so the devil is never
filled with sins, and therefore when thee had made Peter deny his master
once, he made him deny him twice, and when he had made him deny him twice, he
made him deny him thrice. For this cause our sins are counted amongst those
things which are infinite, because the devil and our flesh meet together every
day to engender new sins. All the devils riches is in baits, he has a
packful of oaths for every one which will swear, a pack full of lies for every
one which will deceive, a pack full of excuses for every one which will
dissemble. As he does go through the streets, into every shop he castes a
short measure, or a false balance: as he passes by the tauernes he sets
dissension betwixt friends: as he passes by every Inn he casts a pair of
cards, and a pair of dice, and a pair of tables: as he passes by the
courts, and finds the Lawiers at the bar, he casts among them false
evidences, forged writings, and counterset seals.

Thus in every place where he comes (like a foggie mist) he leaves an evil
savor behind him. The murmuring of Moses, the dissimulation of Abraham, the
idolatry of Aaron, the incest of Lot, the dronkennes of Noah, the adultery of
David, the flight of Jonah, the denial of Peter, name Satan, and thou have
named the very spawne of al sins, which with his tail plucked down the
Stars from heaven. How many hate their enemies, and friends too, and yet
embrace his enemies, because he kisseth when he betrayeth, as though he would
not betray. Avarice says, I will make thee amiable: tyranny says, I will make
thee dreadful: sloth says, I will make thee beautiful: vanity says, I will
make thee merry: prodigality says, I will make thee beloved: So the poor
sinner stands distract how he may follow all sins at once, seeking grapes of
thistles, and roses of thorns.

As he tempts to al sins, so he tempts by all means: for the name of a
compasser does import a cunning tempter. There is craft in compassing, the
Hunter makes a rail about the dear as though he would guard them, when he
means to take some of the^: the fouler goes about the bird as if he did not
see her, when he comes to snare her. If men have so many sleightes to compass
their matters, how can the compasser himself hold his fingers: if the serpents
feed be so subtle, what do you think of the old serpent, who has bin learning
his trade ever since the creation? If men's trades may be called crafts, the
devils trade may be called craft? Herod is called a fox, but this fox taught
him his subtlety: this is he that prepared flaterers for Rehoboam, which
prepared liers for Ahab, which prepared concubins for Solomon, which prepared
sorcerers for Pharao, which prepared witches for Saul, which prepared wine for
Benhadab, which prepared gold for Achan, which prepared a ship for Jonas,
which prepared a rope for Haman, he goes not about for nothing.

But this is the first trick of his compassing, he marks how every man is
inclined, what he loves, what he hates, what he fears, and what he wants: and
when he has the measure of his foot, then he fits him. Ask what you will,
here is he which offered the whole world. What, shall Jonah stay for want of a
ship, nay here is a ship, go and fly from the Lord: shall Esau stay for want
of broths, nay here is a mess of broth, go and sell thy birthright: shall Judas
stay for want of thirty pence, nay here are thirty pence, go and betray thy
master: shall Pilat stay for want of an halter, nay here is an halter, go and
hang thy self.

The tyrant shall not want a flatterer, the wanton shall not want a mate, the
usurer shall not want a broker, the thief shall not want a receiver: he is a
factor between the Merchant and the Mercer, and the gentleman and the tenant:
he is a makebate between the man and his wife, he is a talebearer between
neighbor and neighbor. Thus if you ask me what is the devils trade or
occupation, all the day long he is making nets, and ginnes, and snares, to
catch thee and me, which gape for the worm.

If then the devil be such a busie-bodie, which medleth in every man's matter,
let us remember what the wise man says, a busy body is hated: the devil is
to be hated because he is a busy body: the Jews could not abide the
Publicans because they were like sumners, and takers, which carried tole out of
their country into another: how then can we abide this great publican, which
takes tole over all the world? nay not tole of men, but men themselves: he
which compasses the earth, compasses us, even us which stand here. Therefore
what shall I say, but as Christ said, When the thief compasses the house,
shall not the owner guard the house: if the city be compassed, and not defended,
how should it stand: as the devil runs round about us, so the armor must go
round about us, and then though he compass us, yet he shall not overcome us:
but as the Israelites were safe though the water compassed about the^, as the
children were safe though the flames compassed about them, as Daniel was safe
though the lions compassed about him, so they which have Christ's armor, are
safe, although the devil compass about them. I will not fear, says, David, what
man can do unto me, nay I will not fear what the devil can do unto me, for he
which is with me is greater then he which is against me. Thus much of the
devil and his compassing.

As the serpent compasses, so does his seed: and therefore Solomon calls the
ways of the wicked, crooked wais. This is the great compasser, there be little
compassers beside, like the Pharisees, of whom it is said, that they compassed
sea and land to make one like themselves. In stead of these compassers we have
Seminary priests, which compass from Rome to Tiborn, to draw one from Christ
to Antichrist, I will not name all compassers beside, lest I be compassed my
self, but this I speak within compass, that there is a craft of compassing,
and Satan is the craftes-master, and the rest are his prentises, or factors
under him. When he has compassed some men, he sets them to compass other
men, and so he has his compassers, and spies in every Country, like
continual Legers to follow his business for him, which will do it as faithfully
as himself. If he appoint them to lie, they will lie as fast as he: if he
appointe them to deceive, they will deceive as cunningly as he: if he appoint
them to slander, they will slander as falsely as he: if he appoint them to
flatter, they will flatter as smoothly as he: if he appoint them to mock, they
will mock as scornfully as he: if he appoint them to revenge, they will revenge
as spitefully as he: if he appoint them to persecute, they vvil persecute as
fully as he. So if he do but say let there be an oath, straight there is an oath:
let there be a lie, straight there is a lie: let there be a flout, straight there
is a floute: let there be a bribe, straight there is a bribe: let there be a
quarrel, straight there is a quarrel: therefore in this the liar told the
truth, for he has compassed the earth indeed.

Thus you see what the devil answered, when GOD asked him from whence he came.
Now if God should ask you, as he asked the devil, from whence you came before
you came hither to him, or rather whether you will go when ye depart from him,
I do verily think that some here did come from as bad exercises as the devil
himself: and that when they do depart from this place, they will return to
as badde exercises again, as the Devil did: Some unto the Tauerns, and some
unto the Alehouses, and some unto Stages, and some unto Brothels, and some unto
dicing, and some unto quarrelling, and some unto cosening.

I would feign know this, if the devil came from tempting, and you from
sinning, who was better occupied he in commanding you, or you in obeying him,
they which come to the Church and return to their sins, come to the Lord as
the devil came, not to be reformed of his evil, but to have a pasport to do
more evil: if any such be here, he has learned nothing, but goes empty away,
for they which come like Satan go like Satan: a little water is sprinkled
upon them, which falls off again to the ground so soon as they are out of the
Church door, all which they learned is forgotten, like a perfume which
sauoureth no longer then they abide in the house where it burns, therefore as
I warned you at first, Take heed how you hear, so I warn you now, take heed
least this Compasser come and steal that which you have heard, for when Judas
had received the Sacrament, the devil entering into him after that, could
never be driven out again: so if the devil enter into you, after you have
received this warning, he will possess you like Judas, stronger then he did
before, and every word shall condemn you, as he which eats the Sacrament
unworthily, eats his own damnation, so he which hears the word
unfruitfully, hears his own damnation, that is, the word which I have
spoken, says Christ, shall judge you in the last day.

FINIS.
A SERMON PREACHED upon the first to the Corinthians,

1 CORINTHIANS. 10.12. Let him that thinks he stands, take heed least he fall.

By Henry Smith.



LONDON Printed by Thomas Scarlet. 1592.

1. Corinthians. 10.12. 12 Let him that thinks he stand, take heed least he
fall.
WHen you have examined your selves by the touchstone which I gave you, Acts
26.28 2. Cor. 13.9
whether you be in the faith or no, if you find that you stand in the faith,
let him which thinks he stands, take heed least he fall. Three sentences
we borrowed of Paul: in the first he exhorted us to be Christians: in the
second he taught us to know whether we be christians or no: in the last, he
warns us, if we be, to persevere and take heed least we fall. Paul does not
teach us these phrases to doubt of our salvation, or of the mercy of God, as
the Papists say, but of our constancy in his service, not least we fall from
our election, but least we fall from our righteousness, this is a godly fear,
and blessed is he (says Solomon) not which stands in fear of Gods mercy,
but he which stands in fear of his own frailty. Pro. 28.14. As Job did,
which feared all his works, Job. 9.28. We must have confidence toward God,
but diffidence toward our selves, for God will be true to us, if we be true
to him: this fear is not contrary to faith, but cannot stand without it,
therefore take heed least ye fall, is, take heed least ye sin, as the
Israelites sinned. An admonition gathered from the fall of the Jews, to them
which stand, or to them which think they stand, to take heed least they fall:
as a Cronicler in a story gives a watch word by the way, to admonish the
reader of some special thing to be marked: so the Apostle teaching us to make
use of all that we hear or read, after he had showed how the Israelites stood
sometime, and how they fell after again, which were the elect people of God,
the becon of the world, and glory of nations, until they crucified him, who
would have saved them, ends with a sigh, as if he should say, it greeues me to
record their folly, and to discover the nakedness of my countri-men, what
should I rehearse any more? if they fell thus? take them for a warning, and Let
him that thinks he stands, take heed least he fall. Here we are set to
sinners school, to see what we can learn of the wicked, as the Be does
gather honey of weeds, for all which is written, is written for our
instruction, Romans 15:4. These things (says Paul) are written to admonish us,
upon whom the end of the world is come, as if he should say, we have need to
take more heed then they under the law, because we live in the last and worst
days, when the Dragon is let loose, and has great wrath, because his time is
short, Reave. 12.12. Now if you would know how the Israelites fell, read but
from the sixth verse, and you shall see how they fleeted from sin to sin,
like a fly which shifteth from sore to sore. They tempted the Lord (says
Paul) they murmured, they lusted, they committed Idolatry, they served the
flesh, they sat down to eat, and rose up to play: Take heed (says Paul) o
ye Corinthians, least ye live so too, you shall not do evil because others
do so, but these things are written for your learning, therefore first you
shall learn, that as they fell away, so you may, and then by their fall you
may learn to stand. Thus the Apostle warns us, that we are all in a house
ready to fall, and all in a ship ready to sink, all in a body ready to
sin, who can say what he will do when he is tried? Therefore Paul says not,
let him that stands take heed least he fall, but Let him that thinks he
stands, take heed least he fall: warning us before that we take heed of
falling, and to examine how we stand, whether we stand or no, for when he
ma^es his speech of them which think they stand, not of them which stand, he
intends that few stand in comparison of them which think they stand: many
think themselves wise that are fools like other, many think themselves pure,
which are profane, like other, as Solomon notes, Pro. 30.12. There is a
generation which are pure in their own conceit, and yet are not washed from
their filthiness: as though there were a generation or sect of such men. And
again Pro. 20.6. Many men will boast of their goodness, but who can find a
faithful man: so many seem to stand which stand not, many think they believe,
which know not what faith means, many look to be saved, which cannot tell who
should save the^, no more then Nichodemus knew what it was to be borne again,
the reason is, many are afraid to sound too deep, and examine their
conscience, least it should vpbraid them with the noisomnes of their sins.
Therefore like a favorable Judge, which would save the malefactor, he will ask
him so cunningly, that he will answer for him to, and then he will say, I
find no fault in this man, let him pay his fees and be gone: so I find no
fault in this faith, me thinks it is a sound says, me thinks it is a good
which when he is down rises no love, me thinks it is religious enough,
when I come to the Church, and love my neighbor, and obey my Prince, and give
every man his own, and pay my tithes, and fast twice a week, as the
Pharesie did, me thinks this is well, what would you have more? have I not kept
all the commandments. Lu. 18.18. No (says Christ) there is one behind,
examine thy self, and still thou shall find something behind, like a cobweb
in the top of an house when the floor is swept. Therefore well does Paul
say, he which thinks that he stands, not he which stands, for he which
stands in Christ falls not, but he which thinks he stands falls
suddenly, an may finally, unless he stand upon his vvatch, take heed is a good
staff to stay upon, and so often a man sins as he casts it from him, all go
astraie.

But this is the difference betvveen the sins of them which have faith, and
them which have no faith, they which have no faith, fall like an Elephant,
which when he is down rises not again: they which have faith do but trip
and stumble, fall and rise again, their falls do teach them to stand, their
weakness does teach them strength, their sins does teach them repentance, their
frailnes teach them constancy, as Peter was better after his denial then he
was before. Judas did never stand, but seemed to stand, the Disciples knew not
that he was a thief and intended treason, for they asked, Is it I? is it I?
Christ knew, as it appears, when he gave him the sop and said, That which
thou do do quickly: if ever he had stood, he could not have bin termed
the son of perdition. Many did seem to the world to go out of the Church, but
John says, they were never of the Church, meaning that if they had been of the
Church, they could not have gone out of it, for the true vine could not leave
her grapes, nor the olive her fatness, nor the fig tree her sweetness: so they
which stand in the faith, do not fall away, but seem to fall, as hypocrites
seem to stand. The best men have had their slips, but always they rose
again, as though they had sinned to teach us repentance, therefore their sins
are written, which else should have bin concealed for their honor, for they
were not registered in spite to disgrace them, but to admonish us that when we
see such a field of blood, like carcases, which the dragon has slain. we may
fear to set upon him unarmed, least we be slain like other, as Solomon
beheld the field of the slothful which was full of thistles and weeds, Prou.
24.30. So we must behold the sins of other to learn by them. I passed by
(says Solomon) and considered it well, I looked upon it and received
instruction, this note is in the margent of your Bibles, that I might learn by
another man's fault: so Solomon shows how we should look upon other men's
falts if we behold and consider them, and look upon them to receive
instruction as Solomon did, then do we behold and consider, and look upon
them well, or else as Abraham might see the smoke of Sodom, but Lot might not
see it, so they which can make use of sin may hear, and see, and speak of
errors of men, yet is it not lawful for the^, because they are as a spider
which gathers nothing but poison. Did not many pervert the sins of the
Patriarchs, and apply them to themselves, as they should apply their
doctrines? But these things (says Paul) are not written for our imitation, but
for our admonition that is, for a cave at least we do the like, for they
repented that which they did, and shall we do that which hey repented? Christ
says Follow me, without limits, but Paul says, Be ye followers of me as I
follow Christ: so we must follow the Patriarchs, and Prophets, and Apostles,
as they followed Christ, least following that which they repented, we sustain
or suffer that which they escaped. This is a lesson for all but Christ, Let him
which thinks he stand, take heed least he fall. When Paul had distilled the
capital sins of the Israelits, this is the quintescence, that is, all the
profit which he could wring out of them, Let them that think they stand
take heed least they fall. Who would have said that Jerusalem would have become
an harlot: that the chosen people should become the cutsedst upon the earth?
yet so it is, says Paul, thus and thus they have done, and thus has God
forsaken them, that all the world may take heed how they stir up the lion of
Judah, which deuoureth the wicked like bread: Who would have thought when Lot
was grieved with the sins of Sodom, that he would have committed a worse
sin himself, first to drink til he was drunk, then to lie with his own
daughters? yet he did so. Who would have thought that Noe when he builded the
Arc, because he believed in God, and gave example to all the world how they
should save themselves, when the flood was past, would have given the first
example of sin to his own sons? Who would have thought that when he was
persecuted for his godlynes in the desert, he would have slain the husband
for the lust of the wife, when the blessings of God did call him to
thankfulness? Who would have thought that Solomon when he prayed in the temple,
and was termed by God the wisest man in the world, would have taken mo
concubines unto him than any heathen in the world? How are the mighty
overthrown, says David? 2. Sam. 1. Like Peter which said he would never
forsake Christ: and forsook him first. The strange men are fallen. Even
Solomon himself, and David, and Noah, and Lot, and Sampson, and Peter, the
light of the world, fell like the stars of heaven: these tall soldiers,
strong oaks, fair pillars lie in the dust, whose tops glittered in the air,
that they which think they stand, may take heed least they fall. Can I look
upon these ruins without compassion, or remember them without fear, unless I
be a reprobate, and my heart of flint? Who am I that I should stand like a
shrubbe, when these Caedars are blown down to the ground, and showed
themselves but men, the best man is but a man, the worst are worse then beasts,
no man is untainted but Christ, they which had greater gifts then we, they
which had deeper roots then we, they which had stronger hearts then we, they
which had more props then we, are fallen like a bird which is vvearie of her
flight, and turned back like the wind in the twinkling of an eye. 2. Kin. 8.13.
Who would have mocked him, that should have said sometime as Elisha said to
Hazael, what wickedness he should do in time to come, that he should slay and
trample men, women and children, Hazael blushed to hear thus of him, and
said, Am I a dog that I should do this, as if he would never do it while he
were a man, but count him a dog when he comes to that: so they which are
changed like Hazael blush to hear thus of him, and would have scorned sometime
at him which should once have said when they were zealous and studious
preachers, and persecuted for their preaching, that the time would come when
they should be loiterers, time-seruers, lovers of the world, and greedy
wolves, deuourers of their flocks, and persecutors, they would have said, Am
I a dog? Am I a beast? Am I a reprobate, that I should do this? they would
never believe this til it came to pass, and being fallen, they say they
sinned like Hazael, which blushed before he sinned and was impudent after.
Therefore let no man say what he will be, before he have examined what he is,
but run his course with a trembling fear, always looking down to the rubs
which lie before him, and the worthies which are slain already, and remember
when any spectacle of frailty is in thine eye, this is my warning, for no man
has more privilege then another. This is the profit we should make of other
men's faults, like a pearl which is taken out of the serpent: when we see our
brothers nakedness, it should move us to compassion of him, and a fear of our
selves, for when we rejoice at others fall, like Cham, as the leprosy went
from Naaman to Gehezi, so God turns his wrath from them, and it lights upon
us, Prou. 24.18. and such as have despised others without remorse, have fallen
in the like, or more shamefully themselves, and never rose again. What shall we
do then when we hear of other men's faults? not talk as we do, but beware
by them, and think, Am I better then he? Am I stronger then Sampson? Am I
wiser then Solomon? Am I chaster then David? Am I soberer then Noah? Am I
firmer then Peter, if God should leave me to my self? if he should withdraw
his hand which holds me? Into how many gulfes have I bin falling, when GOD
has preserved me of occasion, or delaied the temptation, or wonderfully kept
me from it, I know not how, for he delivers me from evil, as he delivered
David from the hloud of Nabal, by Abigael, which came unlooked for: So he has
prevented many wonderfully, when they were assaulted so hardly, that they had
thought to have yielded to the enemy. Sometime I may say there wanted a
tempter, sometime I may say there wanted time, sometime I may say there wanted
place, sometime the tempter was present, and there wanted neither time nor
place, but God held me back that I should not consent: so near we have glided
by sin, like a ship which rides upon a rock, and slips away, or a bird which
scapes from the fowler when the net is upon her. There is no salt but may lose
his saltnes, no wine but may lose his strength, nor flower but may lose his
sent, no light but may be eclipsed, no beau^ie but may be stained, no fruit
but as (...) blasted, nor soul but may be (...): we stand all in a slipperie
a nea^ where it is easy to slide, and hard (...) up, like little children
which overthrow themselves with their clothes, now up, now down at a straw,
so soon we fall from God, and slide from his word, and forget our resolutions,
as though we had never resolved. Man goes forth in the morning, weak, naked,
and unarmed, to fight with powers, and principalities, the devil, the world,
and al their adherents, and whom does he take with him but this flesh, a
traitor, ready to yield him up at every assalt unto the enemy. Thus man is set
upon the side of a hill, always declining, and slipping: the flesh muffleth
him to make him stumble, the world catches at him to make him fall, the devil
undermines him to make him sink, and cries still, Cast thy self down: and
when he falls, he goes apace, as Peter, who denied thrice together: and when
he is fallen is like a stumbling stone in the way for other, (...) they may
fall too: Therefore (...) that thinks he stands, take heed (...) he fall.

So earnestly must we call (...) our souls, that we be not weary of well
doing: for happier are the children that never began, then Judas, whose end
was worse then his beginning. Wisdom and Righteousness are angry with him
that leaves his goodness to become worse: if thy spouse had committed
fornication thou might have divorced her, but he which leaves his
righteousness to live in wickedness, forsakes his spouse to commit
fornication, and is divorced from Christ himself. If thou were like the Vine,
or the Olive, or the Fig tree, they would not leave their grapes, or their
fatness, or their sweetness, to get a kingdom; but the Bramble did: If thou
be like the Bramble, what will thou do when the fire comes? As this is a
memorandum to all, so especially let him that rules, and him that teaches,
take heed least he fall: for if the Pillars shrink the Temple shakes, as when
a great Tree is hewn down, which is a shadow to the beasts, and a neast to
the birds, many leaves, and bows, and twigges fall with it: so many stand, and
fall with them, whose lamps give light to others: Even as Ieroboams sin made
Israel to sin. Therefore Paul has given you a watchword, which every one
should write upon his table, upon his bed, and upon his nails, least he forget
in one hour, for he which stands now, may fall before night. Sin is not
long in coming, nor quickly gone, unless God stop us, as he met Balaam in
his way, and stay us, as he stayed the woman's son, when he was a bearing to
his grave: we run over Reason, and tread upon Conscience, and fling by
Council, and go by the Word, and poast to Death, as though we ran for a
Kingdom, like a Lark, that falls to the ground sooner then she mounted up: at
first she retires, as it were by steps, but when she comes nearer the ground,
she falls down with a iumpe: so we decline at first, and waver lower and
lower, til we be almost at the worst, and then we run headlong, as though we
were sent poast to hell, from hot to lukewarm, from lukewarm to key
cold, from key-colde to stark dead: so the languishing soul bleedes to
death, and sees not his life go till it be at the very last as pe.

Woe be unto him that is guilty of this murder, if the blood of Abell cried
for vengeance against his brother Cain which slew his body, shall not God be
revenged for the death of the Soul. Where is thy Brother (says GOD?) Nay
where is thy soul? have thou slain it, which was my Spouse, my Temple, mine
own Image? If the servant which hid his Talent was cast into darkness,
what shall be done unto thee which have lost thy Talent? For he which falls
from his righteousness, does not hide his Talent, but more, he does lose it.

Thus if you never knew what good to make of evil, this you may learn in
the sinners School: let them which think they stand, take heed least they
fall, and let them which are down, care to rise, and the Lord so direct our
steps, that we may rise again.

FINIS.

