AN EXTRACT OVT OF THE History of the last French King HENRY the fourth of
famous memory, According to an Autentique Copy written in his life time.

To which is added his being murdered with a knife in his Coach in Paris the
14. of May last 1610. Still. ROMANS

WITH AN APPRECATION FOR THE SAFEGVARD and HAPPINESS of our MOST GRACIOUS
Sovereign JAMES the first, etc.

Seen and allowed by Authority.

Jmprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. ANNO 1610.

To be sold at BRITAIN BVRSE.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable WILLIAM Lord Viscount Cranborne, sole son and heir
to the Right Honorable the Earl of SALISBVRY, L. High Treasurer of England.
Right Honorable,
THE continual favors J received from your L. at my being in FRANCE, do (and
shall always) bind me to serve and honor you in what J may. And now purposing
with my self to consecrate to this our Age and to Posterity, the memory of
Henry the 4. the late French King, (whose most deplorable Murder, sorrow it
self can never sufficiently bewail) J esteemed the Dedication thereof, (as
well in respect of my own particular duties to your L. as in regard of the
Quality of the Subject, whereof J write) to belong to you, more then in Part.
For with whom may my Narrations of the wonderful passages of his Life hope to
find more gracious acceptance, then with your L. whom J knew to be so great an
honourer of his Person, an eyewitness of his Royal Parts, and one that had
received so many ample favors from him being alive?

The Circumstances of his being Murdered, (J cannot call it his Dying, for they
Die not, but are made to Die, who are so Murdered) are best known to your L.
whose speedy Letters gave our STATE the first notice of his Fall. J only now
set them down to propose to your Thoughts the Consideration of Humane
frailty, and the Weakness even of greatest Greatness, so often as you call
to mind that KING, then whom, the Princes of the Christian world cannot have a
more ample or apposite Subject to meditate upon.

It was about Christmas last past (your L. did then too thoroughly think of it
J am sure, ever after to forget it) that the rumor of our Kings death was
spread over the French Court; which (though it were but a rumor, and against
which all those then about you opposed themselves) struck you notwithstanding
so full of dolor and affliction of spirit, that J suppose how much your Noble
and gentle nature was wounded with the sight of this Kings wounds. Two notable
occurrences, that in your Lordships Travels you should hear of the murder of
your own King, (which proved otherwise) and be an eyewitness of the Murder
of another, which was too true; and both of them the greatest Kings of Europe.

Your Loss in Him was great; great, in loosing a KING, from whom you had
received so gracious respects; great, in cutting off your Honorable purpose of
following his Fortunes in those Germane Wars, wherein you should have seen
so warrelike Lessons read by so Excellent and profound a Master.

But GOD (whose Providence and Power is as infallible, as irresistable) has
diuerted him from finishing that great Affair, which he has left (I hope) to
be consummated by another. I cease from further troubling your Lordship, and so
rest

Ever humbly at your Honors command, Edmond Skory.

AN EXTRACT out of the History of the last French King HENRY the 4. of famous
memory.
THere being an Union of Virtue and Fortune in the person of this French K.H.
the 4, whose life I will only point at; has justly gotten him all the
elevated titles of an immortal glory. So many actions of his person are as so
many miracles, and may safely exempt him from being paralleld either in the
difficulty of obtaining, or happiness in keeping so great and stirring a
Kingdom. And the particulars indeed of the course of his life; seem by the
Divine providence to have been conducible to the reservation of that State;
which otherwise had fallen into an irrecouerable consumption. His birth being
amongst the barren rocks: and his education comporting with the asperitie of
the place, were the ingredients with which his youth was tempered, and whereby
(his body as his spirit made invincible) he was prepared fit for the
acco^plishment of great, and glorious labors. He had not drawn the breath of
seven years in this world; but his quality drew him into the knowledge of
the world: where, his royal towardness begot him estimation, and that
estimation (even then) extended it self to the assured hope of succeeding
greatness. By the Civil wars was his Father, (the Light, and Conductor of
his Nature, and fortunes) extinguished; his Mother removed from Court; his Uncle
imprisoned; his friends in disgrace; his servants banished; and his own ruin
plotted.

And now these of the Religion (being wrapped in like extremities, disposing
their eyes to heaven, and their bodies to the earth, finding no other hope of
safety, then in his Arms) elected him their General; the abated hopes of
whom, by the loss of four Battles, could not be repaired but by the
felicity of his Generous courage.

At nineteen year old he was inueigled into his first marriage; a marriage as
dangerous, as illegitimate; for celebration of which direful Nuptials; Hymen
had his garment not sprinkled; but daubed all over with the blood, of the best
bloods in France; his Mother lost her life, his friends were banished,
himself, and his servants captiued. All which mischiefs he suffered patiently,
and underwent the perils, inconueniencies, and labors, (though a General)
even of the Common soldier, until the time; that his wisdom obtained to his
party, some relaxation of evils; and breathing from toiles, by the means of a
fifth Edict of peace.

But suddenly; was this calm converted into a storm, which powered upon him
the charge of ten royal Armies in less then four years. At the battle of
Coutray, his name was made terrible to the enemy; who, but by so apparent
merit; was unwilling to have acknowledged his Virtue. A cruel tragedy ended,
where France was the Theater, strangers the Actors, the Epilogue of which was
closed with the death of two Princes, who had filled the Realm with fire,
blood and confusion.

The King then reigning Henry the 3. (predecessor to this King, as well in
being murdered, as in rule) being in desperate distress and almost surprised
at Tours, was happily rescued by this H. the 4. whose approach (like the
discovery of a Land to men long at sea) inspired a new courage into the Kings
drooping and disheartened forces, and had conducted him to the undoubted
conquest of PARIS; but for that execrable King-killing- Friar, whose face, as
his disseigne was mufled with the veil of piety; by means whereof he was so
untimely rent from himself, his fortunes, and his friends: The true natural
French men (being thus desolated of their Prince, and fearing many tyrant-Kings
in stead of one-lawfull) cast themselves into this man's arms, and did commit
to his virtue and valor, the revenge of their slaughtered King, and the
salvation of their State. Nevertheless, to such an height was the astonishment
of the fact grown, and to such an ebb was the fidelity of the people drawn,
by reason of diversity in Religion: that many did shamefully abandon him;
choosing rather to be idle spectators in their Countries ruin, then faithful
Patriots in procuring, or defending the Liberty thereof.

All these oppositions augmented his resolution, and were but as so many dark
clouds, in which his fortunes and virtue being inuolued, might in their due
time break forth with the more astonishing violence.

The insolent obstinacy of his rebellious subjects, made him to have as many
combats, as iourneyes, and as many sieges, as encampings, opposing themselves
against him as a public enemy to entrappe him, whilst he sought them as a
father his children, to gain them. Within his tent were nothing but griefs
and anxieties caused by vn-intermissiue infidelities, and pernicious
desseignes, discovered every moment against his person and the State: every day
double combat, double victory: one against his enemies, another with his own,
and himself: in the last of which, using a conniuent lenity, where a sharper
insight into the offenses might bring damage. Diepe serves for example of his
fidelity. Arques the scale to raise his glory. Paris believing him vanquished,
was amassed to see him victorious. He made roades into diverse provinces, to
confirm those who were falling off. In his passage all yielded to him, and an
infinite number of taken-townes received a happy proof of his puissance, and
moderation. He returned with the same success and diligence, to the relief of
Meulan, chasing away the army, and the General of the enemies, that held it
besieged: who a little after, being joined with the Spanish forces, instead of
diminishing their former shame, augmented his glory, giving him new triumphs by
the memorable battle of Yury. Following this happiness, Vernon, Mante,
Melun, and many other places, were brought to his obedience, as Chartresse was
after, and Paris it self had also bin, if his goodness had not feared her
ruin and desolation.

To recount all his exployts, were matter enough for an ample History, and a
task for a perfect Historian; yet through these small lights: may his conduct,
experience, diligence, constancy, patience, bounty and valor (the essential
parts of a General) be discerned.

At Aumale he was prodigal of his own blood to save others. Roan brought to
extremity, saw him depart from her to encounter Strangers, which he put to
flight; and had he not been diswaded by the counsel of others from the chase,
they had received the reward of Run awayes.

Thus never beaten, always victorious, conducted by God, through the pikes of
his enemies, and from their clandestine machinations, (which a false devotion
raised incessantly against his life) he discovered and overthrew the infernal
desseignes of those, who (to the attaining of their licentious and cruel
purposes) had made Religion their vizard.

But, at length the hearts of the wavering were fortified, and the eyes of the
ouer-violently-deuout vnseeled; who then saw the unjust causes that held them
in rebellion: Then began the Towns of France, in aemulation one of another,
to contend who should offer first, or most their Duty. Meaux, Lions, Orleans
and Bourges first in obedience, brought him the first honor; and, the King by
his auspicious entrance into Paris, got an immortal glory of the knowledge of
Laws, and Arms, pardoning, as well as vanquishing, forgiving in a day so many
people, and rendering and confirming life and liberty to so many Strangers; who
could not persuade themselves, but that they were in the jaws of Death and
Bondage.

The particular sieges of Laon, and La-Fere, the site and quality of the
garrison being impregnable, the voyage of the Franch-comte, the combats of
Fountaine-Francois, the taking of Dijon, and other Towns of Burgongne, the
submission of many Princes, the reduction of Roan, Newhauen, Amyens, Abbeuille,
Peronne, Poitiers, Perigueux, Toulouse, Marseillis, Vienne, Valence, Troy,
Sens, Rhejms, and other Towns following their example, will one day fill many
volumes, and confer upon this Prince the Laurels of Alexander, the triumphs
of Caesar, and the felicities of Augustus.

At his general assembly held at Roane, he furnished himself by the advice of
some, for the Sauegard of all; and authorized those edicts which assured peace
and rest.

In the surprise of Amyens, in liew of bearing ill will, the success confirmed
the divine assistance, the fidelity of the French, the courage of the Prince,
and the terror of the Strangers, who astonished at his carriage in this
business; esteemed themselves fairly blessed, to have obtained a peace from
him. The obstinacy of Britanie had given matter for his powerful Justice to
work upon, if the prayers of his friends, and the tears of the vanquished,
had not diuerted his just displeasure. And then to give France an honorable
and glorious repose, and to make retribution to the State of that which had
been taken from her, he displayed his Floure-de-lices within the Alps,
ouerturning all interposed obstacles. The proud rock of Mountmeliend (which
the people thereabout held impregnable) looked fearful at his presence, and
humbled it self to the force of his Cannons.

Piedmont, doubting her taking, and Millaine suffering a neighbour-feare (as
being a frontier) implored the Pope by persuasion to divert him; at whose
solicitation he was content to desist from further prosecution; and to
consecrate to the peace and good of that part of Europe, his just anger and
conquests, if he had followed his courage, his puissance, and good fortune.

To make all perfect, he espoused the Princess Maria de Medices, whom the
heavens had designed to be the ornament of Italy, the glory of Florence, the
Luster of her house, and the hope of France, with whom he made his royal
entry into Paris, and thinking he had now triumphed over all the enemies of
the State, he disposed himself to recompense the merits and virtues of those,
who had formerly well served him; howbeit the ingratitude of one whom he had
mightily raised, exasperating his nature, constrained him to deliver him to the
punishment of death, whom no other castigation could reduce to amendment;
giving, by this correction of one; fear and example to all. His watchfulness,
stirred by this allarume; he prevented and dissipated the remainders of that
treason, iniecting a sufficient terror into the town of Sedan, by the only
clash of his armor, who found in their tears more safety then in their
rampires; and so were assumed into his favor. By this excellent example he
confirmed the good in obedience, reduced others to duty, and blotted out all
remembrance of their former enormous offenses; preferring Mercy before
Justice, and Clemency before Profit. He reestablisht by solemn Edicts, such
as were condemned, and banished by Arrest, and rased those monuments, sacred to
his memory, because they were erected to the infamy of others. So strong is
he in himself, and in the opinion of the world, that the conclaue respects
him: England is in perfect amity with him, Almany and Italy honors him,
Spain fears him, and Belgia seeks him. And now he rejoices in the labor
of his hands, and in the tranquillity which he has made with the price of his
blood, and from the twentieth year of his age purchased with his laborious and
dangerous exercises.

The laws and Arts enjoy a sweet repose, and large increase under his Empire,
and a free commerce is reestablished throughout his Kingdom; he has adorned
his City of Paris with many and excellent buildings, besides other his
particular works of great Magnificence.

He showed his peaceful providence in finances, his judgment in the choice of
men, and his viue-spirit and excellent composition of mind and body in all
sudden accidents; And since he was a King, his greatest enemies cannot justly
upbraid him with the least breach of contracted friendship with any of his
neighbors.

And lastly, to sum up this Man of men, this princelike soldier, and
souldier-like Prince: whose royal face is white with Time, with watchings and
with experience, and the Laurels which begirt his venerable head, and took
their root in his Caske, have been gathered in the grounds of three pitched
fields: of 35. encounters of armies; of an hundred and forty combats, and 300.
sieges of places; in all which; his person striued (if it were possible) to
have got the start of his courage: For these causes has the Christian world
reason to rejoice in the contemplation of so able a champion against the common
enemy: and the French Nation to hold themselves happy in having so excellent a
Prince.

But now I must forsake this grove of Baies and Olives (which his Valor and
Wisdom had planted for my Pen to walk in) and address my self to speak of
his Death; in which the lives of so many thousands were interessed. And as He,
who being to set his hand to a Proscription of the Death of others, wished he
had been ignorant of letters, rather then to use them in such a funeral
affair: So I protest before the knower of all Hearts, that I do unfeignedly
wish, not only that I were ignorant of letters, but that I had also lost that
hand, with which I write these lines, so that he were living; and that I had
not true matter to write of his inhumane and barbarous slaughter, which I will
briefly touch in the maine particulars; as being a Subject in which my spirits
languish, before they begin to enter, and in which being entered, I have small
delight to continue long.

The King (for explanation of his dearest affection to his Queen; and for
satisfaction of his own mind) had (before his intended departure for this
War) invested Her with the Crown and Title of Queen of France and Navarre.
The morrow after which great solemnity, he appointed to go to his Arsenall,
to visit the Duke d' Suylly his Treasurer, who at that time was in some
indisposition of body. And notwithstanding (as it is written from good place)
that he was dissuaded from going abroad that day by some, as a day marked out
by Astrologers, to portend danger to his Person: yet he; a second Caesar as
well in the course of his life as of his death, was little swayed with their
disswasions, but like a King, and a Christian replied, That it was an offense
to God to give credit to these Prognostiques; and that having God to his Guard,
he feared no man.

That morning, walking in the great gallerie at the Twilleries, he had been
slain by this villain, (who to that purpose pestered somewhat near his
Person) but that by some then about the King, he was thrust off, esteemed only
as some rude rascal. After dinner, about four of (...) story of the new
King, by whosoever else shall write it: Only thus much, the Queen was
proclaimed Regent; during the Kings minority: the state of France yet enjoys
her former Tranquillity, and Monsieur Praslyne was dispatched away to the Army
to hold some discipline until the coming of the Dukes of Neuers; and Bullion.

The peaceful Plenty, and Discipline this King had brought France unto: the
great affair of war which he had in hand, the sumptuous crowning of his
Queen which he had finished; and to be thus snatched away from these, and in
these, by a second Herostratus; who has defaced one of the royallest buildings
the earth bare: must power a myriad of the worlds curses, and the vengeance of
God in full vialls upon the Actor and deuisors thereof.

That the sacred person of so great a King; should be undone by the hands of an
unholy Villain, and his own vassaile: that a Prince of the sword, should be
butchered with a Knife: that He, who had returned victoriously alive, from the
head of so many Armies (where Death keeps his open shambles) should now be
robbed of his life, by the hands of only one, and in the peaceful streets of
Paris: which were yet warm with the glory of his Queens late Coronation: is a
villenie; that exceeds (if it were possible) the merit of damnation.

I demand even of the Devil himself (in whose office all former villenies are
enrouled) whether the praeceding Ages have begot so stupendous and wicked a
deed: Nay I will demand of his Astrology; (wherein he is so great a Master)
whether the succeeding Times can be malignant enough to produce such another?

Truly I confess; that the Intention of the Pouder-treason if it had come to
Act: (by which our entier State had been entirely ruined in an instant) had
exceeded this: (for as yet, God be praised the State of France goes on in her
former and even Course:) I confess that Treason; blew up all other treasons,
as it would have blown up all us: It was the Devils Masterpiece; devised by
himself; exceeding all Thought, all Expression; all Example.

O How unthankful then are we to God for that his miraculous preservation of
our King for the States sake; of our State, for the Kings sake: Whose Constancy
in Religion, and Judicious profoundnesse in the controuersed points thereof;
whose temperance in government, and mercy even to greatest Offenders, has
given us cause to confess the value of so inestimable a King, and with
public sacrifice of prayers, importune God for the continuance of his
safety. How can we hear of so terrible a blow but on the other side of the
wall, and forbear to fix our eyes and hearts on him, that disposes all
things, howsoever man propounds.

And whether the speech proceeded from some planetary observation in foreign
parts, or from some Intelligence broken forth from out the den of these
lurking-assacinates; yet sure I am, (and my information is of credit) that even
about this very time, the like assault was said should be made upon the Person
of our Sovereign: which divert O God, for thy Holy Names sake, who art King of
kings: for Religions sake, he is the nourice and protector of Religion: for
Nature and Humanities sake, we are borne, and must live under him: preserve
him O God, as thy image being a man; as thy vicegerent being a King; that as
thou have with a miraculous peace brought him to these his own Kingdoms; so
thou will every night, and every morning sprinckle his diadem with the dew of
Security, Peace, and Plenty; that posterity may compare his reign, with the
reign of Solomon, until being full of days, he shall quietly lay down his
life and resign his precious soul into thine hands, and deliver his Empires
into the hands of those, who by thy Laws, and by the Laws of Nature are borne
to inherit them.


