A FRVITFVLL SERMON, Upon part of the 5. Chapter of the first Epistle of Saint
Paul to the Thessalonians.

By Henry Smith, Which Sermon being taken by Characterie, is now published for
the benefit of the Faithful

AT LONDON, Printed for the widdowe Broom. 1591.

1 Thessalonians. 5, 19, 20. 21. 22. 19. Quench not the Spirit. 20. Despise not
Prophesying. 21. Try all things, and keep that which is good. 22. Abstain
from all appearance of evil.
Having lately spoken of these words; In all things give thanks, and quench
not the Spirit: Touching the first, I showed you, that it is an easier thing
to obtain of God, than to be thankful to him; for more have gone away
speeders, Luke 17, 17.
than have gone away thankers. Then how the wicked are beholding to God as well
as the just, and therefore it is said, that the sun does shine upon the
just and unjust. Then how Iaacob came not so bare to Laban, Gen 19, 30.
(when he brought nothing with him but his staff in his hand) as man comes
into this world, without strenght or staff to sustain him, which made the
Apostle to ask: 1 Cor 4, 7.
What have you which you have not received? Therefore, to teach man to be
thankful unto his Maker, he was not made in Paradise, the place of joy and
happiness; but being made out of Paradise, he was brought into Paradise, Gen
2, 8.
to show how all his joy and happiness came from God, and not from Nature,
that he might know where to bestow his thanks. Therefore David to perswad
all men unto thankfulness, says: It is a good thing and pleasant to be
thankful. Psalm 147, 1.
If he had said, no more but good, all which love goodness were bound to be
thankful, but when he says not only good, but pleasant too, all which love
pleasure are bound to be thankful: and therefore, as Peter's Mother in law,
Math 8,
so soon as Christ had healed her of a fever, rose up immediately to minister
unto him: So we so soon as Christ has done any thing for us, should rise up
immediately to serve him. 1 Samuel 1.
As Annah when she had received a son from God, did consecrate him to God
again: so what soever we receive of God, we must give it to God again; that
is, use it to his glory, and make it one of our means to serve him, for all
things which we receive in this life, are given unto us, least we should want
any means to serve God.

Then because the Apostle requires thanks for all things, I showed you, that
he is not thankful before God, which thanks him only for his benefits, but
he is thankful in deed, which thanks him for his chastisement. It may be
while the Lord gives, many will say: Blessed be the name of the Lord: but when
the Lord takes away, Job 1*
who will say blessed be the name of the Lord. There is one example the^ of
Paul's doctrine, which is: in all things to give thanks. There is an other
example of Paul's doctrine, which gave thanks to GOD for his rod: for an
obedient child does not only kiss the hand which gives, but the rod that
beats.

After, speaking of these words, Quench not the Spirit; I showed you that the
Spirit, does signify the gifts of the Spirit: the Spirit in the third of
Mathewe, Math 3,
is likened to fire, and therefore Paul says well, Quench not the Spirit,
because fire may be quenched.

Here I took occasion to speak of zeal, which is the fire of the Spirit;
showing you that GOD is pleased with zeal, as men are pleased with love. But
as Christ did baptize with fire; Math 3, 11.
so John did baptize with water: And, as the holy Ghost descended with fire;
so he did descend with a wind that cools fire: Acts 2,
showing, that our zeal should be a temperate zeal, Esaias 58, 2,
as our Masters was. Esaiah was commanded to cry, but not to roar. The Jews
might not gather too much Manna, Exo 16, 18.
no more than they might gather too little: as there is a measure in knowledge,
so there is a measure in zeal; that is, be zealous according to discretion, as
Paul says, Rom 12, 3.
Be wise according to sobriety. The Disciples were commended for their zeal,
Math 10, 28.
when they left all to follow Christ: but Christ reproved them for their
zeal, when they would pray for fire from Luke 9, 55.
heaven to consume the Samaritanes. Therefore zeal and discreation united
together, are like the two Lions which supported the throne of Solomon; 1 Reg
10, 20.
and he which has them both, is like Moises for his mildnes, and like Phineas
for his feruencie: therefore, as wine is tempered with water, so let discretion
temper zeal. But I need not bring water, to quench that fire which is out
already; I would rather I could say of you, you are too zealous, as Paul told
the Athenians they were too superstitious. Acts 17. 22.
But our sickness is not a hot sickness, but a cold sickness; the hot
body is distempered, but the cold body is dead.

Then I showed you, how the Spirit is quenched, as a man does quench his
reason with over much wine: and therefore we say, when the wine is in, the
wit is out; because before he seems to have reason, and now he seems to
have none: So our zeal, and our Faith, and our love, are quenched with sin.
Every vain thought, and every idle word, and every wicked deed, is like so
many drops to quench the Spirit of GOD. Some quench it with the business of
this world: some quench it with the lusts of the flesh: Some quench it with
the cares of the mind: Some quench it with long delays: that is, not plying
the motion when it comes, but crossing the good thought with badde thoughts,
and doing a thing when the Spirit says do it not: as Acbab went to battle
after he had consulted with the Prophet: therefore Paul says; Ephesians 4, 30.
Grieve not the Spirit: shewwing that the Spirit is often grieved before it
be quenched, and this is principaly to be remembered that when a man begins
to grieve and check, and persecute the Spirit, lightly he never cease
until he has quenched it; that is, until he seem to have no spirit at
all, but walks like a lump of flesh.

After Quench not the Spirit, follows Despise not Prophesying: In the end
of this Epistle, Paul speaks like a Father which is come to the end of his
life, who because he has but a while to speak, heapeth his lessons together,
which he would have his sons remember when he is gone: so Paul, as though
he were set to give good counsel, and had no leisure to speak that he
would, sends the Thessalonians a brief of his mind, which their meditation
should after amplify and expound unto them: His first advise is, quench not
the Spirit: that is, when a good motion comes, welcome it like a friend,
and cross it not with thy lusts: for lusts are enemies to the benefit of
the Soul.

The second Admonition teaches how the first should be kept, Despise not
prophesying, and the Spirit will not quench, because prophesying does kindle
it.

The third Admonition teaches how to make fruit of the second, Try the
doctrines of them which prophecy, and thou shall not believe error for
truth, but hold the best.

The fourth Admonition is the sum of all, and it comes last, because it is
longest in learning; that is, Abstain from all appearance of evil. This is the
sum of al, for he which can abstain not only from evil, but from the
appearance of evil, is so perfect a man, as can be found in this sinful life.

Place all these together, and it is as if Paul should say, Quench not the
Spirit by despising of Prophesying, neither despise Prophesying, because all
do not Prophecy alike; but rather when you hear some preach one way, and
some an other; when you see some follow him, and others follow him, do you
try the doctrines by the Scripturs, Acts 17, 11.
as the men of Beroea did, and choose that which is best, and soundest, and
truest, having always such an eye to the Truth, that you abstain from all
appearance of error; so jealous the Holy Ghost would have us of our faith, that
we set no Article upon our Religion, but that which is an undoubted truth; as
Moses did nothing in the Tabernacle, but that which was showed in the pattern
set down before him.

The occasion of these Lessons, seems to come of this; that there were some
among the Thessalonians as there be among us, which did forsake all Religion,
because the Preachers did not agree, or because the lives of Professors gave
some offense, therefore Paul shows that there is no cause, why they should
mislike the Word for the Preacher; or why they should despise Religion for the
Professor, because the Word and the Religion is not theirs: for they can no
more be polluted by them than God. Then he concludes, that feeing it is
necessary, that there shall be always errors and heresies, to try us; we
should also try them, and thereby be provoked so much the more from error or
heresy, that we abstain even from the appearance thereof, least we fall into
the sin; this is the scope of these words.

Despise not Prophesying. This Admonition is (as it were) the keeper of the
former: for by prophesying the spirit is kindled, and without prophesying, the
spirit is quenched; and therefore after Quench not the spirit, Paul says,
Despise not Prophesying: showing, that as our sin does quench the spirit, so
Prophesying does kindle it. This you may see in the Disciples that went to
Emaus: of whom it is said, when Christ preached unto them out of the Law and
Prophets, their Spirit was so kindled with his prophesying, Luk 24, 32,
that theier hearts waxed hot within them.

This you may see again in Saules Messengers, which were sent for David, 1 Samuel
19, 20.
when they came among the Prophets, and heard them prophecy, their Spirit
was so kindled, that they could not choose but prophecy also: in so much,
that when Saul came after himself, and hearing the Prophets, as they did, the
Spirit came upon him likewise, and he prophesied too, whereupon it was said:
1 Samuel 19, 23. 24.
Is Saul also among the Prophets? This is no marvel that the Spirit of man
should be so kindled, and revived, and refreshed with the word, for the word
is called the food of the soul: Heb 5.
take away the word from the soul, and it has no food to eat, as if you
should take food from the body, the body would pine: And therefore Solomon
says, without visions the people perrish: Prou 29* 18.
that is, without out Prophesying the people famish. Therefore, he which loves
his soul, had not need to despise Prophesying, for if he despise
Prophesying, then verily he famisheth his own Soul, and is guilty of her
death.

The Apostle might have said, Love Prophesying, or honor Prophesying: But why
does he forbid, to despise Prophesying? Why did Christ say, The poor receive
the Gospel, Mat 11, 5.
but to show that the rich did contemn it? Why does Paul say, I am not
ashamed of the Gospel, Rom 1, 16.
but to show that many are ashamed of it? Even so he says, despise not
Prophesying* showing, that the greatest honor we give to Prophets, is not to
despise them: and the greatest love which we carry to the Word, is not to
loath it. If we do not despise the Preachers, then we think that we honor
them enough; and if we do not loath the Word, then we think that we love it
enough: therefore the Apostle says, Despise not Prophesying, for honor
Prophesying.

Prophesying here does signify Preaching, Rom 1* 14.
as it does in Rom 1, 14. Will you know why Preaching is called Prophesying?
To add more honor and renown to the Preachers of the Word; to make you
receive them like Prophets, and then Christ says, Mat 10, 41.
you shall have a Prophets reward: that is, not such a reward as you give, but
such a reward as God gives.

Lastly, if you mark, Paul says not Despise not Prophets, but Prophesying;
signifying, that from the contempt of the Prophets, at last we come to despise
Prophesying too, like the Jews, when they were offended with the Prophet,
charged him to prophecy no more. Iere 11, 21.
Therefore as Christ warned his Disciples, to hear the Scribes and Pharisees,
Mat 23, 3.
although they did not as they taught, so Paul warns the Thessalonians, that
if any Prophets among them, do not as they teach, and therefore seem worthy
to be despised like the Scribes and Pharisees: yet that they take heed, that
they do not despise Prophesying, for the Prophets.

Because the Preachers are despised, before the word be despised; therefore
we will speak first of their contempt. Christ asked his Disciples what they
thought of him? Mat 16, 13.
So I would ask you, what you think of Preachers? Is he a contemptible
person, which brings the Embassage of God? 2 Cor 5, 20,
which has the name of an Angel, Reu 1 20,
and all his words are Messengers of life? is he a contemptible person?
Prophets are of such account with GOD, that it is said: God will do nothing,
Amos 7, 3.
before he reveal it unto his Prophets: so Prophets are as it were GODS
Counselors. Again, Kings, Priests, and Prophets, were figures of Christ:
all these three were anointed with Oil, 1 Kings 13, 1,
to show that they had greater graces than the rest, but specially the
Prophets are called men of God, to show that all which are of God, will make
much of Prophets for Gods sake: therefore, 1 Cor 14, 34.
women are forbidden to take upon them to prophecy, least that noble calling
should become vile and despised, by such unskillful handlers of it. Therefore
when the Prophet Elisha, would send for Naaman the leaper, to come unto him,
these were his words: 2 King 5, 8.
Naaman shall know that there is a Prophet in Israel: as though all the
glory of Israel were chiefly in this, that they had Prophets and other had
none. Therefore, when this Prophet was dead, Ioash the King came unto his corse,
and wept over his face, and cried: O my Father, 1 King 13, 14.
my Father, the Charet of Israel and horsemen of the same: showing, that the
Chariots and horses, and Soldiers do not so safeguard a City, as the
Prophets which teach it, and pray for it. How joyful and glad was Lydea, when
she could draw Paul and Silas to her house: If you think me to be
faithful come to Acts 16. 15.
my house: showing, that never any guests were so welcome to her house before.
How tender was the Shunamite over Elisha, that she built an house to welcome
him, and to keep him with her, thinks all the places in her house too bad for
him, she built him a new room, and made him stay.

How much did the Galathians make of Paul, Gal 4, 1^.
that he says, They would pull out their own eyes to do him good; So, once
a Prophet was esteemed like a Prophet, and has he bid you despise them
now, which bad you to honor them before? No, Paul charge us to receive our
teachers, as he was received himself: saying, He which labors in the Word
is worthy of double honor: 1 Timothy 5, 14.
That is, the preachers (after a sort) are as well to be honored as the Ruler.

Aaron and Moses were brethren. If Aarons Vrim and Thumi would have served:
Exo 28, 30.
Moses rod and staff should not have needed. But when the tongue could not
persuade, then the rod did compel.

As Paul shows the Thessalonians, how the Preachers of the word should be
honored, so he teaches the Phillippians how to honor their teachers, Phil 2,
29.
saying: Receive him in the Lord with great gladness, and make much of such:
that is, show your selves so glad of him, that he may be glad of you. Have you
need to be taught, why Paul would have you make much of such? because they
are like Lamps, which consume themselves to give light to other: so they
consume themselves to give light to you; Because they are like a Hen, which
clocketh her chickens together from the Kite: so, they clock you together from
the Serpent; Because they are like the Shout, Ios^ 6, 20.
which did beat down the walls of Jericho: so they beat down the walls of
sin; Because they are like the fiery Pillar which went before the Israelits
to the land of Promise, for they go before you to the land of promise; Exo
13, 20.
because they are like Moises, which stepped between the plague and the people,
because they are like good Andrewe, that showed his brethren the Messiah, John
1. 14,
so they call you to see the Messiah, and therefore make much of such. If we
should make much of Prophets, how much should we make of prophesying? If we
should love our instructers, how much should we love instruction?

Simeon keeping in the Temple met with Christ, Luke 2, 28.
so, many hearing the Word have met with knowledge; have met with comfort;
have met with peace; have met with salvation; but without the Word never any
was converted to God: therefore, whenever the word is preached, every one may
say to himself, as the Disciples said to the blind man; Be of good comfort,
Mar 10, 49.
he calls thee: Be of good comfort the Lord calls thee; But when the word
is not preached, the^ every man may say to himself, Beware the devil calls
thee. When the Prophets went from Jerusalem, then sword, and famine, and
pestilence, and all the plagues of God rayned upon them, even as the fire came
upon Sodom, Gen 19.
so soon as Lot was gone out.

There be two trades in this land, without which the Realm can not stand; and
one is the Queens soldiers, and the other is the Lords soldiers, and the
Lords soldiers are hardly used, like the Queens soldiers; for from the
Merchant to the Porter, no calling is so despised, so contemned, so deryded,
that they may beg for their service: for their living is turned to an alms;
one says, Moses is quis: that is, the Magistrate is some body: but Aaron is
quasi quis: that is, the Minister is no body, because no body is despised
like him. Receive a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, nay, receive a Prophet in
the name of an enemy, as Achab received Eliah, Art thou here mine enemy? 1
King 21, 20.
If Paul had lived in our days, he would not have said, Despise not the
Prophets, but persecute not the Prophets: for he should have seen, not only
despisers of the Prophets, but mockers of them; not only mockers, but
slaunderers of them; not only slaunderers, but hunters, biters, and smiters of
them. Charm the Charmer never so sweetly, let his song be never so pleasant,
yet many Adders are ready to stop their ears, and to stop his mouth; like
a Bird which is smitten in her song, of the Archer whom she sings unto; even
as Saul let his spear fly at David, 1 S^m 19, 10
while he played upon his harp to solace and comfort, and drive the evil
spirit from him. Once they did build houses for the Prophets like the
Shunamite, 2 Kin 4, 10.
but now they take their houses from them, and think they do God good
service, when they make them, and their Wives, and their Children, and their
Servants beggars. Once Paul said to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4, 12.
Let no man despise thy youth: showing, that Preachers should not be despised
for their youth; but now they despise the young Prophets and the old too,
with great contempt.

How is the double honor turned to single honor? Nay, how is our honor
turned to dishonor? Mal 1, 3.
If I be a Master (says God) where is my fear? so, if we be Prophets, where
is our reverence? Does not the contempt of Prophets cry unto God, as well as
the blood of Abell. Gen 4, 10.


When the Messengers which were sent unto the Vineyard for fruits, were
beaten of them which should have laden them; then it is said, that the Lord
of the Vineyarde waxed worth, Mat 21, 43.
and said, that he would let the Vineyarde unto others, which should yield
unto him the fruits thereof.

The meaning of this Parable is this, that when the Preachers and Teachers
which Christ sends to his Church for fruits, are abused and persecuted, or
contemned and scorned, by those whom they (by him appointed) do call unto the
heavenly banquet; then will he remove the glory of their Light, and the
sweet comfort of his Gospel to others, which will yield him the fruits
thereof. Theerfore what may those fear which have used Christ's Ambassadors,
as Ammon used David's Ambassadors. 2 Chro 10, 4.
Jerusalem is left without one Prophet, because she despised them. Sodom was
burned because she despised Lot: and the whole world was drowned because it
despised Noah. And are not these examples written for our warning.

The time came when Saul sought for a Prophet, 1 Samuel 28.
and GOD would not answer him by Prophets, because he had despised his
Prophets before: so, the time comes, when you shall ask, Wheere is the Seer?
and they shall say, he is rapt away like Elias; a Prophet was amongst us, but
when he was despised in Jerusalem, 2 Kings 2, 2, 11.
he was sent to Niniuie, Is not judgment begun already? does not the Gospel
stand at the door, as if she were ready to take her leave: are we not come
from despising of Prophets, almost to the despising of prophesying too? Do not
many wall in the streets, while we preach in the Temple.

The beasts came to the Arc to Gen 7. 9.
save themselves, and men will not come to the Church to save themselves. But
we may cry unto them as the Children did unto their fellows in the Market:
We have pyped unto you, Mat 11, 17.
and you would not dance, We have lamented unto you, and you would not
mourn. Some come to hear us, but they come as Naaman came to Elisha, 2 Kings
5, 11.
when the Prophet had told him what he should do, he mocked him for it,
and thought that he knew a better way than that himself. So they come to
hear us, but they think they can teach us. But they must remember that Paul
says: 1 Cor 1, 27.
GOD has chosen the foolish to confound the wise. Therefore, if they think
themselves wise, let them think us those fools whom God has chosen to
confound them. For although at all other times we are as plain and simple as
Jacob, yet at this time we have a promise, and it is given us for your sake, to
speak sometime that which we conceive not ourselves, because the hour is come
when GOD has appointed to call some of you, as he has done some of you
before: therefore as the Princely spirit came upon Saul when he should
reign, to teach him how he should rule; so the Prophetical spirit comes
upon Teachers, when they should teach, to teach the^ how they should speak:
therefore Christ was content to be baptized of John, so be you contented to be
instructed of us; that if we be more simple than you, the glory of God may
appear more in converting you by us.

Has not this despising of the preachers, made the Preachers almost despise
preaching? The peoples neglecting of the Prophets, has made the prophets
neglect prophesying. The devil stirs up this carelesnes in men's hearts, to
the intent our ingratitude may move the Lord to take from us (as from the
Jews) both our Prophets and our prophesying, and so leave us to a senseless
security, that most commonly fore-runneth destruction.

What moves so many that would put their hands to the plough, and study
divinity, look back to law, or Physic, or trades, or any other thing,
rather then they will enter into this contemptible calling, but only the
consideration of our contempt and beggarie? And is not the Arc then ready to
depart from Israel? Now if you will know, what makes Prophets and
Prophesying despised, more fully, you may see first in Ieroboams priests, 1
King 15. 26.
it is said that Jeroboam made Israel to sin, that is, Jeroboam made Israel
to contemn Religion, because he made Priests of the basest of the people: 1
King 13, 33.
therefore, they which make Priests like Ieroboams Priests, make the people
contemn the Priests and Religion too.

Why might none carry the Arc of the covenant but the Leuits? Deuteronomy 10, 8.
was it not, least the Arc, which is a sign of God, should be despised?
therefore, none should meddle with the Word, which is, the Law of God, but
they which are fit, least they make it despised.

The second thing which makes Prophets and Prophesying despised, is, the
rudenes and negligence of them, which are able to do well in their Ministry,
and yet do contrary. It is said of Hophni and Phineas, 1 Samuel 2, 17.
that by their corrupt sacryficing, they made the people abhor the
sacrifices: so, many by their slubbering of the Word, (for want of study and
meditation) do make men think that there is no more wisdom in the Word of
GOD, than they show out of it. There is a kind of Preachers risen up but of
late, which shroud and cover, every rusticall, and unsavory, and childish,
and absurd Sermon, under the name of the simple kind of teaching, like thee
Papists Priests, which make Ignorance the Mother of Devotion: but in deed to
preach simply, is not to preach rudely, nor unlearnedly, nor confusedly; but to
preach plainly, and perspicuously, that the simplyest that does hear, may
understand what is taught, as if he did hear his name. But if you will know
what makes many Preachers, preach so barely, and loosly, and simply? It is your
own simplicity which makes them think, that if they go on, and say
something, all is one, and no fault will be found, because you are not to
judge in nor out: and so, because we give no attendaunce to doctrine as Paul
teaches us. Math 4.
Yea, it is almost come to pass, that in a whole Sermon, the hearer cannot
pick out one note more, than he could gather himself: In the 48. of Jeremy,
there is a curse upon them which do the business of the Lord negligently:
truly I cannot tell whom the Prophet means. These would not have Prophets and
prophesying despised, and yet they are means to make both despised themselves.

The last thing which makes Prophets and prophesying despised, is the
diversity of minds, while one holds one way, and an other an other way, some
leave all and will be of no Religion, until both parties agree; as if a
patient should pine himself and eat no meat at all, because one Physician
says, that this meat will hurt him, and an other says, that that meat will
hurt him: these are the^ the three enemies which makes us and our labors so
vulgarly despised.

Now what shall we answer to our Despisers? Mica 7.
Rejoice not against me, O my enemy (says the Church) for I shall be
praised: so, Despise not the Prophets, O ye Ismalites, for they shall be
honored.

Peter says to Ananiah and Saphira; You have not lied unto man, Acts 5, 3.
but unto GOD: for you have not despised man, but GOD. For our Savior Christ
says, Luk 10, 16.
He which despises you, despises me: and he which despises me, despises
him that sent me.

When satan slew Jobs servants, Job 1, 16.
his malice was against Job: so, when you despise GODS servants, your
presumption is against God; for that which you do unto them (says Christ) you
do unto me. Why then, if they despise Christ? they shall be despised of
Christ: for he told Saul, that he spurned against the prick* that is, he
spurned against that, which would spurn against him. Therefore, if you give
unto Christ when Math 10,
you give unto the poor; And if you honor Christ when you honor his
Prophets: us you give unto the poor for Christ's sake, so despise not the
Prophets for Christ's sake: if for all this we must be despised still, then
this is our remedy, Paul says: Whatsoever we are to you, 2 Cor 2, 15.
yet we are a sweet savor to God, both in them which are saved, and in them
which perrish. That is, though we bring him word that you will come to the
banquet, yet we shall be welcome without you, and so much of that.

After Despise not Prophesying, follows, T^rie all things: as if he should
say; Despise not Prophesying, least you believe error for truth: for, as among
Rulers there be bad rulers, so among Prophets, there be false Prophets, This
made Christ warn his Disciples, to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, Mar
8, 25.
that is, of their false doctrine. This made John say, Try the Spirits; 1
John 4, 1.
and therefore we read in the 17. of the Acts, how the men of Beroea would
not receive Paul's doctrine before they had tried it, Acts 17, 11,
and how did they try it? It is said that they Searched the Scripture: that
is, the way which Paul would teach you to try other, even as he was tried
himself: whereby you may see, that if you use to read the Scriptures, you
shall be able to try all doctrines, for the word of GOD is the touchstone of
every thing, Gen 1, 2.
like the Light which God made to illuminate all his creatures, so is the
Scripture to decide all questions; every doubt must come to the word, and all
controversies must be ended at this tribunal: the Scripture must speak, which
is right, and which is wrong: which is truth, and which is error: and all
tongues must keep silence to hear it. So GOD has appointed that the judge of
our controversies, which he says in the 12. of John, John 12. 48*
shall judge us in the last day.

Here a man may ask, if it be so, that God would have us try all our
Religion by the Scripture, and not by Fathers, nor by Doctors, nor by Counsels,
nor by Angel, nor by Pope: how then do the Papists say, we must believe as
the Church believes, and never look into the Scripture whether our teachers
say as God says, but take it upon their credit, as a blind man eats his
meat: a man tries his horse which must bear him, and shall he not try his
faith which must save him?

Peter says: Let every one be able to give a reason of his faith. Is this a
reason to say, I believe so, because Rome believes so; or rather because the
Word of GOD does teach me so? It will not be an auailable answer for them
which dye in heresy, superstition, or blindness, to say, the Priests taught
us so: no more than it served the first woman Eve to say, Gen 3, 13.
the Serpent taught her so: for GOD says, Be not deceived, neither by
Serpent, nor by Prophet, nor by Angel: Therefore I conclude with the Apostle
Paul, Despise not Prophesying, least the Gospel be taken away from you; and
yet try Prophesying, least you receive error for truth, and men's dreams for
doctrine.

As we are to try doctrines, so Paul would have us to try our thoughts,
and speeches, and our actions: therefore he says, Try all things. He does
not bid us take a taste of all sins and vanities, as Solomon did, to try
them, for they are tried already: but that we should set the Word of GOD
always before us like a rule, and believe nothing but that alone which it
teaches, love nothing but that which it prescribes, hate nothing but that
which it forbids, and do nothing but that which it commands: and then
we Try all things by the Word of GOD. As the Eunuch said, Acts 8. 31.
How should I understand without an Interpreter? so thou may say, how
shall I try without the Word, which is, the touchstone of good and evil.

Now, when we have tried by the Word of God, which is truth, and which is
error: which is light, and which is darkness: what should we do then? Keep
that which is best: That is, stay at the truth, stay at the light, as the wise
men that followed the conduction of the bright shining star from the East,
Math 2.
stayed when they came to Christ.

We must keep and hold fast the truth, even as a man gripeth a thing
strongly with both his hands: that is, defend it with thy tongue: maintain it
with thy purse: further it with thy labor, in danger, and trouble, and loss,
and displeasure: come life, come death; think always, as Christ did seal the
truth of his promise with his blood most precious, so thou must seal the
truth of thy profession with thy dearest blood; else is it apparent thou do
not keep it but let it go. Well therefore does Paul put try before choose;
for he which in choice of all things first tries, may after his trial choose
the best. But he which chooses before he try, takes oftentimes the worst
sooner than he does the best.

And in this was exceedingly manifested the notable deceit of satan by his
instruments the popish Priests in the days of ignorance; who, because the
people should take superstition before Religion, would never let them have the
touchstone of the Word to try their doctrines, but kept them from the
Scripture, and locked it up from their understanding, in an unknown tongue,
which they could not skill of, least they should try their teaching, Acts 17,
as the men of Beroea tried the wholesome doctrine of S. Paul: and by their
sleights making all their Religion a craft, as men call their trades; for in no
deceiuable trade (how full of falsehood soever) could more deceit be harbored
than in theirs. Therefore as Josiah rejoiced in his time, that the book of GOD
was sound again: so we may rejoice in these days, that the book of God is
found again; for when the people might not read it nor hear it, it was all
one to them, as if they had (for so long time) utterly lost it.

After this precept of the Apostle, Try all things and keep the best: he
adds: Abstain from all appearance of evil: as if he should say, that is
like to be best, which is so far divided from evil, that it has not so
much as the appearance of evil: and that is like to be truth, which is so
far from error, that it has not the show of error: whereby he shows,
that nothing should be brought into the Church, or added in matters of faith
and doctrine to our Religion, but that which is agreeable and consonant to the
undoubted truth, and utterly without suspicion of error. It is not enough to
be persuaded of our faith, but we must be assured of it; for our Religion is
not built upon wavering and inconstant doubts, but upon most assured and
certain knowledge.

Here we may marvel why Paul bids us, Abstain from all appearance of
evil, because it is apparent, that sin, and heresy, and superstition, are
hypocrites: and common experience approoueth, that sin has the appearance of
virtue, and heresy has the appearance of Truth, and Superstition has the
appearance of Religion: but let our wonder herein be thus answered. By this,
the Apostle does note, that there is no sin, nor heresy, nor superstition,
but if the visour or veil be removed, or rather taken away from it, which
makes it seem virtue, or truth, or Religion, it will appear in the right
nature to be a sin, and heresy, and superstition, though at the first sight,
the mask or visour do make it seem none: because it couers the evil, like a
painted Sepulcher upon rotten bones.

Hereby we are taught, prudently to judge of all things as they are, and not
as in outward appearance they seem to be; and as we draw aside the
curtain, before we behold the picture: so we must remove (to avoid our own
prejudice) all opinions and surmises, and then behold the thing naked as it is,
if we determine to know it indeed: for truth needs no colors to make it
glorious.

Here I might admonish them which separate themselves from our Church, in such
manner as S. Paul admonishes all men, when he says: Examine whether you be
in the faith; so, examine whether you have the show of error. Has it not the
show of error, to broach a Religion which was never heard of before these
late years?

Has it not the show of error, to retain an error, which the Author
himself has voluntarily recanted; even as ye would suck up with greedines
the dogs vomit?

Has it not the show of error, to affirm that those Preachers may in no
wise be heard, which (by their own confessions) have first converted and
painfully brought them to the knowledge of God, and daily conuerteth others.

Has it not the show of error, to affirm, that the Lords Prayer may not
be used as a lawful Prayer: which for the excellency of Christian peticion,
and without any controversy (for any thing that we or they can read) was so
used from the beginning?

Has it not the show of error, to say, that no man may use any set prayer,
seeing there be many Prayers, and Psalms, and blessings, and thankesgiuings in
the Scripture, which were used in that form.

Has it not the show of error, to affirm, that we have no Church, and yet
to grant that our Martyrs which dyed in the bloody persecution of tyrannous
popery, were true members of the Catholic Church?

Has it not the show of error, to affirm, that two or three may
excommunicate all the rest without a Ministry, seeing the Pastor is the mouth
of the Church?

Has it not the show of error, to affirm, that the Church of Christ was
never invisible before this age, and that it is such a small flock, as their
number is: and that it has set foot no where but in England?

Has it not the show of error, to hold that for sound and good Religion,
which is altered every day; adding and detracting, as though a man should make
a Religion of his own inventions, changing and altering so fast as new
conceits come into his idle brain?

Let them think that Paul says unto them: Rom 12, 3,
Be wise unto sobriety, and suspect that construction which your selves
devised: for Solomon says, Pro, 4, 27.
There is an error upon the right hand as well as upon the left, that is, as
I may call it: The zealous error. And if this be not that error of zeal, I
know none at all in this land.

Yet shall not I say, that we have not the show of evil too? Nay, I would
that we were but in the show thereof. I may not call evil good, no more than
I may call good evil, and therefore let us pull the Beam out of our own
eyes, as we would pull out the moate out of other men's. Let us amend our
sins, and then boldly reprove others.

If Paul would have us abstain from every appearance of evil, sure he
would have us abstain from heresy and hypocrisy. and not to surfeit with the
blessings of peace, and then say: it was never merry world since this new
Religion came up; not to pretend conscience in not coming to Church, and have
no conscience in oppressing the poor, and undoing the Fatherless and
widows.

Antechrist and all his shauelings, (thanks be to GOD) are meetly well rooted
out from amongst us, yet his tail (I fear me) remains behind in the hearts
of a number, which living amongst us like men of another Nation, Number. 33, 55,
are an ill savor unto us, as the remnant of the Cananites were unto the
Jews. GOD charged his people of Israel, to root out all the inhabitants of
Canaan; yet they spared some, as Saul (disobaying the voice of the Prophet)
spared Agag, but that remnant hindered their peace, and never suffered them to
be in quiet; for they were goades in their sides, and pricks in their eyes: it
is with us likewise to be feared, that the remnant of Canaan, which now
contemn Prophets, will be a mean to pull down Prophesying. But let us apply
this doctrine of the Apostle to the kindling of the Spirit in all feruencie of
zeal, and mildness of love: not deferring to embrace grace when it is
offered, least by delay the Spirit be quenched: and let us reverence Prophets
and Prophesying; for despisers, and mockers, may (in their scoffings) mock at
Elisha, 2 Kings 2, 23, 24.
but the reward of their envy, is a devouring end. Neither let us forsake
the Word, for any invention of man, but try all things by the touchstone of
the Scriptures, indeuoring to avoid all occasion of offense, and to hold of
that foundation which is best and soundest, and not to be moved: Beseeching
him that has taken the evil of Antechristian error and superstition away, to
take away also the appearance of the same.

FINIS.
IMPRINTED AT LONDON, for the widdowe Broom.

Anno Dom. 1591.


