The benefit of Contentation.

Taken by Characterie, and examined after.

LONDON. Printed by Roger Ward, for John Proctor, and are to be sold at his
shop upon Holborne bridge. 1590.

THE BENEFIT OF CONTENTATION.
1. TIM. 6. 6. Godliness is great gain, if a man be content with that he
has.
BEcause when we preach, we know not whether we shall preach again, my care
is to choose fit and proper textes to speak that which I would speak, and
that which is necessary for you to hear. Therefore thinking with my self
what doctrine were fittest for you, I sought for a text which speaks against
covetousness, which I may call the Londoners sum. Although God has given you
more then other, which should turn covetousness into thankfulness, yet as
the Iuie grows with the Oak, so covetousness has grown with riches: every
man wishes the Philosophers stone, and who is within these walls that thinks
he has enough, though there be so many that have to much? Exodus 16. 2.
As ye Israelites murmured as much when they had Mamma as when they were
without it, Nom. 11. 4
so they which have riches covet as much as they which are without them: that
conferring your minds and your wealth together, I may truly say, this City is
rich, if it were not covetous. This is the devil which bewitcheth you, to
think that you have not enough, when you have more then you need. If you
cannot choose but covet riches, I will show you riches which you may covet.
Godliness is great riches. In which words, as Jacob craved of his wives and
his servants to give him their Idols, Cene. 35. 4
that he might bury them, so Paul craves your covetousness, that he might
bury it: and that ye might be no loosers he offers you the vantage, in
stead of gain, he proposes great gain. Godliness is great gain: as if he
should say, Will you covet little gain before great? You have found little
joy in money, you shall finne great joy in the holy Ghost: you have found
little peace in the world, you shall find great peace in conscience. This
seeing ye world strive for the world, like beggars thrusting at a dole, Lawyer
against Lawyer, brother against brother, neighbor against neighbor for the
golden apple, that poor Naboth cannot hold his own, 1. King. 21. 4.
because so many Achabs are sick of his vineyard: when he has found the
disease, like a skillful Phistian, he goes about to pick out the greedy
worm which makes men so hungry, and sets such a glass before them, that
will make a shilling seem as great as a pound, a cottage seem as fair as a
Palace, a plough seem as godly as a diadem, that he which has but twenty
pounds, shall be as merry as he which has an hundred, and he which has
an hundred, shall be as iocund as he which has a thousand: and he which has
a thousand: shall be as well contented, as he which has a mission: even as
Daniel did thrive with water and pulse, Dan. 1. 12.
as well as the rest did with their wine and iunkets. This is the virtue and
operation of these words: if you hear them with the same spirit that Paul
wrote them, they will so work upon your hearts, that you shall go away every
man contented with that which he has, like Zacheus, which before he had
seen Christ, Luke. 19. 8.
knew nothing but to scpane, but as soon as he had heard Christ, all his mind
was set upon giving: this was not the first day that Zacheus seemed rich to
others, but this was the first day that Zacheus seemed rich unto himself, when
riches seemed dung, and Godliness seemed riches. Christ does not will other to
give all their goods away to the poor, as he bad the young man, Mat. 19. 21.
to see what he would do, but he which forbad him to keep his riches,
forbids us to love riches, which makes our riches seem poverty, 1. Tim. 6,
17.
When ye contenme riches, ye shall seem rich, because no manhath enough but
he which is contented: but if ye covet, and groan, and christ: Genesis 49. 4.
as Jacob gave Ruben a blessing, but said thou shall not be excellent, so God
may give you riches, but he says, you shall not be satisfied. For ye will be
covetous until ye be religious. He that will have contentation must leave his
covetousness in pawn for it. This is the spirit which we would east out, if
ye will leave but this one sin behind, you shall depart out of the Church
like Naaman out of Ioraan, 2. King. 5, 14.
as if you had been washed, and all your sms swepe away like the seals from
Paul's eyes. Acts 9. 18.
For what has brought usury, and simonie, and briberie, and cruelty, and
subtlety, and envy, and strife, and deceit into this City, and made every
house an Inn, and every shop a market of oaths and lies, and fraud, but the
superfluous love of money? Name covetousness, and thou have named the mother
of all these mischiefs: other sins are but hirelinges unto this sin:
usury and briberie, and simonie, and extortion, and deceit, and lies and
oaths, are factors to covetousness, and serve for porters to fetch and bring
her living in. As the receiver makes a thief, so covetousness makes an
usurer, and extortioner, and deceiuer: because she receives the booty which
they steal. Genesis 30. 1.
Even as Rachel cried to her husband, Give me Children or else I die: so
covetousness cries unto usury and briberie, and simonie, and cruelty, and
deceit, ant lies, Give me riches or else I die. How they may save a little,
and how they may get much, and how they may prolong life, is every man's dream
from sun to sun, so long as they have a knee to bow unto Baal: Romans 11.
so many vices bud out of this one that it is called The root of all evil, 1.
Tim. 6. 10.
as if he would say, the spawne of all s(...)es. Take away covetousness and
he will sell his wares as cheap as he: he will bring up his Children as
virtuously as he: he will refuse bribes as earnestly as he: he will succor
the poor as heartily as he: he will come to the Church as lightly as he. If
ye could feel the pulse of every heart, what makes Gehezi take the bribe,
which Elisha refused? 2, King. 5, 17.
What makes Demetrius to speak for images, Acts 19, 24,
which Paul condemned? What makes Nabal deem David that which Abigali gave
him? 1. Sam. 5. 10.
what makes Judas grudge the oil which Mary tendered? Math. 26, ^.
Nothing but covetousness. When thau should give, she says it is too much:
when thou should receive, she says it is too little: when thou should remit,
she says it is too great: when thou should repent, she says it is to soon:
when thou should hear, she says it is to far: like Pharao which found one
business or other to occupy the Jews, Exodus 5, 6.
when they should serve God.

Thus every labor has an end, but covetousness has none, like a suitor in
law which thinks to have an end this fearne and that term, and the lawyer
which should procure his peace prolongeth his strife, because he has an action
to his purse, as his adversary has to his land: so he which is set on
coveting does drink brine which makes him thirst more, and sees no haven
till he arrive at death: when he has lied, he is ready to lie again: when
he has sworn, he is ready to swear again: when he has deceived, he is
ready to deceive again: when the day is past, he would it were to begin again:
When the term is ended, he wishes that it were come again: and though his
house be full, and his shop full, and his coffers full, and his purse full, yet
his heart is not full, but lanke and empty, like the disease which we call the
Woolfe, that is always eating, and yet keeps the body lean. The Ant does
eat the food which she finds: the Lion does refresh himself with the pray
that he takes, but the covetous man lies by his money as a sick man sits by
his meat, and has no power to take it, but to look upon it, like the Prince
to whom Elisha said that he should see the corn with his eyes, but none should
come within his mouth. Thus the covetous man makes a fool of himself. He
coueteth to covet: he gathers to gather: he labors to labor: he cares
to care, as though his office were to fill a coffer full of angels, and then to
die, like an ass which carries treasures on his back all day, and at night they
are taken from him, which did him no good but lode him, How happy were some
if they knew not gold from lead? If thou be wise (says Solomon) thou shall
be wise for thy self, Prou. 9. 12.
but he which is covetous, is covetous against himself. For what plague is
this (unless one would kill himself) for a man to spend all his life in
carking, and pining, and scraping, (as though he should do nothing but
gather in this world, to spend in the next) unless he be sore that he shall
come again when he is dead, to eat those scraps which he has gotten with
all this stir? Therefore covetousness may well be called misery, and the
covetous miserable, for they are miserable indeed.

Of them which seem to be wise, there be no such fools in the world as they
which love money better then themselves, but this is a judgment of God, that
they which deceive other should deceive themselves and live like Cain which was
a vagabond upon his own lands, Genesis 4. 14.
so they are beggars in the midst of their wealth. For though they have
understanding to know riches, and a mind to seek them, and wit to find them,
and policy to keep them, and life to possess them, yet they have such a
false sight and bleare eye, that when their riches lie before them, they seem
poverty, and he which has not half so much seems richer then they will you
know how this comes to pass, to show that the covetous men belong to hell,
they are like hell while they live. Pro. 30. 15.
Hell is never filled and they are never satisfied, but like the horse-leath
which cries give, give, so their hearts cry bring, bring, and though the
tempter should say to them as he said to Christ, Mat. 4.
All these will I give thee, yet (...) would not content them no more then
heaven contented him: Luke. 16.
but as the glutton in hell desired a drop of water and yet a river would not
satisfy him, for if a drop had bin granted him he would have desired a drop
more, and a drop more, and a drop to that, so they will lie and swear and
deceive for a drop of riches. The devil need not offer them all as he did
to Christ, for they will serve him for less, but if he could give them all,
all would not content them, no more then the world contented Alexander. For it
is against the name and nature of covetousness to be content, as it is against
the name and nature of contentation to be covetous.

Therefore one says, that no man's heart is like the covetous man's heart, for
his heart is without a bottom, like a fire which has never wood enough.

A prentise is bound, but for nine year and then he is free: but if the
covetous might live longer then Methusalah, Genesis 5. 25.
yet they would never be free men, but prentises to the world while they have
a foot out of the grave.

It is a wonder to see, as the devil compasses about, seeking whom he may
devour: so men compass about seeking what they may devour, such love is
between men and money that they which profess good will unto it from their
hearts, will not take so much pains for their life as they take for gain.

Therefore no marvel if they have no leisure to sanctify themselves, which
have no leisure to refreshe themselves. Christ knew what he spoke when he
said No man can serve two masters, Mat. 16. 24.
(meaning God and the world) because each would have all. As ye angel and devil
strove for Moses body, Judge. 1.
not who should have a part but who should have the whole so they strive still
for our souls who shall have al. Therefore the Apostle says, the love of this
world is enmity to God. 1 Ioh. 2. 15
Signifieng such emulation between these two, that God cannot abide the
world should have a part, and the world cannot abide that God should have a
part. Therefore the love of the world must needs be enmity to God, and
therefore the lovers of the world must needs be enemies to God, and therefore
no covetous man is Gods servant, but Gods enemy. Ephesians. 5. 5.
For this cause covetousness is called Idolatry which is the most contrary
sin to God, because as treason sets up another king in the kings place, so
Idolatry sets up another God in Gods place. This word does signify, that
the covetous make so much of money, that they even worship it in their hearts,
and would do as much for it, as the idolaters do for their idols. Paul seeing
such sins committed, and such pain taken for gain, thought with himself if
they could be persuaded, that godliness is gain, it is like that they would
take as much pains for godliness, as they take for gain. Therefore he takes
upon him to prove this strange paradoxe. that godliness is gain, against all
them in the verse before, which hold that gain is godliness: These two
opinions are very contrary, and here are many against one. A man would
think that Paul should be very eloquent and sharp witted, and that he had
need to use some Logic: For he has chosen an hard text: what Paul, will you
prove that godliness is gain? You shall have more opponentes against you, 1.
King. 22. 17.
then Michaia had when he forbad Achab to sight: if you had taken the former
verse which says that gain is godliness, then you should have had matter and
examples enough, the merchant and mercer and lawyer, and landlord, and patrene,
and all would come in and speak for gain, as the Ephesians cried for Diana:
Act. 19. 28.
but if you will be cross to all and preach godliness is gain, to them which
count gain godliness. Men will think of you as Festus did, Acts. 25.
that you speak you know not what. These lessons are for Paul himself. Mat.
19.
As Christ says, All do not receive this word, Luke. 12, 18.
so all do not count this gain but loss, we count him rich which has his
barnes full like the Luke. 16. 14.
churl, Dan. 5. 1.
his coffers full like the glutton, his table full like Baltasar, his stable full
like Solomon, 1. King. 4. 26.
his grounds full like Job, his purse full like Cressus. Job. 1. 3.
you speak against your master: for Christ sent word unto John that the
poor receive the Gospel, Luke. 7. 22.
as though the godly were of the poorer sort, Psalm. 73. 38. 5. 12.
and David calls the wicked rich, they prospeand flourish, their seed blasteth
not, their cow casts not, as if he should say, it is not as you take it
Paul, that godliness does make men rich. For this I have observed in my time,
that the wicked are the wealthiest, Luke. 16.
and good Lazarus is the poor man and wicked Dives is the rich man. Again we
read that the blind man was asked, which of of the Scribes or the Pharisees
or the Elders did follovv Christ, yet these were counted rich men, though they
had no godliness: and if ye should examine your self, it seems you were no
rich man for all your godliness, when you did work with your hands for your
living: 1. These. 2. 9.
therefore if Godliness be such gain, how happens it, that your share is
no better: So they which are like Nicodemus (when Christ says they must be
borne again) John. 3.
think that he can have no other meaning but that they must return again
into their mothers womb: John. 6.
and when he calls himself bread, that he must needs mean such bread as
theydine with As the Jews hearing the prophets speak so often of Christ's
kingdom, Math. 20. 20.
and call him a king, looked for a temporal king which should bring them peace,
and joy, and glory, and make them like kings themselves: so the carnal ears
when they hear of a kingdom, and treasures, and riches, straight their minds
run upon earthly, and worldly, and transitory things, such as they love: to
whom Paul answers as Christ answered his Disciples. I have an other meat
which you know not of: John. 4. 32.
so there is another gain, which you know not of, I said not that godliness
is earthly, or worldly, or transitory gain, but great gain. Godliness is
great gain. He will not prove Godliness to be gain, but great gain:
Godliness is great gain, as if he should say, more gainful then your wares,
and rents, and fines, and interest: as though he would make the Lawyer and
Merchant, and Mercer, and Draper, and Patron, and Landlord, and all the men of
riches believe that Godliness will make the^ rich sooner then covetousness. Aba.
1. 5.
I fear this saying may be renewed. Psalm. 14. 2. and 43. 2
If a man tell you, ye vvil not believe it, nay if God tell you, yet ye will not
believe it. As the Lord looked down upon earth, to see if any did regard him,
and says, there is not one, so this sentence may go from court to city, from
city to country, and say there is scarce one in a town that will subscribe
unto it. Many (says David, Psalm. 4.) ask who will show us any good,
meaning riches, and honor, and pleasure, which are not good, but when he came
to goodness it self, he leaves out Many, and prays in his own person,
Lord lift up the light of thy countenance upon us. as though none would join
with him, yet Wisdom is justified of her own children, and the godly call
Godliness gain. To make us love Godliness, he calls it by the name of that
we love most: that is, Gain. As the Father calls his son which he would
love more than the rest by his own name, to put him in mind of such a love as
he bears to himself. Here we may see that God does not commannd men to be
godly only, because it makes for his glory, but because Godliness is
profitable to us. For Godliness is not called Gain in respect of him, but in
respect of us: it is gain to us, but it is duty to him. So it is not called
health in respect of God, but in respect of us, because it is the health of the
soul. so it is not called a kingdom in respect of God, but in respect of us,
because we are entitled to the kingdom by this difference from the
reprobates. But all the good things in the world together, and the goodness
of all is found in Godliness: and therefore godliness is called by the names
of those things that men count. best, to show that the Godly are as well, as
merry, as content with their love toward God, and Gods love toward them, as
other are with health, and wealth, and pleasures. Therefore it is said of the
Godly. Esaias. 33. The fear of the Lord is his treasure. Therefore says Jeremy,
3. Lament. The Lord is my portion. as though he desired nothing else: and
therefore it is said of Moses. Heb. 11. 26. That he esteemed the rebuke of
Christ greater riches the^ all the treasures of Egypt. If crosses be riches, as
Moses thought, what riches are in Godliness? but is this al? shall godliness be
our riches in this life only. Nay (says Paul, 1. Tim, 4) Godliness has the
promises of this life and of the life to come. And therefore christ says, First
seek the kingdom of God, and all the rest shall be cast upon you, Mat. 6.
Ruth. 2. 16.
even as the sheaues fell before Ruth: so riches shall fall in your way, as they
did to Abraham, and Lot, and Jacob, and Job, and Joseph, riches were cast to
the^ they knew not how, but as if God had said, Be rich, and they were rich
straight. For all good things were created for the good, and therefore they
are called good. Gen, 1. Because the good God created them for good men to good
purpose: Gene. 25. 30 Genesis 27. 8
and therefore as Jacob got the blessing, so he got the inheritance also: to
show that as the faithful have the inward blessing, so they have the outward
blessings too, when they are good for the^. For (says David, Psalm. 34) They
which seek the Lord shall want nothing that is good. He says not, that they
shall want nothing, but, that they shall want nothing that is good. Now God
knows better then we what is good for us: as the Nurse knows better then
the child when the milk is ready for it. Therefore Christ says, Your heavenly
Father knovveth what you have need of: he says not that we know what we
have need of, but that our father knovveth: as if he should say, when you have
need of health, your Father will send you health: when you have need of
riches your Father will send you riches: when you have need of l^^ertie, your
Father will send you liberty: for he says not only, that his Father knovveth
what we have need of, but he will give us the things which we need.
Therefore as children take no care for their apparel, what clothes they should
wear, nor for their victuals, what meat they should eat, but leave this care
for their father, so says Christ, Take you no care, for my father cares for
you.

He was not content to call Godliness gain, but he calls it great gain,
as if he would say Gain, and more then Gain: riches, and better then riches:
a Kingdom, and greater then a Kingdom.

As when the Prophets would distinguish between the Idol gods and the living
GOD, they call him the great God: so the gain of Godliness is called great
gain. The riches of the world are called earthlye, transitorye, snares,
thorns, dung, as though they were not worthy to be counted Riches: and
therefore to draw the earnest love of men from them, the holy Ghost bringes
them in with such names of disdain, to disgrace them with their lovers: but
when he comes to Godliness, which is the riches of the soul, he calls it
great riches, heavenly riches, unsearchable riches, everlasting riches, with
all the names of honor, and all the names of pleasure, and all the names of
happiness. As a woman trimmes and deckes her self with an hundred ornaments,
only to make her amiable, so the holy Ghost sets out Godliness with names
of honor, and names of pleasure, and names of happiness, as it were in her
jewels with letters of commendation, to make her to he loved. Least any riches
should compare with Godliness, he gives it a name above other, and calls
it Great Riches, as if, he would make a distinction between Riches and
Riches: between the gain of Covetousness, and the gain of Godliness, the
peace of the world and the peace of conscience, the joy of riches, and the joy
of the holy Ghost. The worldly men have a kind of peace, and joy, and riches,
but I cannot call it great, because they have not enough, they are not
contented as the Godly are, therefore only Godliness has this honor, to be
called great riches. The Gain of covetousness is nothing but wealth, but the
Gain of Godliness is wealth, and peace, and joy, and love of God, and the
remission of sins and everlasting life. Therefore only Godliness has this
honor to by called great gain. Riches make bate, but Godliness makes peace:
Riches breed covetousness, but Godliness bringes contentation: Riches make
men unwilling to die, but Godliness makes men ready to die: Riches often hurt
the owner, but Godliness profits the owner and other. Therefore only
Godliness has this honor to be called great riches, such ^^ine, such joy,
such peace is in Godliness, and yet no man couets it: for this is the quality
of virtue, it seems nothing unto a man until he has it, as Solomon says of
the buier, while he is in buying he dispiseth the thing which he buyeth, and
says, Pro. 20. 14.
It is naught, it is not worth the price which ye ask, but when he has bought
it, so soon as he is gone, he boasts of his peniworths, and says it is
better, then his money. So Godliness, before a man have it, he says it is not
worth his labor, and thinks every hour too much that he spends about it,
but when he has found it, he would not loose it again for all the world,
because he is now come to that, which follows, to be contented with that
he has. Riches come, and yet the man is not pleased, honor comes and yet the
man is not pleased: liberty comes, and yet the man is not pleased, pleasure
comes, and yet the man is not pleased, Psalm. 23. 5
until God come, and then he says, My cup is full. Show us thy father (says
Phillip) and it suffices. John. 14. 7
nay show us thy truth and it suffiseth. Now my soul (says the Churl) take
thy rest: nay, now my soul take thy rest, Luke. 12. 19
for thou have laid up for many years. The godly man has found that which
the world does seek, that is enough, every word may be defined, and every
thing may be measured, but enough cannot be measured nor defined: it changes
every year: when we had no thing, we thought it enough if we might obtain less
then we have: when we came to more, we thought of an other enough: now we have
more, we dream of another enough: so enogh is alwais to come, though too much
be there already. This is because we seek contentation in the things, when it
is in the mind, for Godliness is in the mind, and the gain of Godliness is
contentation. The apostle speaks as though he had found a new kind of
riches, which the world never thought of that are of such a nature, that they
will satisfy a man like the water that Christ spoke of, John. 4.
he that drinks of this water shall thirst no more: so they that taste of
these riches shall covet no more: but as the holy ghost filled all the house,
Act. 2.
( Act. 2) so ye grace and peace, and joy of the holy ghost fills all the
heart, that as Joseph had no need of Astronomy because he had the spirit of
Prophecy, Genesis 44. 15
so he which has contentation has little need of riches. Such a sweet thing
is Godliness that it seasoneth al estates, like the Unicorns horue, which
dippeth in ye fou^tain, and maks the waters which were corrupt and noisome clear
and wholesome upon the sudden: so whatsoever estate godliness comes unto, it
says like the Apostles, Peace be to this house, peace be to this heart, peace
be to this man.

I may liken it to the five loaves Luke. 5. 9
and two fishes wherewith Christ fed five thousand persons, and yet there were
twelve baskets full of that which was left, which could not fill one basket
when it was whole: so their little feast was made a great feast: so the godly
though they have but little for themselves, yet they have something for other,
like the wyddowes Myte, that they may say as the Disciples said to Mark. 12.
Christ, Math. 10
they want nothing, though they have nothing. Contentation wants nothing, and
a good heart is worth all: For if she want bread, she can say as Christ said, I
am another bread: John. 4. 32.
If she want riches, she can say, I have other riches: If she want strength,
she can say, I have other strength: If she want friends, she can say, I have
other friends. Thus the Godly and all within, that the Godless seek without.
Therefore if you see a man contented with that which he has, it is a great
sign that Godliness is entered into him, for ye heart of man was made a Temple
for God, and nothing can fill it but God alone. Therefore Paul says after his
conversion that which he could never say before his conversion, Phil. 4.
I have learned to be content, First he learned godliness, then godliness taught
him contentatio^. Now (says Paul) I have learned to be content, as though this
were a lesson for every Christian to learn, to be content For thus he must
think, that as God said to Moses, when he could not obtain leave to go to
Canaan, Let this suffice thee to see Canaan: Deuteronomy. 26.
so whatsoever he gives, he gives this charge with it, Let this suffice thee.
As Jeremy says, This is my sorrow, and I vvil bear it, Ier. 10. 19
so thou must say, This is my portion and I will take it. This is the sign,
whether Godliness be in a man, if he have joy of yt which he has: for ye
things which god gives to ye righteous, Paul says yt he gives the^ to
enjoy, 1. Tim. 6. 17. yt is, if he have much, he can say with Paul, I have
learned to abound: if he have little, he can say with Paul, I have learned to
want: yt is, if he have much as Abraham, and Lot, and Jacob, and Job, and
Joseph, yet it cannot corrupt his mind, but as the net was full of fishes, and
yet did not rent, because they cast it in at Christ's command: John. 21. 11.
so though ye godly man be full of riches, yet his heart is not rent, his mind
is not troubled, his cou^tena^ce is not changed, because he reme^breth yt
these things were given him to do good, as Hester thought of her honor: if
he have little, Hest. 4. 14.
it is like the little oil, which served the widow as little as it was, 2.
King. 4. 7.
For a little to the righteous Psalm. 34.
(says David) is better then great riches to the ungodly: for when a man has
found ye heavenly riches, he cares not for earthly riches no more then he
that walks in the Sun, thinks not whether the Moon shine or no, because he
has no need of her light. Therefore we conclude with Christ ( Math. 5) Mat. 5
Blessed are they which thirst after rigteousnes, for they shall be satisfied:
Not they which thirst after riches, nor they which thirst after honor, nor
they which thirst after pleasure, they shall not be satisfied, but thirst more,
as the ambitious, voluptuous and covetous do, but they that thirst after
righteousnesshalbe satisfied, though they have no riches, nor honor, nor
pleasure: Genesis 2
even as Adam was warm though he had no clothes, though he was naked, yet he
did not see his nakedness, so long as he was innocent: but when he began to
rebel, then he began to want clothes, so though a man be pore, yet he does not
see his poverty so long as he is contented, but when he begins to covet,
then he begins to want riches, and from that day the curse (in the first of
Agge. 6.) takes hold upon him, Ye eat, but ye have not enough: ye drink, but
ye are not satisfied: ye cloth your selves but ye are not vvarme. Indeed the
covetous man seems to draw the world to him with cords, his coffers are of
lodestones, his hands like nets, his fingers like lime-twigges, there it
comes, and there it comes, one would think that this man should be happy one
day.

When the Churles barnes were full, he bad his soul rest, thinking to gain
rest by covetousness, Luke. 12. 8.
that he might say Riches gain rest as well as Godliness, but see what
happened that night when he began to take his rest, riches and rest, and soul
and all were taken from him. Did he not gain fair? would he have taken such
pains if he had thought of such rest, covetousness may gain riches, but it
cannot gain rest, ye may think iike this churl to rest, when your barnes and
shoppes and coffers are full: but ye shall find it true which Esaias says,
Esaias. 41.
there is no rest to the ungodly, therefore the wise man to prevent any hope
of rest, or honor or profit, by sin, speaks as though he had tried, Pro.
12. 3.
a man cannot be established by iniquity. Therefore he cannot be quieted nor
satisfied by the gain of deceit, or bribes, or lies, or usury, Pro. 10. 2.
which is iniquity: therefore blessed is the man whom godliness does make
rich, for when the blessing of the Lord makes rich (says Solomon) he does
ad no sorrovv to it, Pro. 13. 6
but (says he) the reuenevves of the wicked is trouble, as though his money
were care: wherefore let patron, and landlord, and lawyer, and all say, that
Paul has chosen the better riches, which thief, nor moth, nor canker can
corrupt. these are the riches at least which we must dwell with, when all the
rest which we have lied for, and sworn for, and fretted for, and cosoned for,
and broken our sleep, and lost many sermons, forsake us. Like servants which
change their masters: then godliness shall seem as great gain to us as it
did to Paul, and he which loved the world most, would give all that he has
for a dram of faith, that he might be sure to go to heaven when he is dead,
though he went toward hell so long as he lived.

It is said of this city that many citizens of London have good wills, but
bad deeds, that is, you do no good till that ye die.

First you are ungodly, that you may be rich, and then you part from some of
your riches to excuse for your ungodliness, it may be, that some here have
set down in their wills, when I die I bequeath an hundredth pound to a
college, and an hundredth pound to an hospital, and an hundredth gowns to
poor men. I do marvel that you give not more when you are at that point,
Mat. 27. 3
for Judas when he died returned all again: so ye die and think when ye are
goue, that God will take this for a quittance: be not deceived for God does not
look upon that which ye do for fear, but upon that which ye do for
love. If you can find in your heart to do good while ye are in health, as
Zacheus did, then God has respect unto your offering, but before God hearken
how you give your riches, first he examines how ye come b^ them.

Thus you see the fruits of Godliness and the fruits of covetousness if ye
be covetous you shall never have enough though ye have too much. If ye be
godly, ye shall have enough though ye seem to have nothing.

Therefore what counsel shall I give you, but as Christ counseled his
disciples, Lnk. 16. 9
be not friends to riches, but make you friends of riches, and know this,
that if he cannot say as Paul says, Phil. 9
I have learned to be content, Godliness is not come into your house yet, for
the companion of Godlilinesse is contentation. Therefore as Christ says, John.
8. 39.
if the son make you free, you shall be free in deed, so I say, if
godliness make you rich, ye shall be rich indeed.

FINIS.

