Three Prayers, one for the Morning, another for the Evening: the third for a
sick-man. Whereunto is annexed, a godly Letter to a sick friend: and a
comfortable speech of a Preacher upon his death bed. Anno. Dom. 1591.

AT LONDON, Printed for Thomas Man. 1591.

Three Prayers, one for Morning, an other for Evening: the third for a
sicke-Man.
A Morning Prayer.
O Lord prepare our hearts to pray.
Eternal God, giver to them which want, Comforter to them which suffer, and
forgiuer to the^ which repent: we have nothing to render thee but thine own.
If we could give thee our bodies, and souls, they should be saved by it: but
thou were never the richer for them. All is our duty and all of us cannot
perform it: therefore thy son died, and thy spirit descended, and thy Angels
guide, and thy Ministers teach, to help the weakness of men. All things call
upon us, to call upon thee, and we are prostrate before thee before we know
how to worship thee: even since we rose, we have tasted many of thy
blessings, and thou have begun to serve us, before we begin to serve thee.
Why should thou bestow thy health and wealth, and rest, and liberty upon us
more then other? we can give no reason for it, but that thou art merciful.

And if thou should draw all back again, we have nothing to say, but
that thou art just. Our sins are so grievous and infinite, that we are feign
to say with Judas, I have sinned: and there stop because we cannot reckon
them. All things serve thee, as they did at first, only men are the sinners in
this world.

Our heart is a root of corruption, our eyes are the eyes of vanity, our ears
are the ears of folly, our mouths are the mouths of deceit, our hands are
the hands of iniquity, and every part does dishonor thee, which would be
glorified of thee. The understanding which was given us to learn virtue, is apt
now to apprehende nothing but sin; the will which was given us to affect
righteousness, is apt now to love nothing but wickedness.

The memory which was given us to remember good things, is apt now to keep
nothing but evil things. There is no difference between us and the wicked,
we have done more against thee this week, then we have done for thee since
we were borne, and yet we have not resolved to amend; but this is the course
of our whole life, first we sin, and then we pray thee to forgive it, and
then to our sins again, as though we came to thee for leave to offend thee.

And that which should get pardon at thy hands for all the rest, that is,
(our prayer) is so full of toys and fancies, for want of faith and reverence,
that when we have prayed, we had need to pray again that thou would forgive
our prayers, because we think least of thee when we pray unto thee. What Father
but thou, could suffer this contempt, and be contemned still? Yet when we think
upon thy son, al our fear is turned into joy, because his righteousness for
us, is more then our wickedness against our selves. Settle our faith in thy
beloved, and it suffices for all our iniquities, necessities, and infirmities.

Now Lord we go forth to fight against the world, the flesh, and the devil:
and the weakest of our enemies, is stronger then we: therefore we come unto
thee, for thy holy spirit to take our part; that is, to change our minds,
and wills, and affections, which we have corrupted, to remove all the
hindrances which lets us to serve thee: and to direct all our thoughts,
speeches and actions, to thy glory, as thou have directed thy glory to our
salvation. Although we be sinners (O Lord) yet we are thine, and therefore we
beseech thee to separate our sins from us, which would separate us from
thee, that we may be ready to every good, as we are to evil. Teach us to
remember our sins, that thou may forgette them, and let our sorrow
here, prevent the sorrow to come. We were made like thee, let not flesh and
blood turn the Image of GGD to the image of satan: our foes are thy foes,
let not thine enemies prevail against thee to take us from thee, but make thy
word unto us, like the star which led unto Christ: make thy benefits,
like the pillar which brought to the land of promise: make thy cross, like
the messenger which compelled guests unto the banquet: that we may walk
before men like examples, and always look upon thy son, how he would speak
and do, before we speak or do any thing.

Keep us in that fear of thy Majesty, that we may make conscience of all that
we do, and that we may count no sin small, but leave our lying, and
swearing, and surfeting, and coveting, and boasting, and flanting, and
inordinate gaming, and wanto^ sporting, because they draw us to other sins, and
are forbidden as straightly as other. Let not our hearts at any time be so
dazzled, but that in all temptations, we may discern between good and evil,
between right and wrong, between truth and error: and that we may judge of
all things as they are, and not as they seem to be; let our minds be always
so occupied, that we may learn something of every thing, and use all those
creatures as means and helps prepared for us to serve thee. Let our
affections grow so toward one another, that we may love thee as much for ye
prosperity of other as if it were our own: let our faith, and love, and prayer
be alwaie so ready to go unto thee for our help, that in sickness we may find
patience, in prison we may find joy, in poverty we may find contentment,
and in all troubles we may find hope. Turn al our joys to the joy of the
holy Ghost, and al our peace to the peace of consciences, and all our fears to
the fear of sin, that we may love righteousness, with as great good will as
ever we loved wickedness: and go before other in thankfulness toward thee, as
far as thou go in mercy toward us before them; taking all that thou
sendest as a gift, and leaving our pleasures before they leave us, that our
time to come, may be a repentance of the time past, thinking always of the
joys of heaven, the pains of hell, our own death, and the death of thy son
for us.

Yet Lord let us speak once again like Abraham, one thing more we will beg at
thy hands, our resolutions are variable, and we cannot perform our promises to
thee, therefore settle us in a constant form of obedience, that we may serve
thee from this hour, with those duties which the world, the devil, and the
flesh, vvoulde have us defer until the point of death.

Lord we are unworthy to ask any thing for our selves, yet thy favor has
preferred us to be peticioners for other. Therefore we beseech thee to hear us
for them, and them for us, and thy son for all. Bless thy universal Church,
with truth, with peace, and thy holy discipline. Strengthen all them which
suffer for thy cause, and let them see the Spirit of comfort coming toward
them, as thy Angels came to thy son, when he was hungry.

Be merciful unto all those which lie in anguish of conscience, for remorse of
their sins: as thou have made them examples, so teach us to take example by
them, that we may look upon thy Gospel, to keep us from despair: and upon
thy law, to keep us from presumption. Prosper the Armies which fight thy
battayles, and show a difference between thy servant and thy enemies, as
thou did between the Isralites and the Egiptians, that they which serve thee
not, may com to thy service, seeing that no God does bless besides thee. Make
us thankful for our peace, whom thou have set at liberty, while thou have
laid our dangers upon others, which might have laid their dangers upon us:
And teach us to build thy Church in our rest, as Solomon built thy Temple in
his peace. Have mercy upon this sinful Land, which is sick of long
prosperity, let not thy blessings rise up against us, but indue us with
grace as thou have with riches, that we may go before other Nations in
Religion, as we go before them in plenty; give us such hearts as thy
servant should have: that thy will may be our will; that thy Law may be our
Law; and that we may seek our kingdom in thy kingdom. Give unto our Prince a
princely heart, unto our Counselors, the spyrit of counsel, unto our Judges,
the spirit of Judgment, unto our Ministers the spirit of doctrine, unto our
people, the spirit of obedience: that we may all retain that communion here,
that we may enjoy the communion of Saints hereafter.

Bless this Family with thy grace and peace, that the Rulers thereof may
govern according to thy word, that the servants may obey like the Servants of
God, and that we may all so love one another, that we may all be loved of
thee. Now Lord we have commenced our suit, our understanding is weak, and our
memory short, and we unworthy to pray unto thee, more unworthy to receive the
things which we pray for. Therefore we commend our prayers and our selves
unto thy mercy in the name of thy beloved son our loving Savior, whose
righteousness pleads for our unrighteousness. Our Father which art in heaven.
etc.

A Prayer for the Evening.
O Lord God, what shall we render unto thee for all thy benefits? which have
given thy son for a ransom, thy holy spirit for a pledge, thy word for a
guide, and reseruest a kingdom for our perpetual inheritance: of whose
goodness we are created, of whose justice we are corrected, of whose mercy
we are saved: our sins strive with thy benefits which are more, let us count
al creatures, and there be not so many of any kind, as thy gifts, except our
offenses, which we return unto thee for the^. Thou might have said before
we were formed: let them be monsters, or let them be Infidels, or let them be
beggars, or Cripples, or bond-slaues so long as they live. But thou have made
us to the best likeness, and nursed us in the best religion, and placed us in
the best land, that thousands would think themselves happy, if they had but a
piece of our happiness. Therefore why should any serve thee more then we, which
want nothing but thankfulness?

Thou have given us so many things, that scarf we have any thing left to pray
for, but that thou would continue those benefits which thou have bestowed
already, yet we covet as though we had nothing, and live as though we knew
nothing: when we were children, we deferred till we were men, now we are men,
we defer until we be old men; and when we be old men, we will defer
until death. Thus we steal thy gifts, and do nothing for the^, yet we look
for as much at thy hands, as they which serve thee all their lives. The least
of thy blessings, is greater then all the courtesies of men, and yet we are not
so thankful to thee for all that we have, as we are to a freende fore one
good turn: we are ashamed of many sins in other, and yet we are not ashamed
to commit the same sins our selves, and worse then they; yea we have sinned
so long almost, that we can do nothing else but sin, and make others sin
too, which would not sin but for us.

If we do any evil, we do it cheerfully and quickly, and easily: but if we
do any good, we do it faintlie, and rudely and slackly; When did we talk
without vanity? when did we give without hypocrisy? when did we bargain
without deceit? when did we reprove without envy? when did we hear without
weariness? when did we pray without tediousness? Such is our corruption, as
though we were made to sin: in deed, or in word, or in thought, we have
broken all thy Commandments, that we might fee what good is in evil, which
has left nothing but guilt, and shame, and expectation of judgment, while we
might have had peace of conscience, joy of heart, and all the graces which come
with the holy spirit. Some have been won by thy word, but we would not
suffer it to change us: some have been reformed by thy cross, but we would
not suffer it to purge us: some have been moved by thy benefits, but we
would not suffer them to persuade us: nay we have given consent unto the
devil, that we will abuse all thy gifts, so fast as they come: and therefore
thy blessings make us proud, thy riches covetous, thy peace wanton, thy meats
intemperate, thy mercy secure, and all thy benefits are weapons to rebel
against thee, that if thou look into our hearts, thou may say our Religion is
hypocrisy, our zeal envy, but wisdom policy; our peace security, our
life rebellion: our devotion ends with our prayers, and we live, as though
we had no souls to save.

What shall we answer for that which our conscience condemns? We are one day
nearer to death since we rose, when we shall give account how every day has
been spent, and how we have got these things which other will consume when
we are gone.

And if thou should ask us now, what lust assuaged, what affection
qualified, what passion expelled, what sin repented, what good performed,
since we began to receive thy benefits this day, we must confess against our
selves, that all our works, words, and thoughts, have been the service of the
world, the flesh and the devil: we have offended thee and contemned thee all
the day, and at night we pray unto thee, Father forgive us all our sins,
which have dishonored thee, while thou did serve us: run from thee while
thou did call us: and forgotten thee whilst thou did feed us; so thou
sparest us, so we sleep, and to morrow we sin again: this is the course of
all our pilgrimage, to leave that which thou commaundest, and do that which
thou forbiddest. Therefore thou might justly forsake us, as we forsake thee,
and condemn us, whose conscience condemns our selves; But who can measure thy
goodness which give all, and forgiuest all?

Though we are sinful, yet thou love us: though we knock not, yet thou
openest, though we ask not, yet thou give; What should we have if we did
serve thee, which have done all these things for thine enemies? therefore thou
which have given us all things for thy service, O Lord give us a have to serve
thee, and let this be the hour of our conversion, let not evil overcome
good, let not thine enemy have his will, but give us strength to resist,
patience to endure, and constancy to persevere unto the end.

Instruct us by thy word, guide us by thy spirit, mollify us by thy grace,
humble us by thy corrections, win us by thy benefits, reconcile our nature to
thy will, and teach us to make profit of every thing, that we may see thee
in all things, and all things in thee. And because (o most merciful father),
we walk between thy mercy and justice, through many temptations, govern our
steps with such discretion, that the hope of mercy may prevent despair, and
the fear of justice may keep us from presumption: that in mirth, we be not
vain, in knowledge we be not proud, in zeal we be not bitter, but as the
Tree brings forth first leaves, then blossoms, and then fruit, so first we
may bring forth good thoughts, then good speeches and after a good life, to
thee honor of thy name, the good of thy Children, and the salvation of our
souls, remembering the time when we shall sleep in the grave, and the day when
we shall awake to judgment. Now the time is come (O Lord) which thou have
appointed for rest, and without thee we can neither wake nor sleep, which
have made the day and night, and rulest both: therefore, into thy hands we
commend our souls and bodies which thou have bought, that they may serve
thee: restore them O Lord to their first Image, and keep them in thy service,
and resign us not to our selves again, but finish thy work, that we may
every day come nearer and nearer to thy kingdom, till we hate the way to
hell, as much as hell it self, and every cogitation, and speech, and action,
be so many steps to heaven. For thy names sake, for thy promise sake, for thy
sons sake O Lord, we lift up our hearts, hands, and voice unto thee in his
name, which suffered for sin, and sinned not. Our Father etc.

A Prayer for a sicke-man.
Almighty God and almercifull Father, which art the Physician of our bodies
and souls, in thy hands are life and death, thou bring to the grave, and
pullest back again: we came into this world upon condition, to forsake it
whenever thou would call us, and now the Somners are come, thy fetters
hold me, and none can loose me but he which bound me: I am sick in body and
soul, but he has stricken me which in judgment shows mercy. I deserved to
die, so soon as I came to life: but thou have preserved me till now, and
shall this mercy be in vain, as though I were preserved for nothing? Who can
praise thee in the grave? I have done thee no service since I was borne, but my
goodness is to come, and shall I die before I begin to live? But Lord thou
know what is best for all, and if thou convert me, I shall be converted in
an hour: And as thou acceptedst the will of David as well as the act of
Solomon: so thou will accept my desire to serve thee, as well as if I did live
to glorify thee. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is frail, and as I did
live sinfully whenever thy spirit was from me, so I shall die unwillingly,
unless thy spirit prepare me: therefore dear father give me that mind which a
sicke-man should have, and increase my patience with my pain, and call unto my
remembrance, all which I have heard or read, or felt, or meditated to
strengthen me in this hour of my trial, that I which never taught any good
while I lived, may now teach other how to die, and to bear their sickness
patiently: apply unto me all the mercies and merits of thy beloved son, as if
he had died for me alone. Be not from me when the enemy comes: but when the
tempter is busiest, let thy spirit be busiest too: and if it please thee to
loose me out of this prison, when I shall leave my earth to earth, let thine
Angels carry up my soul to heaven, as they did Lazarus, and place me in
one of those mancions which thy son is gone to prepare for me. This is my
mediator which has reconciled me and thee, when thou did abhor me for my
sins, and thou did send him from heaven to us, to show that thou art
bound to hear him for us. Therefore in him I come unto thee, in him I call
upon thee: o my redeemer, my preserver, and my Savior; to thee be all praise
with thy father and the holy spirit for ever. Amen.

What shall stay me from my father,
my brother, and my Comforter?
A comfortable speech, taken from a godly Preacher, lying upon his death bed:
written for the sick.
I Owe to God a death, as his son dyed for me. Ever since I was borne I have
been sailing to this Haven, and gathering patience to comfort this hour:
therefore shall I be one of those guests now, that would not come to the banquet
when they were invited. What hurt is in going to Paradise? I shall-loose
nothing but the sense of evil: and anon I shall have greater joys then I
feel pains: for my head is in heaven already, to assure me that my soul and
body shall follow after. O death where is thy sting? why should I fear that
which I would not escape, because my cheifest happiness is behind, and I cannot
have it, unless I go unto it? I would go through hell to heaven, and therefore
if I march but through death, I suffer less then I would suffer for God. My
pains do not dismay me, because I travel to bring forth eternal life, my
sins do not fright me, because I have Christ my Redeemer; the Judge does not
astonish me, because the Judges son is mine advocate; the devil does not
amaze me, because the Angels pitch about me. The grave does not grieve me,
because it was my Lords bed: o that Gods mercy to me, might move other to love
him: for the less I can express it, the more it is. The Prophets and Apostles
are my forerunners; every man is gone before me, or else he will follow after
me, if it please God to receive me into heaven before them which have served
him better, I owe more thankfulness unto him. And because I have deferred my
repentance till this hour, whereby my salvation is cut off if I should die
suddenly, lo how my God in his merciful providence, to prevent my
destruction, calls me by a lingering sickness, which staieth till I be ready,
and prepares me to my end, like a Preacher, and makes me by wholesome pains
weary of this beloved world, least I should depart unwillingly, like them whose
death is their damnation. So he loves me while he beats me, that his stripes
are plasters to save me, therefore who shall love him if I despise him? This is
my whole office now, to strengthen my body with my heart, and be contented as
God has appointed, until I can glorify him, or until he glorify me. If I
live, I live to sacrifice, and if I die, I die a sacrifice, for his mercy is
above mine iniquity. Therefore if I should fear death, it were a sign that I
had not faith, nor hope as I professed, but that I doubted of Gods truth in his
promise, whether he will forgive his penitent sinner or no: it is my Father,
let him do what seems good in his sight: Come Lord Jesus, for thy servant
comes, I am willing, help my unwillingness.

Thus the faithful depart in another sort, with such peace and joy round
about them, that al which see, wish that their souls may follow theirs.

A Letter written to ones freende in his sickness.
Beloved, I meruell not that you have pain, for you are sick: but I marvel
that you cover it not for offense, because the wisdom of a man is to bite in
his grief, and always to show more comfort in God, than pain in suffering.
Now God calls to repetitions, to see whether you have learned more constancy
than others; if sickness be sharp: make it not sharper with frowardness but
know that this is a great favor to us, when we die by sickness, which makes us
ready for him that calls us. Now you have nothing to think upon but God,
and you cannot think upon him without joy: your grief passes, but your joy
will never pass. Tell me (patient) how many stripes is heaven worth? Is my
friend only sick in the world, or his faith weaker than others? You have
always prayed Thy will be done, and now are you offended that Gods will is
done? How has the faithful man forgotten that all things (even death)
turn to the best to them that love God? Teach the happy (o Lord) to see his
haippinesse through troubles. Every pain is a prevention of the pains of
hell, and every ease in pain, is a foretast of the ease and peace and joys in
heaven.

Therefore remember your own comforts to others before, and be not impatient,
when there is most need of patience, but as you have ever taught us to live,
so now give us an example to die: and deceive satan as Job did.

FINIS.

