THE LAVVIERS QVESTION. The Answer to the Lawiers Question. The Censure of
Christ upon the Answer.

By HENRY SMITH.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Gosson: and are to be sold at his shop by London
Bridge Gate.

THE LAVVIERS Question.
Luke, 10.25. And behold a certain Lawier stood up, and tempted him saying:
Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?


IT is a weighty question, and has been long discoursed by what means a man
may come to heaven, and who is not desirous to be resolved in it? Here the
question is propounded by a Lawier, and answered by the Lawgiver, whose
judgment in this case is worth the hearing. He propounds the question as
one desirous to learn, when indeed he means nothing less. But as Ahab,
when he asked Micheas in the first book of Kings and second Chapter, if he
should go up to fight against Ramoth in Gilead, meant not to follow the
Prophets direction, but only desired to hear his opinion, so the Lawier
propounds this question, not with the mind to learn of Christ, but with the
mind to tempte Christ and to try his learning: as the Devil came to tempt
Christ in the wilderness, so the Lawyer comes to tempt Christ in the City: and
therefore whereas the Evangelist says; Behold a certain Lawyer stood up. He
might have said, Behold a certain Devil stood up because for the time he took
upon him the Devils office to be a tempter. When the Devil tempted Christ
Math. 4. he bid him Avoid Satan. And when Peter tempted Christ Math. 16. He
said unto him depart Satan. So when this Lawyer tempted Christ he might have
said: Auaunt Satan, because in his action he was the instrument of Satan.
But though the Lawier was worthy to be repulsed because he was so
importunate, yet was his question worth the aunswering because it was of such
importance. We see then with what mind the Lawier came to Christ; now let us
see how he saluteth Christ. Though he came with a bad mind, yet does he use
good words; that he might deceive with less suspicion, he saluteth him by the
name of Master, as if he did profess himself to be his Disciple. So does
Judas salute him when he meant to betray him, Matthew. 26.49. And so do the
Pharisees salute him, when they meant to bring him within the compass pass of
treason Mat. 22.15. And this has bin always the guise of the wicked to use
the smoothest speech when they intend most mischief, and under color of
friendship to practice their treachery. When Absalon meant to be revenged on
his brother Ammon, for defiling his sister Thamar, he made a great feast, and
caused him to be murdered in the midst of the banquet. 2. Sam. 13. When Ioab
meant to murder Amasa he saluted him courteously, saying; Art thou in health my
brother? 2. Sam. 20. and with his right hand took him by the beard to kiss
him, and with his left hand sheathed a sword into his belly.

These are such as the Psalmist speaks of Psalm. 28. which have glosing
tongues and bloody minds; which speak friendly to their neighbors, and
imagine mischief in their hearts. As the Scorpion has an amiable face and a
poisoned tail, so these men have fair looks, and murdering hands: Their
words are as soft as butter, and as smooth as oil, but their deeds are cruel
as the deeds of war, and deadly as the dint of swords. The Prophet David was
fore troubled with such dissemblers as he complains every where in his book
of Psalms, Psalm. 41. That even his own familiar friend whom he trusted, and
which did eat at his table, had laid great wait for him. And Psalm. 55. that
it was not an open enemy which had done him dishonor, for then he could have
borne it; nor it was not his adversary which had lift up himself against him,
for then peradventure he would have hid him self from him: but it was even
his companion, his guide, and his own familiar friend, which took sweet
counsel with him, and walked in the house of God as friends. At this day the
world is full of such fained friends which will flatter thee to thy face, and
bite thee behind thy back. They will give out hard speeches of some man that
is absent, in thy hearing, to see if thou will speak as hardly of him, which
if thou do, thy words shall presently be told unto him. VVoe unto him
(says the wise man Eccle. 2.13.) that has a double heart, wicked lips, and
mischievous hands, and to the sinner that goes two manner of ways. The Lord
has given but one heart, and one tongue, and one face to one man: therefore we
should not carry a double heart in our breast, nor two tungs in our head, nor
two faces under a hood. It was not lawful for the Israelites to wear any
garments made of linen and woollen, Deuteronomy. 22. to signify that it should not be
lawful for Christians to be dissemblers, to carry fire in the one hand and
water in the other, to carry honey in their mouth and gall in their heart, or
(as David speaks Psalm. 12.) to flatter with their lips, and dissemble in
their double heart.

Of all kind of cattle these are the worst, because they do most hurt, where
they are least mistrusted. Therefore they are compared to the wily Fox, for
their crafty fetches, Ezech. 13. And Herod is termed a Fox for his
dissembling, Luke. 13. For as the Fox faineth himself dead that he may catch
the birds to devour them: so the flatterer faineth himself to be harmless
and honest, and conscionable, and religious, and holy, that he may deceive the
hearts of the simple, Romans 16.18. He is like your shadow which does imitate
the action and gesture of your body, which stands when you stand; and walks
when you walk; and sits when you sit; and rises when you rise: So the
flatterer does praise when you praise; and finds fault, when you find fault;
and smiles when you smile; and frowns when you frown; and applauds you in
your doings; and sooths you in your sayings: and in all things seeks to
please your humor, till he have sounded the depth of your devises, that he
may betray you to your greatest enemies. As the Sirens sing most sweetly when
they intend your destruction, so flatterers speak most fair, when they
practice most treachery. Therefore every fair look is not to be liked,
every smooth tale is not to be believed, and every glosing tongue is not to be
trusted: But as we must try the spirits whether they be of God or no, 1.
John, 4.1. So we must try the words whether they come from the heart or no; and
we must try the deeds whether they be answerable to the words or no.

Now we are come to the question, which is by what means a man may inherit
eternal life. A weighty question worthy to be known, not only of Lawiers
and learned men, but also of all, both men and women, which are persuaded in
their heart as with their mouth they do confess, that after death their bodies
shall rise again. Therefore though this Lawier were to be blamed because he
came with so bad a mind; yet is he to be commended, because he moved so good
a question.

Many now a days are very curious in idle and unprofitable questions: As what
God did before he made the world: How long Adam stood in the state of
innocence: Whether Solomon were saved or no: with many such vain and
unnecessary questions; but few there are which will ask (as this Lawier did)
what they must do to inherit eternal life. You shall see many very careful
and inquisitiue how they may get riches; where they may purchase lands and
Lordshippes; how they may come to advancement and honor; and by what means
they may procure the Princes favor: But you shall see few or none inquisitiue
concerning the means of their salvation, you shall seldom hear any ask
their Pastor what they must do to be saved, or which way they may come to
heaven? It is not now as it was in John Baptists time, when the Publicans, the
soldiers and all sorts of people came unto him, with Master what shall we
do? Luke, 3.10. etc. Nor it is not now as it was in the time of Christ, when
the people came and asked him, what shall we do that we may work the works of
God? John, 6.28. Nor it is not now as it was in Peter's time, when upon the
hearing of Peter's Sermon the people came to Peter and to the other Apostles,
crying and saying, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? Acts, 2.37. But now
every man's mind is of his worldly profit, or pleasure, or preferment. This is
the drift of all their devises, this is the end of all their practices, how
they may live here in delight and ease, and leave behind them a rich
posterity. As for that heavenly country whereunto they were borne, that new
Jerusalem wherein they should dwell, it is the furthest end of their thought,
and the least part of all their care how to inherit it, how to inhabit it. The
Question is, how he may inherit eternal life; wherein he seems to
confess that there is an eternal life, for thereof he makes no doubt, only
the question is, how he may attain unto it. Here therefore it appears
that this Lawier was not a Saducee which denied the resurrection of the dead.
Mathe. 22. Nor he was not an Epicure, which are of this opinion, that after
death there is neither joy to be looked for, nor pain to be feared, and
therefore are wont to say, Ede, bibe, lude, etc. or as it is 1. Cor. 15. Let
us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die. But this man was a Pharisee,
such a one as Paul was before his conversion, one that expounded the law of God
unto the people, and lived after the straitest law of their religion; Acts,
26.5. in a word, he was such a one, as both for his life and learning, was
admired and honored of the Jews. Though this Lawier were learned, yet it was
boldly done of him to tempt the Lord: But what is it which learning dare not
attempt, if it be not tempered with the fear of God? Christ Jesus found no
greater adversaries than the high Priests, the Scribes and Pharisees, which
were all learned men, and the Church of Christ at this day is by none so much
afflicted, as by those that carry the opinion of singular learning. For look
how many heresies are extant in the Church, or how many controversies in
religion, they have bin deuisd and are maintaind by learned men. Let learned
men therefore learn to fear the Lord: yea, let them learn to know nothing so
much as Christ Jesus, and him crucified, 1. Cor. 2.2. without the which
knowledge all knowledge is ignorance, all wisdom is foolishnes, all learning
is madness, and all religion is error, or hypocrisy, or superstition. God has
not chosen many wise men, nor many nightie men, nor many noble men, but God
has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and God has
chosen the weak things of the world, to confound the things that are mighty;
and vile things of the world, and things which are despised, has God chosen,
yea and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are, 1, Cor.
3.19. Our Savior Christ in the choice of his Apostles, called not one that was
learned; yet has he not rejected all that are learned: for from heaven he
called his Apostle Paul a learned Lawier, Acts, 22.3. to be the Apostle and
Preacher of the Gentiles, Romans 11.13. And there is no doubt, but that in all
ages, and even at this day, he calls some in every place, and endueth them
with excellent learning, that they may serve to the gathering together of the
Saints, and to the exercising of the ministry, and to the edifying of the
Church of God, Ephe. 4.12. The Lord Jesus so moderate our learning with his
holy fear, that we may direct al our studies to the enlarging of his glory
and kingdom here on earth, that when the chief shepherd shall appear, 1.
Pet. 5.4. we (that have instructed other, and turned many to righteousness) may
shine as the brightness of the firmament, and as the staerres of heaven for
ever, Dan, 12.3.

Good Master what shall I do to inherit eternal life?

Mark here the discretion of the Lawier in asking this question. As the man
was a Lawier, so there is no doubt but that he had read the Law and the
Prophets. If you look into the Law, you shall not find, Cursed is he that
continues not in all things that are written in the book of the Law to know
them. If you peruse the Prophets you shall not find, Cease from doing of evil
and learn to speak well. But the Law says, Cursed is he that continues not
in all things that are written in the book of the law to do them, Deu, 27.26.
Gal. 3.10. And the Prophets say, Cease from doing of evil, and learn to do
well. Esaias, 1.16. Psalm. 24.14. And therefore the Lawier says not; How much
must I know, nor what shall I believe, but what shall I do to inherit
eternal life. We have been taught too long, that we are saved by faith
without the works of the Law. Which Doctrine though it be most true, and both
soundly proved, and flatly concluded Romans 3.28. Yet being understood amiss as
Paul's writings sometimes are, 2. Pet. 3.16. it has been the decay of all
good deeds, and brought in Epicurisme and all ungodliness. It Is true indeed
that eternal life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ, Romans 6.23. But yet
this gift is bestowed only upon those for whom it is prepared, Math. 20.23.
which have exercised themselves in the works of mercy, Math. 25.35. In
respect of God our election stands certain from all eternity: For it has
this seal, The Lord knows them that are his, 2. Tim. 2.19. And I know whom I
have chosen, John, 13.18. But in respect of our selves it is uncertain, and
therefore we must strive to make the same sure by good works, 2. Pet. 1.10.
These are the ways to come to heaven, though they be not the cause why we
shall come to heaven, therefore we must keep the way if ever we mean to come
to heaven: For as we are ordained to the end; so are we ordained to the
means which bring us to that end. If God have predestinate any to eternal
life, he has also predestinate them to the means whereby they must attain
eternal life, that is faith and a good conscience, 1. Tim. 5.19. therefore it
is certain that whosoever ever is to be saved, shall at one time or other before
they depart out of this life be called truly to believe, and shall endeavor
by all means as Paul did to keep a good conscience both toward God and toward
men. Act. 14.16. For that which is spoken of Christ in special, Psalm. 45. Thou
have loved righteousness and hated iniquity, must be verified and in some
measure accomplished in all the members of Christ, they must love righteousness,
and hate iniquity. And this is the difference that the Apostle puts between
the Children of God and the Children of the Devil, that the Children of God
both love and do righteousness, and the Chilof the Devil love sin and do it.
1. John. 3.7. Let no man therefore think that he is predestinate to salvation:
unless he find and seele in himself the effects and fruits of
predestination. For those whom God has predestinate, them also in his good
time he calls Romans 8.29.30. (not to uncleanness but unto holiness, 1. These.
4.7.) and whom he calls, them also he justifies (and endueth with the grace
of sanctification. Romans 6.2. etc.) and whom he justifies, them also he
glorifieth. Romans 8. If any be ingrafted into Christ by a lively faith, he
cannot but bring forth the fruit of good life. John. 15. and whosoever does not
bring forth such fruit it is certain that he is not yet ingrafted into Jesus
Christ. Let us not therefore I say flatter nor deceive our selves, as though we
had true faith, when we have not the true fruits of faith. For as the Sun
cannot be without light, nor the fire without heat: no more can a saving faith
be without good works, which are the fruits and effects thereof. The penitent
thief had but a short time of repentance: yet in that short time he wanted not
good works to declare his faith. Luke. 23.40 41.42. For no sooner was it given
him to believe in Christ, but that presently he makes answer on the behalf
of Christ and clears him of all amiss; he rebukes his fellow for his
incredulity, he confesses the greatness of their sin, and their just
punishment for the same, he acknowledges Christ to be the Lord and calls
upon him. Therefore it is not enough for us to say we have faith, for the
Devils have a kind of faith ( James. 2.19.) nor it is not enough for you to
come to Church to call upon the Lord, for Lord Lord will not serve the turn
Math. 7.21.) nor it is not enough for us to preach unto you, for unto some that
have preached in the name of Christ, it shall be said at the last day, depart
I know you not, Math. 7.22. nor it is not enough for you to be only hearers of
the word, for then you deceive your selves, James. 1.22. But you that say you
have faith must show it by your deeds, James. 2.18. And you that come to call
upon the Lord must depart from iniquity. 2. Tim. 2.19. And we that preach unto
you, must practice that our selves, which we preach unto you, and be an
example of holy life for you to follow, 1. Pet. 5.3. And you that are hearers
of the word, must be doers of the word; and then you shall be justified, Romans
2.13.

What shall I do? The Papists will have other men do good works for them.
For some of the holier sort (forsooth) have works of supererrogation, that is,
more good works than they need themselves, which they can spare and bestow
upon those that pay best for them. And we that are Protestants, because we
will not disable Christ, nor derogate from his merits, will have Christ do all
for us, and we will do nothing for our selves.

But this Lawier was of another mind; He asks what he shall do to gain
eternal life, because he knew that another man could not deserve it for him.
The soul that sins that same shall die, and the soul that does
righteousness shall surely live says the Lord, Ezec. 18.4.5. And though Moses
and Samuel stood before the Lord, to make intercession for the wicked, it
shall not help them, Ier. 15.1. Yea, though Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in the
Land when the Lord brings his plagues upon it for sin, they shall save
neither sons nor daughters, but only deliver their own souls by their
righteousness, Ezech. 14.20. Therefore it behooves every man to know what he
must do to inherit eternal life, and not only to know, for he that knows
his Masters will and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes, Luke,
12.48. but he must do it, and so shall he have cause of rejoicing in
himself, and not in another. For as another man's sin shall not be laid to
my charge, so another man's righteousness shall not be reckoned to be mine, but
every man shall bear his own burden, Gal. 6.4.5.

What shall I do to inherit eternal life? There is a life which is short and
temporal, which Job compares to a wind that soon blows over, Job, 7.7.
James to a vapor that soon vanishes away, James, 4.14. This Lawier asks
not after this temporal life, for this is common to beasts with men: But here
he inquireth concerning that life which is eternal, and shall never have an
end. It Is strange to see how every man almost desires to be eternal, and yet
how few do use the means to be eternal: As the fowls by a natural
inclination, delight to fly, the fish to swim, and the beasts to go; so
men are naturally carried with an earnest desire to live for ever.

And albeit men know themselves to be mortal, yet every man according to his
several disposition, deuiseth some means to be immortal. Some like Lycurgus
do publish wholesome laws: Some Plato like, pen learned books: And some like
Solomon build goodly houses, and call the lands after their own names,
thinking by this means that their names at least shall continue for ever,
Psalm. 49.

Thus every man almost, either for some valiant enterprise like David's worthies
that killed the Giants, 2. Sam 21. or for some desperate attempt like Saul that
killed himself, the first of Samuel, and thirty one Chapter; or for their
famous and stately buildinges, as the builders of both the Babels, in the
eleventh Chapter of Genesis, and fourth Chapter of Daniel, will be eternixed.
But howsoever men by such means may be remembered after death, yet this is not
the way to get eternal life. For this is life eternal to know the only true
God, the seventeenth Chapter of John, and third verse. And to believe in the
son of God, the third Chapter of John, and sixteenth verse. But these knowers
must be dooers; for he that says I know him, and keeps not his
commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him, the first of John, the
third Chapter, and fourth verse. And these believers must be good livers, for
this is a true saying, and these things I will thou should affirm, that they
that have believed God, should be careful to show forth good works, Titus,
third, eight. Therefore to the obtaining of eternal life two things are
necessary. The first is, to believe well; the second is, to live well. By the
first we are justified in the fight of God, for he respects our faith. By
the second we are justified in the sight of men, for they regard our works.
And thus are the Apostles Paul and James reconciled; for when Paul makes faith
the cause of justification, Romans, third Chapter, and twenty eight verse, he
means such a says as works by love, Galathians, the fifth Chapter, and
sixth verse; whereby we are justified in the sight of God. And when James
makes works the cause of justification, James the second Chapter, and twenty
four verse, he means such works as proceed from faith, James, the second
Chapter and the eighteenth verse, whereby we are declared to be righteous
before men.

The Scripture describes this eternal life by diverse excellent names: to show
the worthiness and excellency thereof, it is called a Kingdom, Luke, the
twelfth Chapter, and thirty two verse; but yet such a Kingdom as cannot be
shaken like the Kingdoms of this world, Hebrews, the twelfth Chapter, and
twenty eight Verse; for it is a heavenly Kingdom, Matthew, the eighth Chapter
and eleventh verse. It is called Paradise, Luke the three and twenty Chap. and
forty three verse; for it is more pleasant than the garden of Eden. And
Abraham's bosom, Luke the sixteenth Chapter, for it is a place of rest and
comfort. It is called the house of the father, wherein there be many Mansions,
John, the fourteenth Chapter. The joy of the Lord, whereinto every faithful
servant must enter, in Matthew 22. Chapter; and all to express and declare
unto us the beauty, excellency, and glory of that life which is eternal: And
yet as glorious and excellent as it is; such is the love and favor of God unto
us, that he has appointed it to be our inheritance, as here the Lawyer terms
it. Inheritance is a kind of tenure, whereby a man in his own right holds or
possesses any thing, as his own; as when a lawful heir does inherit his
Fathers lands: Even so the kingdom of God belongs unto us as our lawful
inheritance, because we are the Sons of God.

It is a great prerogative to be the Sons of God. John, the first Chapter
and third verse. But to be Heirs and Heirs with Christ, ( Romans the eight
Chapt,) of that heavenly inheritance is a wonderful privilege. How are we
bound unto Almighty God? that where as he might have made us stones, or
trees, or beasts, or such insensible and unreasonable creatures: it pleased his
divine Majesty to make us men, the undoubted heirs of eternal happiness.
Behold (dear brother) and consider that heaven is thine inheritance, eternal
glory is thy patrimony; thou art borne to a kingdom, thou have a title to it,
and when thou do depart this life thou shall be sure to find it: If before
thou depart this life thou do not loose thy right and title by thy sinful
life.

Let every one therefore as he tendereth the salvation of his own soul,
forsake his wicked ways and now begin to walk in the ways of the Lord: If
heretofore thou have profaned the Lords Saboath, remember that henceforth thou
sanctify it: If thou have been a Blasphemer of the name of God, see that
henceforth thou use it with all reverence: If thou have been malicious, from
henceforth be charitable: If thou have been contentious, now learn to be
peaceable: If thou have been incontinent, now begin to be chaste: If thou have
been a drunkard, from henceforth be sober: and in a word. If thou have been
inclined to any sin, be sorry for it and forsake it: If thou have neglected
any good work: now begin to do it, that in so doing thou may inherit
that eternal life which is promised and prepared for them that know the will
of God and do it. as it is written in Luke, the eighth Chapter, and twenty
one verse.

The Lord in mercy grant that you be not forgetful hearers but dooers of
the word.

Here ends the first Sermon.
Printed at London for Thomas Gosson: and are to be sold at his Shop by
London Bridge Gate. 1595.

THE LAVVGIVERS Answer to the Lawiers Question.

By HENRY SMITH.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Gosson: and are to be sold at his shop by London
Bridge Gate.

THE LAVVGIVERS Answer to the Lawyers Question.
Luke, 10. And he said unto him, what is written in the law, how read thou?
etc.


YOU have heard the Question propounded: Now you shall hear the Question
answered. And he said unto him, what is written in the law, how read thou?
As if he should have said: I marvel that thou being a Doctor of the Law,
which should be able to instruct others in matters of Religion, art ignorant
of that which it behooves every man to know by what means he may inherit
eternal life. Wherein have thou bestowed thy study, wherein have thou employed
thy w^^, and how have thou spent thy time? Thou seem to be a Lawyer: Tell
me what does the Law require of thee: Thou seem to have read the Scriptures,
let me see how thou have profited by thy reading. Thus does our Savior send
this Lawier to the Law to learn his duty, and sets him to school that
thought himself too good to learn. He came to tempt Christ by asking the
question, but now himself must make the answer, unless he will bewray his
own ignorance. If he be a Lawier, let him look what the law says
concerning this question, because the law is able to resolve every doubt,
second Timothy, the third Chapter; sixteen and seauenteene verses. Therefore
the Prophet Esaias sends us to the law and to the testimony, Esaias the eighth
Chapter, and twenty verse. And our Savior Christ bids us search the
scriptures, John 5. And tells us that the ignorance of them is the cause of
all error, Matthew twelve Chapter. If then thou would know the will of God
study the scriptures, there he has revealed his will unto thee: If thou
desire to please the Lord, look into his word, there he has showed thee
what his pleasure is: Finally, if thou would have thy works to prosper,
consider what is written in the law, ask counsel at the mouth of the Lord:
Examine all thine actions by the touchstone of the word, and be sure to do
nothing for the which thou have not the word for thy warrant: If harlots
entise thee to lewdnes as Putiphars wise entised Joseph, Genesis the thirty
nine Chapter, fly from them as Joseph did from her, and remember what the law
says, thou shall not commit adultery. If sinners such as have no fear of God
before their eyes entise thee saying; Come with us we will lay wait for
blood, and watch to state the simple man: consent thou not, but consider what
is written in the Law. Thou shall do no murder: If they say cast in thy lot
among us, we will all have one purse, we shall get great riches, and fill our
houses with spoil, Proverbs the first Chapter and fourteenth verse. Walk not
thou in the way with them, refrain thy foot from their path, and look what
the Law requires of thee, thou shall not steal. If Papists would persuade
thee to change thy religion, because thy Fathers were of another religion,
look into the Scriptures, examine thy religion by the word of God, and then as
Elias said unto the people, If the Lord be God then follow him, but if Baal be
he then go after him, the first book of Kings the eighteenth Chapter and
twenty one verse. So answer thou them, if this religion be agreeable to the
word as in truth it is, then will I be of this religion, though my forefathers
have been of your religion: And to conclude, if thy father that begat thee,
thy mother that bare thee, thy wife that lies in thy bosom, thy friend that
is as thine own self, or thy child which is the fruit of thy body (
Deutronomium the thirteenth Chapter and sixth verse) shall require thee to do
any thing which the Lord has forbidden in his law, or shall forbid thee to
do any thing which the Lord has commanded in his word, then thou may
answer them as Job answered his wife, thou speak like a foolish woman, Job
the second Chapter and tenth verse; or as Christ answered his mother, Woman
what have I to do with thee? John the second Chapter and fourth verse; or as
he answered his friend Peter, Go after me Satan, for thou sauerest not the
things that be of God, etc. Matthewe the sixteenth Chapter and twenty three
verse. Yea if it come to this, that thy Prince which has power over thy life
command one thing, and the Lord command the contrary, thou must answer as
Peter and John answered the Rulers ( Acts the fourth Chapter and nineteenth
verse) whether it be mere, etc. Yea thou must be content with Sydrach, Misach
and Abednego, (Daniel the third Chapter) to undergo any punishment even unto
the death, rather than thou would dishonor him or disobey his word, that
has power to call both body and soul into hell together, Matthew the tenth
Chapter and twenty eight verse.

It follows verse twenty seven, And he answered and said, Thou shall love
thy Lord God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
strength, and with all thy thought, and thy neighbor as thy self. Before the
Lawier moved the Question: Now it is the Lawiers turn to answer, and in his
answer he shows him self a learned Lawier: for whereas the law of God
consists of ten precepts, he reduces the same unto two; The one taken as
it seems out of Deutronomium the sixth Chapter, containing our duty toward
God; the other taken out of Leuiticus the nineteenth Chapter, containing our
duty to our neighbor. Here is the abridgement of Moses law, which as it was
delivered in two tables, so it is reduced to two duties, and both these
require but one thing and that is love, Deutronomium the tenth Chapter. So does
our Savior Christ himself divide the law, Matthew the twenty two Chapter,
where being asked which is the great commandment, he answers as here this
Lawier does; Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all
thy soul, and with all thy mind: This is the first commandment and the
second is like unto this; Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Here is
nothing but love (my brethren) and yet here is the fulfilling of the law,
Romans the thirteenth Chapter. For all the benefits that God had bestowed
upon the Israelites his people, he requires nothing but love: And for all the
favors which he has done unto us, he asks no more but love again.

If we were not too unkind, God needed not to crave our love having so well
descrude our love, in loving us before we loved him, first of John the fourth
Chapter. But now he is ^aine to become a Suter for our love which he has
dearly bought, for he showed his love to us before he craves our love to him.
By his almighty power he created us of nothing, and made us the most
excellent of all his creatures; if that be little worth because it cost him
little, for he spoke the word and we were made, Psalm. 33.9. Yet this is such a
love as cannot be expressed, that when we were fallen from that excellent
estate wherein we were created and become heirs of hell and condemnation; so
did he love this sinful world, that he gave his only begotten son to die
for the sins thereof. That he might bring us to heaven, he came down from
heaven; that he might deliver us from hell, he went down to hell for us; Not
gold nor silver, but his dearest blood was the price of our redemption, 1
Peter, 1. What can a man do more than to give his life for his friend? Romans
5.6.7. And what can God do more, than to die for sinful men? And for all
this, what does this loving Lord require of thee, but that thou love the Lord
thy God. Blessed be such a Lord that requires nothing of his servants but
love. If any Prince were so gracious unto his subjects that he would require no
other subsidies, nor tribute, nor custom of them but love: how were the
subjects bound to love and honor such a Prince? And such a one is our most
gracious Lord and King, who for all the blessings and benefits that we enjoy
under his most happy government, craves no more but love at our hands for
recompense. Once he required burnt offerings, that was a dear kind of
service; but now he asks love, a kind of service which every man may well
affoorde. He asks not learning, nor strength, nor riches, nor nobility, but
he asks love; a thing that the simplest, the weakest, the poorest, the basest
may perform as well as he that is most learned, most strong, most rich, or
most nobly borne. If God had required this of thee, that thou should be able
to dissolve doubts like Daniell, and to dispute subtle questions, what should
then become of thee that art unlearned? If the Lord should accept of none but
such as were strong and valiant, what should then become of women, old men and
children, which are weak and feeble? If God should regard none but the rich
and wealthy, what should then become of the poor and needy. To conclude, if
God should make choice of none but such as were of noble parentage, what should
we do that are the common people? But now he requires such a thing of us, as
the poorest and simplest may performed as well as the wealthiest or wisest man
in all the world, for if we cannot love, we can do nothing; specially if we
cannot love God, that has so loved us, we go not so far as the wicked do,
for sinners also love their lovers, Luc. 6.32. And therefore blessed be God,
that for the performance of so small a work, has proposed such a great
reward, and for the obtaining of such a happy state, has imposed such an
easy task. The eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, neither can the
heart conceive, what God has prepared for them that love him, Esaias 64. chap.
4. verse. 1. Corinthians. 2. chap. 9. verse. And for all these unspeakable
joys which God has prepared, he requires no more of us but love. How is God
enamoured of our love, and how unkind shall we be to withholde it from him?
He has an innumerable company of Angels, which are inflamed with his love: and
not content therewith, he sues to have the love of men. God has no need of
our love, no more then Elisa had need of Naamans cleansing, but as Elisa bad
Naaman wash, that he might become clean, in the second book of Kings the fifth
chapter: so God bids us love, that we might be saved. It is for our good
altogether, that God requires our love in earth, because he means to set his
love on us in heaven. If the man of God had willed Naaman do some great thing,
ought he not to have done it? So if God had willed us do some great thing,
ought we not to have done it? How much more when he says unto us; Love, and
you shall live for ever.

Now if you would know whether you have this love of God in you, examine your
actions, whether they be done with delight and comfort. In amore nihil amari;
In love there is no mislike. It Is like the waters of Iordane wherein Naaman
washed: for as his flesh which before was leprous, became fair and tender
after his washing, so all our actions, and labors, and afflictions, which
before were tedious and irksome, become joyous, and pleasant, and
comfortable, after we are once bathed in the love of God. It is like the Salt
that Elisa cast into the noisome waters, to make them wholesome, in the 2.
Kings and second chapter; or like the meal that Elisa put into the bitter
pottage to make them sweet, as in the 2. Kings the 4. chap. So the love of God
being shed in our hearts by the holy Ghost, does make all anguish, and
sickness, and poverty, and labors, and watchings, and losses, and injuries,
and famishment, and banishment, and persecutions, and imprisonment, yea and
death it self to be welcome unto us. Such was the love of that chosen vessel,
who for the love that he bare unto God, waded through all these afflictions, 2.
Cor. 12. and could not for all these and many more, be separated from the love
of God, as he protests, Romans 8. Wherefore (beloved) seeing God that has done
so much for us, requires no more but love of us, which every one may easily
afford: let him be our love, our joy, and whole delight, and then all our life
will seem delightful. As Iaacob served seven years for Rachaell, Genesis
29.20. and they seemed to him but a few days for the love that he bare unto
her: so when we have once set our love upon God, our pain will be pleasure,
our sorrow will be joy, our mourning will be mirth, our service will be
freedom, and all our crosses shall be counted so many comforts: for his sake
whom we love a great deal more then Iaacob loved Rachell, because his love to
us is like Ionathans love to David, passing the love of women, 2. Samuel 1.26.

Thus we have heard, what it is that the Lord requires of us, namely love.
Now let us see what manner of love he requires. Thou shall love the Lord thy
God, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy strength, and with
all thy thought. Here the Lord sets down the measure of that love which he
requires of us, that first it must be true and unfeigned, as proceeding from the
heart and mind; secondly that it must be sound and perfect with all the heart,
with all the mind. The Lord which is a spirit and truth, John. 4. will be
served in spirit and in the truth. He cannot away with hypocrites, which draw
near unto him with their lips, but their hearts are far from him. Matthew. 15.
He cannot abide dissemblers, which flatter with their lips, and dissemble in
their double heart, Psalm. 12. and therefore though he requires all the heart,
yet he requires not a double heart; to signify that a single heart is
pleasing unto him, and that he detesteth a double heart. As there is a glosing
tongue a wanton eye, an idle ear, a wicked hand, and a wandering foot; so
there is a false and dissembling heart, which marreth all the rest. As is the
eye, such is the light, if the eye be single, the body is full of light: if the
eye be wicked, the body is full of darkness, Matthew. 6.22. So as is the heart,
such are the actions of the body, which proceed from the heart. A good man,
out of the good treasure of the heart, brings forth good things, and an
evil man out of the evil treasure of the heart brings forth evil things,
Matthew. 12.35. therefore as Christ says, Make clean within, and all will be
clean, Luc. 11. So I say unto you: look that your heart be sincere and
single, and then your tongue, your eye, your ear, your hand, your foot, that
is; all your actions will be holy to the Lord. The heart of man is the
storehouse wherein his treasure lies, and therefore God seeking to have the
treasure, requires the heart: For where the treasure is, there will the heart
be also, Matthew. 6.21. But he will have it freely, not by constraint; and
therefore he requires the heart, because whatsoever is done with the heart, is
done willingly, and that which is done against the heart, is done as it were
against the hair. Therefore in requiring the heart, God shows that he
delights in voluntary service. Among all the offerings that the Lord in his
law required of his people, he likes none so well as the free will offerings
of their hand. Princes require help of their subjects, because they stand in
need of help, not regarding whether they do it willingly or against their
wills; but God requires the heart, because he needs not our help. As God
gives to all men indifferently, and casts no man in the teeth, Iame. 1. chap.
5. verse; so he would have us to give that which we give unto him willingly,
without grutching. If we give him love, we must give it lovingly; if we give
him our heart, we must do it heartily; if we give him our alms, we must do
it cheerfully: for as he loves a cheerful giver, 1. Cor. 9.7. so he loves a
cheerful lover: but he that loves not with the heart, loves not cheerfully,
for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, Matthew. 12.34. the
head deuiseth, the eye sees, the ear hears, the hand works, the foot
walks. If the heart be enditing of a good matter, the tongue will be as the
pen of a ready writer, Psalm. 45.2. but if the heart be unwilling, every thing
will be yrkesome like the gift of Ananias, that was loath to part from the price
of his land, because Satan had filled his heart with covetousness. Acts. 5.
chap. 2. ver. Such are the gifts of many now a days, which either give not so
much as their ability might affoorde, or if they do, then presently they begin
to repent that they gave so much; and as Judas murmured that the oil was not
soulde, and given to the poor, John 12. chapter, so they grieve that their
alms was not spared, and put to some other use. Thus though they give sometime
as Ananias did for fashion sake, because they see other give, yet is their gift
nothing worth, because it comes not with a willing mind. God more regarded the
sheapheards sacrifice of the first fruits of his sheep, Genesis 4. chapter,
and 4.5. ver. than the husbandmans oblation of the first fruits of his ground;
because Abel offered sincerely with all his heart, and Caine offered like an
hypocrite for an outward show. The widows mite, Luc. 21. was more esteemed,
than the rich men's much, because she offered of her penury with a willing
mind, they of their superfluity for ostentation. A cup of cold water or a
morsel of bread, that is given with cheerfulness, is better then a fat Ox
with hatred and ill will. When we give to the poor, we lend unto the Lord, and
the Lord to whom we lend, measures the gift by the mind of the giver, and not
by the worth of the gift. A small thing (says David, Psalm. 37.16.) that the
righteous have, is better then great riches of the ungodly: so a small thing
that the righteous give, is better then great gifts of the ungodly, because
they give for the love of God with all their heart, but the ungodly give for
other respects, either for the love of the man to whom they give, or (like the
Pharisees Matthew. 6.1.) for the praise of men before whom they give.

Some will not give at all, wherein they declare that they have no love at all:
When a poor man comes to their door, or to their pue, then (as Naball
answered David, when he desired relief for himself and his company. 1. Sam.
23.10. Who is David? or who is the son of Isai? There be many servants now a
days, that break every man away from his master: shall I then take my bread
and my water, and my flesh that I have killed for my shearers, and give it unto
men whom I know not whence they are: so they answer the poor man: who art
thou, and whence come thou? there are too many such as you are in every
place, we have poor enough of our own to help, I must bestow mine alms on
them, and I have not for you. Thus do they excuse their niggardise and
unmercifulness by the poor that dwell among them; upon whom God knows they
bestow no more than that which law compels them to bestow, and that for the
most part against their will. Where is the love of God my bretheen? If you say
you love God, and show not your love to your brethren, you lie, for if you love
not your brother whom you see, you cannot love God whom you have not seen, 1.
John 4.20. As we must love God with the heart, that is, sincerely, so we must
love him with all the heart, that is, with a perfect love. God is like a
jealous husband, loathe to have a partner in his love. Exodus 20. He will not
have half the heart, nor a piece of the heart, but all the heart. When the
heart is divided it dies, therefore God will not have the heart divided, least
it die, because he desires a living and not a dying heart. He is not like the
unkind mother that would have the child divided; 1. Kin. 26. but like the
natural mother, who rather than it should be divided, would forgo the child.
So God will have all or none, if he may not have all the heart, and all the
soul, and all the strength, and all the thought, he will have none at all. The
devil, or the world, or the flesh, will play small game as we use to say,
before they will sit out; if they cannot get full possession of our hearts,
the^ they are content to have some part of our love, as it were a little room
in our hearts, a wicked thought, or a consent to sin, like Pharao the king of
Egypt, who when he could not keep the Israelits still in bondage, would keep
their wives and children back: and when this would not be granted, then he was
content to let them go and do sacrifice, but their sheep and their cattle
must stay behind: and when this might not be obtained, then he desired them
only to bless him before they went, Exodus 10. But God is of another mind: he
that made all the hearts of men, and tries them, and knows them, and renueth
them, and mollifieth them, and lighteneth them, and rules them, and turns
them which way it pleases him, will have all the heart because he has best
right to all. Therefore as Moses answered Pharao. There shall not a hoof be
left behind us: so whenever the devil, the world, or the flesh, are suitors
unto us for any part of our heart, as commonly they are, when we have any
sacrifice or service to perform unto the Lord our God, then we must answer
them, as Moses answered Pharao; Thou shall have neither hand nor hoof in this
action, Exodus 10.26: or as Peter answered Simon Magus when he offered money for
the holy ghost; Thou have neither part nor fellowship in this business, Acts
8.20.21. I must not yield one jot to your suggestions, for I must love the Lord
my God, with all my heart, with all my soul, etc. That God may be our God, he
will have the greatest love, because whatsoever we love best, we make our God:
we may love our parents, or our wives, or our children, or our friends, or our
neighbors, as well as we love our selves, with a true and unfeigned love, but we
must love God better tha^ our parents, or our wives, or our children, or our
friends, or our neighbors, or our selves with all our hearts, and with all our
soul, that is with a sound and perfect love. As we love a ring or a jewel for
his sake that gave it, so we must love althings of this life for his sake that
gave them, and for his own sake above all the rest. This perfect love we can
bestow but once, and but one can have it, and who so has it, must be our God;
if we set our heart upon riches, we make riches our God, therefore David says
Psalm. 62; If riches increase set not your heart upon them; if our whole delight
be in eating and drinking, then we make a god of our belly, and the Apostle
tells us, Phil. 3. that our end is damnation, if we be given to wantonness and
fleshly pleasure, then Venus is our goddess, and Solomon tells us, Prou. 6.
cha. 26. ver. that our end will be beggerie. But if we have set our love on
God, the eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, neither has it entered
into the heart of man what God has prepared for them that love him, 1. Cor.
2.9. Now if you would know how you must love God with all your heart, thus you
must do it. When the devil or the world, or the flesh, shall set any thing
before thee to love, wherewith thou shall offend thy God, thou must be content
to loose and forgo the same be it never so precious, be it never so lovely: He
loves God above all, which not for the love of any thing that is created, can
be brought to sin against his Creator. So Joseph loved God above all, who
though he might have had the love of his Lady and Mistress without suspicion
of man, yet he would not consent, and so to loose the love of God, Genesis 39.
Such was David's love to God, 1. Kings, 24. who when he had gotten Saul (his
greatest enemy that sought his life) into a Cave, where he might at once have
been revenged on him for all his injuries, was content only to cut off the
lap of his garment, and so to let him go unhurt, rather than he would sin
against the Lord in laying his hands upon the Lords anointed. Such also was
the love of chaste Susanna Dan. 13. who when she might have gained the love and
favor of the Elders without any note of infamy, chose rather to undergo the
danger of her life, than to sin in the sight of the Lord. Therefore thou
may love the things of this life, thy parents, thy wife, thy children and
the rest, the Lord gives thee good leave to love them, so long as thou may
love them without offense to God. But if once they be unto thee an occasion to
sin, thou must leave to love them, and rather choose to sustain any loss,
though it be to the cutting off thy hand or thy foot, or to the plucking out
of thine eye, Math. 5.29. or to the hazard of thy life, than thou would
offend so divine a Majesty.

Now thou see (if thou be not wilfully blind) how far thou art from this
perfect love which God requires of thee. Thou have not always preferred God
before all thy worldly profit, thou have not always preferred God before all
thy fleshly pleasure: when thou have gotten opportunity to be revenged of thine
enemy, thou have not spared him; when thou have gotten opportunity to commit
wickedness, thy love to God has not restrained thee; where God required all thy
heart, thou have given him no part of thy heart: Sometime all thy heart runs
after thy covetousness, Ezech. 33.31. Sometime thy soul is wholly set
vpon-delight and ease; sometime thy mind is all upon thy corn, Luke, 12. or
thy cattle, or thy pasture; and sometime thy thoughts are all upon thy
merchandise: seldom thou think upon God, but when thou come into the
Church of God; and then thy mind is so distracted with diverse thoughts, and
ears, and affairs of this life, that thou can not think upon God one hour
together. Therefore what remains in this case for thee to do but confess
thine own imperfection: and fly to Christ to supply thy wants, and earnestly
to desire the Lord to change thy heart, to take from thee thy old heart, thy
vain, thy wandering heart, which has loved other things more than God; and in
stead thereof to give thee a new heart and to create a right spirit within
thee, Psalm. 51. wherewith thou may love God above all things in this life,
that in the life to come thou may find the reward of thy love, such joys
and comforts as cannot be expressed.

Thus we have heard what duty we owe unto God himself; Now we shall hear
what duty we owe unto our neighbor. That which we owe unto them both is love,
but yet the love which we owe unto them is not alike. For albeit the second
commandment be like unto the first, Matthew, 22. for the necessity thereof
and in respect of the subject or quality which is required, namely love; yet
in respect of the object which is God, and the measure of our love which must
be perfect; there is great odds between them. In that they both require but
love, they are both alike, but in that the first requires love to God, the
second love to men, the first requires a greater love than the second there is
the difference: But here a doubt arises, seeing God requires the love of all
the heart, soul, etc. what love remains for our neighbor? If God must have
all our love, what love is left for any other? Whereunto I answer, that the
love of our neighbor does not derogate nor detract from the love of God; As
the light of a candle does not dazel, but rather commend the light of the
sun: so our love to our neighbor does not diminish, but rather accomplish
our love to God. He that loves the fruit, will love the tree whereon it
grows, and he that loves the stream will love the fountain from whence it
flows: even so he that loves man which is a creature, will much more love
God that has created him. But let us examine the words: Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self, Here are four things to be observed: First, what is
required, namely love: Secondly who must love, thou: that is every man.
Thirdly, whom we must love, namely our neighbor. And lastly, how and in
what manner we must love him, as we love our selves. Concerning the first, as
in the former precept, so in this also the Lord requires love; wherein he
deals as a kind father with his children, who desirous to have them so to
resemble him, as by their conditions every man may know whose they are:
Therefore* our loving father, desirous to have us like himself, requires us
to be kind and loving one to another, as he is kind to the unkind, to the
evil, to the just, and to the unjust, Matt. 5. He will have us perfect, as he
is perfect, he will have us holy, as he is holy; he will have us merciful, as
he is merciful; he will have us loving as he is love it self. Again, it is
the nature of a loving father, by all means to procure the welfare of his
children: so our heavenly father desirous of our continual happiness,
commands us love, that so we may lead our lives with delight and pleasure.
If he had hated us, he would have commanded us to live in hatred, and envy and
malice with our neighbors; For among all the miseries that are under the
sun, there is not a more miserable and yrksome life than the life of the
envious. Solomon; Prou. 14.30. calls it a rotting of the bones, and as it were
a consumption of the body, because the envious man always repineth, and pineth
away at other men's prosperity. As all things work to the best to them that
love God; Romans 8. so all things work to the worst to them that are envious.
Therefore one wishes, that the envious man had eyes in every city, that he
might be vexed with all men's prosperity. As Christ said, John 13. By this
shall all men know, that ye are my disciples, if you have love one toward
another: so the devil says; By this shall all men know, that ye are my
disciples, if ye have envy, and hatred, and malice, one toward another.
Therefore leaving that hateful and loathsome kind of life to the reprobate and
damned, who are always mal-content like Caine, Genesis 4. and their countenance
cast down; they cannot look on their brother with a cheerful countenance,
nor afford him a merry word. God has prescribed love to those that are his,
to show how desirous he is of their welfare and happiness. But here some churl
may say unto me; If this be all, I shall do well enough: if God require no
more but love, I shall be well content to love, so that I be not bound to give.
Alas, this is a silly shift: for it is the nature of godly love, to relieve and
help him that is beloved: therefore whom thou love, if thou love him
truly, thou can not see him lack, if it be in thy power to supply his want.
If thou love thy horse, thou will give him prouinder; if thou love thy dog,
thou will give him thy crummes, and if thou love thy brother, thou will give
him food. Therefore though nothing be expressed which thou should give unto
thy brother, yet in that thou must love him, thou art bound to give him, not
only thy goods, but even thy life if need require to do him good. This is my
commandment, says our Savior Christ, John. 15. chap. 12. verse. that ye
love one another as I have loved you, but he so loved us, that he gave his life
for us, Romans 5.^. therefore we also ought to give out lives for our brethren.
1. John. 3.16. For as much then, as thy life, which as Christ speaks, is more
worth than food or raiment, Matthew. 6.25. should not be spared for thy another
good, from henceforth grutch not to give thy goods to thy needy neighbor,
defraude not him of food and raiment, to whom thou owe even thy life it
self.

But let us come to the second thing, which shows who is bound to love, Thou
shall love. Under this word thou; God comprehends every particular man and
woman: as if he should say, Thou thy self, and not any other, for thou shall
love thy neighbor. The poor man is not exempted from this precept, because he
may love as well as the rich. If he say I have no wealth, and therefore I
cannot show my love to my neighbor. Though he have no wealth, yet he has a
heart, he has a mind, he has an affection; let him have a loving heart, a
loving mind, and a loving affection; if he cannot do well, let him wish well
unto his neighbor; if he can or gratify him with any thing that he hath^ let
him not envy at any thing that the rich man has sorts the rich man shows
that he loves his neighbor, if he relieve his necessity: so the poor man
shows that he loves his neighbor, if he grieve not at his prosperity. This
therefore as a general precept, binds the poor as well as the rich, it is a
common yoke laid upon the neck, and a common burden laid upon the back of
every christian, but yet it is an easy yoke, and a light burden, Matt. 11.
because it is love, which makes all things to seem delightsome. As there are
some that would be content to love if they might not give; so there are some
would be content to give, if they were sure they should not want: therefore
when it comes to giving, they post it over to their heirs or to their
executors, or to their successors when they are dead; they are never liberal
until they die, and then they are liberal of that which is none of theirs.
They think to be excused by the liberality of their, heirs, but they are
bound to be liberal for themselves: therefore they must not lay the burden
upon them, because every man must bear his own burden, Gal. 6. If they say,
I know not what need I may have before I die, let them remember, that what they
give unto the poor, they lend unto the Lord, and he is a sure paymaister, he
gives great usury, and as David laid, I never saw the righteous forsaken, nor
his seed beg their bread: so they must needs confess, if they will confess
the truth, that they never saw the godly man that was liberal to the poor,
by that means to come to misery. By other means many men fall into extreme
poverty, Alea, Vina, Venus, Dice, Wine, and Women have brought many to
beggary; but by beneficence and liberality to the poor, I never heard that
any came to penury. Such a foyson has your alms, that by the blessing of God
which makes men rich, it increases like the Widows meal and oil which she
bestowed upon the Prophet, 1. Kings, 17. Therefore let no man distrust.

Now we are come to the third thing, which shows whom we are bound to love.
Thou shall love thy neighbor. He says not, thou shall love the rich man, or
thy kinsman, or thy friend or thy companion, but thy neighbor: Under which
word is comprehended every man that is any way capable of thy love, yea; even
thy enemy is included in this precept, Matthew, 5. Romans 12. As the Jews
thought none to be their neighbors but their own Nation, so some think none
to be their neighbors but their equals? The rich man despises the poor
man, and he again enuieth the rich man, and every man as the proverb is,
delights in those that are like himself: But here this law requires that
whosoever is our neighbor, by any means is to be loved. As our Savior Christ
had two kinds of kinsfolk, Matthew. 12. one by the flesh, and another by the
spirit; so we have two kinds of neighbors, one by nature, and another by
grace: and as Christ preserd his spiritual kindred, before his carnal
kindred; so we must prefer our spiritual neighbors, before our carnal
neighbors.

Therefore, although by this law we are bound to love all men indifferently, yet
because there are degrees of neighbors, therefore there must be degrees of
love; we must love our parents, and our kinsfolk, more than strangers, because
they are bound unto us by a straighter bond of nature, according to that of
the Apostle, 1. Tim. 5. He that has not a care of his own, specially they of
his household, etc. So we must love the faithful more than the unfaithful,
because they are bound unto us by a straighter bond of faith and religion, as
the same Apostle wills us, Gal. 6. While ye have time do good unto all,
specially to them of the household of faith: signifying, that as we are bound
to love all men with a general love, because they are all the offspring of
Adam, yet must we love some with a more special love, because they are the
children of God.

Now follows the measure of that love which we owe unto our neighbor,
expressed in the last words; As thy self: Here is the rule whereby our love
must be squared, and a most exquisite example of singular love found in our
selves for us to imitate: He says not, as he loves thee, or as he is beloved
of other; but as thy self. Who knows not how well he loves himself, and
therefore who can excuse himself? I say I know not how well I should love my
neighbor; but how do we love our selves? fainedly? or coldly? or for an hour?
I trow not, but truly and zealously, and every hour; so we must love our
neighbor with a true, zealous, and a constant love. We must not pass by as
the Priest and the Leuit, but power our oil into their wounds with the
Samaritan, to help relieve them, and comfort them. We must love our
neighbor, though he be envious, as David loved Saul, requiting good for evil;
and as Joseph loved Putiphar, not enticed to sin against him. Love is the
fulfilling of the Law: It begins young with Moses, to resist the oppressor,
and ends not in old age, but desires to perish for the beloueds
preservation; calls infants in the street with wisdom to learn;
comfort the imprisoned with Abacucke; burieth the dead with Tobie; visits
the sick and possessed with our Savior: covers the multitude of offenses;
and shall find this last comsort, Come ye blessed: to which joy he bring us
that with his love from everlasting death has bought us.

Here ends the second Sermon.
THE CENSVRE of Christ upon the Answer.

By HENRY SMITH.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Gosson: and are to be sold at his shop by London
Bridge Gate.

THE CENSVRE OF Christ upon the Answer.
Now we are come to the answer of Christ unto the Lawiers Question: The
Question was, What must be done to inherit eternal life? The Answer is; Do
that which thou have said: that is; Love God above all, and thy neighbor as
thy self; and thou shall live, thou shall inherit eternal life. Where first
it is to be observed, that though this Lawier came with the mind to tempt
Christ, yet because he had truly alleged what was written in the Law, Deuteronomy.
6. Leuit. 19. our Savior Christ approoueth his answer, and commends him for
it: whereby we are taught to like and allow of those good things that we
see in any, though they be our enemies.

Many there are, that if their enemy be endued with many excellent virtues,
yet they will not acknowledge it, nor give him his due commendation: but rather
seek by all means to disable him, and disgrace him, and dispraise him behind
his back: If he be temperate and sober, then they say as it was said of
Iohn-Baptist, he has a devil. If he be sociable and familiar, then they say
as it was said of Christ, He is a glutton and a winebibber, Luke, 7. If he be
learned, they say as Festus said of Paul, Acts, 26. he is mad. If he be a
good housekeeper, they call him a Papist. If he be religious, they call him
Precisian. Yea, if he be a Prophet, yet if he tell the truth they account him
their enemy, Gal. 4. as Ahab termed Elias, 1. King. 21. And as the same Ahab
cared not to hear Micheas, because he hated him, 1. Kings, 22. so they
despise the Doctrine, and mislike the Sermon; because they hate the man that
preaches it.

These kind of people are like their father the devil, who both by his name and
nature is an acouser of the brethren, Revel. 12. He could not give Job a good
word, though he were a just man that feared God, Job, 1. and no marvel, for
he could not speak well of God himself, Genesis 3 But Christ is of another
mind, for though this Lawier were his tempter, yet does he allow his Answer;
so though a man be thine enemy, yet let him have his due: If he be learned,
report no less of him; If he be an honest man, defame him not; If he be
humble, say not he is proud; If he be liberal, say not he is miserable; If
he deal justly, say not he is unconscionable, and if he have any thing in him
that is praiseworthy, (as there is no man but has some good thing in him)
acknowledge it, report it, and commend him for it, though he be thine enemy.
But here again we see, that though Christ commend this Lawier for his
answer, yet does he not commend him for any thing else; to teach us, that as
we must give every man his due, so we must give no man more than his due. The
Lawyer had answered directly to Christ's demand; therefore Christ commends
his saying: but the Lawyer had not done so well as he had spoken; therefore
Christ does not commend his doing: so the words of many are very commendable,
but their works are most detestable. If you come to their sermons, you shall
hear them speak marvelous well, but if you look into their lives, you shall
find them far differing from their profession. They are like our Bells,
which can call the people together to the service of God; but cannot perform
any service unto God: so these men can give good counsel unto others, but they
cannot follow it; they can teach the people to know the will and pleasure of
God, but they go not about to do the will of God, that the people might be
moved by their example to do the same. And if you seem to mislike their
doings, then as Christ said of the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 23. They sit in
Moses chair, etc. so they answer for themselves; Do as we say, and not as
we do. A bad excuse, fit for so bad a cause. As if they should say; We would
have you to be godly, but we will not be godly, we would have you to be
saved, but we our selves will not be saved. How can their doctrine do any good,
that live not according to their doctrine? or how can the people think that
the doctrine is true, when they that preach it, live not thereafter. Will not
the people reason thus? If his doctrine were good, surely he would follow it?
If his life be good; surely he would teach us to live as he does. Therefore
whatsoever he says, we will not believe him, but as he does, so will we do,
and we hope to escape as well as he.

Thus with the one hand they build up the Church of God, and with the other
hand they pull it down: because they do more hurt by their bad example, than
they can do good with all their preaching. These are the ungodly, that the
Lord by his Prophet reprooueth, Psalm 50. Why dooest thou preach my laws
and take my words, etc. So long as Esaias was a man of polluted lips, the
office of preaching was not committed unto him, but when his lips were
cleansed, Esaias 6. then was he fit for that office and function. Even so, as
long as we delight in sin as much as any, we are not meet to reprove the
sins of other: but when we behave our selves as it becomes the ministers
of the Gospel, then have we commission to preach the Gospel, and to reprove
the sins of the people.

Therefore to a good Churchman (as you use to call us) two things are
necessary: the first is, to teach well: the second is to live well. for as we
are resembled to Salt, because we must season the people with sound and
wholesome doctrine; so are we resembled to the Sun, because we must shine
as lights in the world by our holy life. As John Baptist was the voice of a
crier, so he was a burning Lamp: as the Apostles were willed to teach and
baptize; so their lights were commanded to shine, that men seeing their good
works might glorify God.

Thirdly, we here may see, that truth is truth, and to be commended from
whomsoever it comes: for though this Lawier came to tempt Christ, yet because
he told the truth, Christ admits his answer, and commends him for it.
Whereby we have to learn to embrace and receive the truth by whomsoever it is
brought: for as a jewel is to be esteemed though it be found in a stinking
dunghill, so the truth is to be regarded, though it be found in a wicked man.

And last of all we here may see, that to be verified which was spoken of
Christ, Esa. 42. Mat. 12: A bruised reed shall he not break, etc. that is, he
shall not discourage any in the way of godliness. Though this Lawyer were
Christ's enemy, yet when he answered discreetly and directly out of the word
of God; Christ approoueth his answer, and exhorts him to the practice of
the same: whereby we have to learn to commend and encourage every man in his
well doing, and by all means to further them in their good beginnings. Praise
and honor are spurs to virtue; therefore if a man have done well, commend
him, and he will do better: but alas with us it is far otherwise, for if a
man have done amiss, it shall be often cast in his teeth: but if he have done
well, he shall never hear of it.

But let us go forward in the answer of Christ: It follows ( do this).
Having approved his saying: now he exhorts him unto doing; for it is not
enough to say well, or to know much, or to believe aright; but we must do
this; that is, we must love God and our neighbor; if we desire to live. Heaven
is not gotten with fair words, nor amorous looks, nor gold, nor silver, nor
gorgeous array; but with the fruits of a lively says: or (that I may use the
words of the Apostle Gal. 5.6.) By faith working through love. God will not
come to judge us at the last day, whether we were learned, or wise, or
eloquent, or wealthy, or honorable: but whether we have done those deeds of
mercy to his needy members. What shall it profit a man in the last hour of his
death, to have been eloquent, and excellent in all kind of learning; that he
has preached many notable and worthy sermons, if he have lived a lewd and
wicked life, and carried a corrupt conscience to his grave. In that terrible
day, when the books of all men's consciences shall be opened, Apocal. 20. and
every man's life shall be strictly examined; it shall go better with us, if
we have served God with a good conscience, then if we have been able to
dispute subtle questions: for at that day it shall be said to some that have
preached in the name of Christ; Depart from me, I know ye not, Mat. 7.

Now, as we shall not be saved for our preaching; no more shall you be saved
for your hearing: for God will have you to do as you hear, as well as he will
have us to do as we teach; if you look into all the scriptures; you shall
find. no promise made to hearers, nor to speakers, nor to readers; but to
believers, or to dooers. If ye ask God, who shall dwell in his holy
mountain, he says Psalm. 15. The man that walks uprightly; If you ask
Christ who shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, he says Matthew. 7. Not they
that cry Lord, Lord: but they which do the will of my father. If you ask him,
how you may come to heaven; he says, Mat. 19. Keep the commandments. If you
ask him who are blessed; he says, Luc. 11. Blessed are they that hear the
word of God and do it. If you ask an Angel who is blessed, he says, Reu.
22. Blessed are they which keep the words of this book. If you ask David, he
says, Psalm. 106. The man is blessed which keeps judgment and does
righteousness. If you ask Solomon; he says, Prou. 29. The man is blessed
which keeps the Law. If you ask Esaias, he says, Esaias 50. He which does this
is blessed. If you ask James, he says, Iam. 1. The dooer of the word shall be
blessed in his deed. And here; Do this, and thou shall live. Here is nothing
but doing to make us blessed: for as the works that Christ did, bare witness
that he was Christ, John 10. so the works that we do must bear witness
that we are Christians. But here some man may object and say; Is any man able
to do this that God requires; and if he be not, why then does God command
us that which we cannot perform? Herein almighty God deals with us, as a
father deals with his children; If a man have a son of seven years of
age, he will furnish him with bow and arrows, and lead him into the fields;
sets him to shoot at a mark that is twelve score off, promising to give him
some goodly thing, if he hit the mark; and though the father know that the
child cannot shoot so far: yet will he have him aim at a mark beyond his
reach, thereby to try the strength and forwardness of his child, and though
he shoot short, yet the father will encourage him. Even so almighty God has
furnished us with judgment and reason, as it were with certain artillery,
whereby we are able to distinguish between good and evil, and sent us into
this world, as it were into the open fields, and sets his law before us as a
mark, as David speaks; promising to give us the kingdom of heaven, if we
hit the same: and albeit he knows that we cannot hit this mark, that is,
keep the law which he has set before us, yet for the exercise of our faith,
and for the testifying of our duty and obedience toward him, he will always
have us be aiming at it: and though we come short of that duty and obedience
which he requires at our hands, yet does he accept and reward our good
endeavor, but if we stubbornely refuse to frame our selves after his will, then
may he justly be angry and displeased with us. Therefore though thou must not
perfectly keep the law of God: yet if thou endeavor thy self to the utmost of
thy power to observe the same, the Lord that works in us both the will and
the work, will accept the will for the work; and that which is wanting in us,
he will supply with his own righteousness.

It follows; And thou shall live. Here is the promise, even life eternal.
Among all earthly things, we count none so dear and precious as our life,
insomuch as we can be content to forgo any thing before our life: our blood
and our limbs we lose sometimes for the saving of this temporal life, which
is no life indeed, but rather a shadow, and the image of death. Now if we make
so much, and suffer so many things for the life of the body, which is so short
and momentany: how far greater things should we suffer for the salvation of
our soul, and for the gayning of that glorious and happy life* which shall
never end. Here Christ speaks not of any common life, but of life eternal;
which is the inheritance and seat of the blessed.

For seeing Christ must answer to the Lawiers Question, and his Question was
how he might inherit eternal life; when the Lawier had said what was written
in the Law, Christ answers Hoc fac and viues; as if he should say, Love God
and thy neighbor, and so thou shall inherit eternal life: this is the
assoiling of thy Question. Go to therefore dear brethren, and consider at how
small a rate or price of love, eternal life is to be purchased. If we take so
great pains, and undergo so many difficulties to pursue this mortal life;
what pains should we undertake to enjoy that immortal life? If God should bid
us go into a hot fiery Furnace, and cast our selves into the burning flames,
we ought to do it, that we might reign with Christ: But our gracious loving
Lord commands no such thing, but only commends unto us love, that we
may live. Our God is not as the gods of the Gentiles, which will have the
Parents slay their children, and offer them up in fire for a burnt sacrifice.
No, our God will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he convert and
live, Ezech. 8. O how gracious is the Lord unto us* which requires no more of
us but love, and yet requires us with no less than life, and that a glorious
and eternal life. Thus I have at length explained The Lawiers Question, and
the Answer of Christ unto the Question: wherein I have showed you one way to
come to heaven, which is to keep the Law of God, and this way we find most
hard and difficult. Another way there is by the death of Christ, and this every
man thinks most easy to find: But this I assure you, that who so ever does
not endeavor to walk in that old way, that is, to walk in the ways of the
Lord, shall never come to heaven by that new and living way Christ Jesus;
because as John says cap. 3.3. who so ever has this hope in him, purges
himself: That is; who so ever hops to be saved by the death of Christ, has
a care to keep himself from sin, and to walk in the commandments of the
Lord.

FINIS.

