A Preparatiue to Marriage.

The sum whereof was spoken at a Contract, and enlarged after.

Whereunto is annexed a Treatise of the Lords Supper, and another of Usurie.

BY HENRY SMITH.



Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin for Thomas Man, dwelling in Paternoster
row at the sign of the Talbot. 1591.

NOBILISSIMO VIRO GVILIELMO CEcilio, Equiti aurato, Baroni Burghleiensi, summo
Angliae Thesaurario, and Cantabrigiensis Academiae Cancellario, Henricus
Smithus haec tria pignota in grati animi testimonium consecrauit.

To the Reader.
BEcause sickness has restrained me from preaching, I am content to do any
good by writing. Happy is that Author which is in stead of other, that after
his Book is read, men need read no more of that matter. I go on a Theme
which many have trauersed before me prolixely, or cursorily, or barrenly: If I
Reuerendis. Couerdalu^ excipio.
have performed by study any more than the rest, let my reader judge, and give
glory to him which teaches by whom he will. What I have endeavored, my self
do feel, and others know. We are ignorant of many things for a few that we
understand: but I have bin always ashamed, that my writings should weigh
lighter for want of pains, which is the bane of Printing, and surfetteth the
Reader. Now I send thee like a Be to gather Honey out of slowers, and weeds.
Every Garden is furnished with others, and so is ours. Read, pray, and
med(...); thy profit shall be little in any book, unless thou read alone,
and unless thou read all. It is one of the births of my fainting, therefore
take it with a right hand, and if thou find any thing that does make thee
better, I repent not that others importunity has obtained it for thee.
Farewell. As Jacob blessed his sons when he left them, so now I Genesis 49. 1.
must leave my fruit to others, I pray God to bless it, that it may bring
forth fruit in other, and be the savor of life to 2. Cor. 2. 16.
all that read it.

Thine in Christ, H. S.

The principal contents of this Treatise.
THE cause of contracts before Marriage. Fol. 2. Three honors given of God to
Marriage. Fol. 3. Three causes of Marriage. Fol. 13. Whether Ministers may marry.
Fol. 19. Whether an old man may marry a young woman, and contra. Fol. 14.
Whether Protestants may marry Papists. Fol. 47. Whether Children may marry
without Parents consent. Fol. 45. Whether Husbands may strike their Wives.
Fol. 69. Whether the use of Marriage be sin. Fol. 23. Whether Mothers should
nurse their Children. Fol. 99. Five marks in the choice of a Husband or Wife.
Fol. 35. The Husbands duties. Fol. 62. The Wives duties. Fol. 74. Their
duties to their Servants. Fol. 68. Their duties to their Children. Fol. 77. Of
Stepmothers. Fol. 105. Of Diuorcement. Fol. 107.
Other observations that fall in handling the parts.
Marriage, the first ordinance of God, and calling of men. Fol. 4. Christ's first
miracle at a Marriage. Fol. 5. Three Marriages of Christ. Fol. 6. By Marriage, the
Woman's curse turned to two blessings. Fol. 6. A note of Adams sleep. Fol. 10.
Another application of his rib, whereof was made the woman. Fol. 11. The day of
Marriage counted the ioyfullest day in man's life. Fol. 11. A good Wife like
little Zoar which Lot sled to from Sodom. Fol. 12. Without Marriage all things
should be vain. Fol. 14. Fornicators like the Devil. Fol. 18. No Bastard
prospered but Iiphtah. Fol. 19. A married sornicator, like a Gentleman these.
Fol. 19. A Wife is the poor man's treasure, wherein only he matcheth the rich.
Fol. 26. Two spies for a Wise, Discretion, and Fancy. Fol. 27. The Wife must
not only be godly, but sit. Fol. 28. A memorable saying of one that light upon
a sit Wife. Fol. 32. The first beginning of the Ring in Marige. Fol. 31. Why
Marriage does come of Nuptiae. Fol. 37. Maids must speak like an Echo. Fol.
38. A lesson for the married, drawn from the name of Wedding garment. Fol. 52.
The Man and Wife, like cock and dam. Fol. 54. Marriage compounded of two loves.
Fol. 55. The best policy in Marriage is to begin well. Fol. 58. They must
learn one another nature. Fol. 59. A sweet example, teaching how coples
shall never fall out. Fol. 61. Man, and Wife, like two partners. Fol. 66.
Abraham bid to leave all but his Wife. Fol. 66. Why Wives are called Huswiues
Fol. 79. When the man is away, the Wife must live like a Widow. Fol 81. Why a
Wife was called the Contrary to a Husband. Fol. 82. The cause why many despise
their Husbands. Fol. 86. Many observations upon Seruanntes. Fol. 88. The
Master must correct his men, and the Mistress her maids. Fol. 97. Children
like mediators, between a man and his Wife. Fol. 98. Adultery like the
disease of Marriage, and diuorcement like the remedy. Fol. 107. Why Adultery
should dissolve Marriage more than any thing else. Fol. 110. A sentence for
the Married to think upon. Fol. 111.
A Preparatiue to Marriage.
YOu are come hither to be contracted in the Lord, that is, of two to be made
one: for as GOD has knit the bones and sinews together for the strengthening
of the body, so he has knit man and woman together for the strengthening of
this life, because two are stronger than one: and Eccle. 9. 9.
therefore when GOD made the Woman for Man, he said, I will make him a help:
showing that man Genesis 2. 18.
is stronger by his Wife. Every Marriage before it be knit should be
contracted, as it is showed in Exo. 22. 16. and Deuteronomy. 22. 28. which Exo. 22.
16, Deu. 22. 28
stay between the Contract and the Marriage, was the time of longing for their
affections to settle in, because the deferring of that which we love does
kindle the desire, which if it came easily and speedily to us, would make us
set less by it. Therefore we read how Joseph and Marie were contracted Math.
1. 18.
before they were married. In the That is between the Contract and the
Marriage. Luc. 1. 27. and 42. and 49. etc.
Contract Christ was conceived, and in the Marriage Christ was borne, that he
might honor both estates, Virginity with his Conception, and Marriage with
his Birth. You are contracted but to be married, therefore I pass from
Contracts to speak of Marriage, What Marriage is.
which is nothing else but a communion of life between man and woman, joined
together according to the ordinance of God. First I will show the excellency
The parts of this treatise.
of Marriage: then the institution of it: then the causes of it: then the
choice of it: then the duties of it: and lastly the diuorcement of it.

Well might Paul say, Marriage Heb. 13. 4.
is honorable, for God has honored it himself. It is honorable Three
excellencies of Marriage.
for the author, honorable for the time, and honorable for the place. Whereas
all other ordinances Act 7. 53.
were appointed of GOD by the hands of men, or the hands of Angels, Heb. 2. 2.
Marriage was ordained by Genesis 2. 22.
God himself, which cannot err. No man nor Angel brought the Wife to the
Husband but GOD himself: so Marriage has more honor of God in this, than all
other ordinances of God beside, because he solemnized it himself.

Then it is honorable for the Marriage the first ordinance of God.
time, for it was the first ordinance which GOD instituted, even the first
thing which he did after man and woman were created, and that in the state of
innocence before either had sinned, like the finest flower which will not
thrive but in a clean ground. Before man had any other calling he was called
to be a Husband: therefore it has the honor of antiquity above all other
ordinances, because it was ordained first, and is the ancientest calling of men.

Then it is honorable for the place; for whereas all other ordinances 3.
were instituted out of Paradise, Marriage was instituted in Paradise in the
happiest place, to signify how happy they are which marry in the Lord, they
do not only marry one another, but Christ is married unto them, and so Marriage
has the honor of the place above all other ordinances to, because it was
ordained in Paradise. As God the Father honored Marriage, so did God the Son,
which is called the seed of the Genesis 3. 1^.
woman: and therefore Marriage was so honored amongst women because of this
seed, that when Elizabeth brought forth a son, Luke 1. 25.
she said, that God had taken away her rebuke; counting it the honor of women
to bear children, and by consequence, the honor of women to be married; for
the children which are borne out of Marriage are the dishonor of women, and
called by the shameful name of Bastards. Deuteronomy. 23. 2.


As Christ honored Marriage with his birth, so he honored it Christ's first
miracle at a Marriage. John. 2. 8.
with his miracles: for the first miracle which Christ did, he wrought at a
Marriage in Chanaan, where he turned their water into wine: so, if Christ be at
your Marriage, that is, if you marie in christ, your water shall be turned into
wine, that is, your peace, and your rest, and your joy, and your happiness shall
begin with your Marriage; but if you marry not in Christ, then your wine shall
be turned into water, that is, you shall live worse hereafter than you did
before. As he honored it with miracles, so he honored it with praises: for he
compares the kingdom Mat. 22. 2.
of God to a Wedding, and he compares holiness to a Wedding Verse. 11.
garment. And in the 5. of Canticles he is wedded himself. Cant. 5. 9.


We read in Scripture of three Three Marriages of Christ.
Marriages of Christ. The first was when Christ and our nature met together. The
second is, when 1. 2.
Christ and our soul join together. The third is, the union of 3.
Christ and his Church. These are Christ's 3. wives. As Christ honoreth Marriage;
so do Christ's Disciples: for John calls the Conjunction Revel. 19 7.
of Christ and the faithful, a Marriage. And in Revel. 21. 9. Revel. 21. 9.
the Church has the name of a Bride, whereas Heresy is called a Harlot.
Further, for the honor of Reave. 17. 1.
Marriage, Paul shows how by it By Marriage, the woman's curse turned to two
blessings. Genesis 3. 16.
the curse of the woman was turned into a blessing; for the woman's curse was
the pains which she should suffer in her travail. Now by Marriage this curse
is turned into a blessing; for children are the first blessing in all the
Scripture. Genesis 1. 28.
And therefore Christ says, that so soon as the mother sees a man child
borne into the world, John. 16. 21.
she forgets all her sorrows, as though her curse were turned into a
blessing. And further, Paul says, that by bearing of children, 1. Timo. 2. 15.
if she continue For those pains will try her says
in faith and patience, she shall be saved, as though one curse were turned
into two blessings. For first she shall have children, and after she shall have
salvation. What a merciful God Note.
have we, whose curses are blessings? Who would have thought that God had hid
a blessing in his curse? So he loved our parents when he punished them, that
he could scarce punish them for love, and therefore a comfort was folded in
his judgment.

To honor Marriage more, it is said, that God took a rib out of Adams side,
and thereof built the Gen 2. 22.
woman. He is not said to make man a wife, but to build him a wife,
signifying, that man and wife make as it were one house together, and that the
building was not perfect, until the woman was made as well as the man: therefore
if the building be not perfect now, it must be destroyed again.

Before God made the woman, A note of Adams sleep. Genesis 2. 21.
it is said, that he cast the man into a sleep, and in his sleep he took a
rib out of his side, and as he made the man of earth, so he made the woman of
bone, while Adam was a sleep. This does teach us two things: As the first
Adam was a figure of the second Adam, 1. Cor. 15. 22. and 45.
so the first Adams sleep was a figure of the second Adams sleep, and the
first Adams spouse was a figure of the second Adams spouse. That is, as in the
sleep of Adam, Eve was borne; so in the sleep of Christ the Church was borne:
as a bone came out of the first Adams side, so blood came out of the second
Adams side. As Adams spouse received life in his sleep; so Christ's spouse
received life in his sleep: that is, the death of Christ is the life of the
Church; for the Apostle calls Death a sleep, but Christ which dyed is called
Life, showing that in his Ephesians. 5 14. John. 14. 6.
death we live. Secondly, this sleep which the man was cast into, while his
wife was created, does teach A note of Adams sleep.
us that our affections, our lusts, and our concupicenses, should sleep while
we go about this action. As the man slept while his wife was making, so our
flesh should sleep while our wife is choosing, least as the love of Venison
wan Isaak to bless one for another, so Genesis 27. 3.
the love of gentry, or riches, or beauty make us take one for another.

To honor Marriage more yet, or rather to teach the married how to honor one
another, it is said, A note of Adams ribbe. Genesis 2. 22. Ephe. 5. 23.
that the wife was made of the husbands rib: not of his head, for Paul calls
the husband the wives head: nor of the foot, for The Fathers observation.
he must not set her at his foot: the servant is appointed to serve, and the
wife to help. If she must not match with the head, nor stoop at the foot,
where shall he set her then? He must set her at his heart, and therefore she
which should lie in his bosom, was made in his bosom, and should be as close
to him as his ribb of which she was fashioned. Lastly, in all Nations the day
of Marriage was reputed the ioyfullest day in all their life, and is reputed
still of all, as though the Sun of happiness began that day to shine upon us,
when a good wife is brought unto us. Therefore one says, that Marriage does
signify Merriage, because a playfellow is come to make our age merry.

Solomon considering al these excellencies, as though we were more indebted to
God for this tha^ other temporal gifts, says: House and riches are the
inheritance of the fathers: but a prudent wife comes Pro. 14. 14.
of the Lord. House and riches are given of God, and all things else, and yet
he says, house and riches are given of parents, but a good wife is given of
God: as though a good wife were such a gift, as we should account from God
alone, and accept as if he should send us a present from heaven, with this
name Thus Adam does. Genesis 2.
written upon it, The gift of God.

Beasts are ordained for food, and clothes for warmth, and flowers for
pleasure, but the wife is ordained for man, like little Zoar, a City of refuge
to fly to in all his Genesis 29. 20.
troubles, and there is no peace comparable unto her, but the peace of
conscience.

Now it must needs be, that Marriage, which was ordained of such an excellent
Author, and in such a happy place, and of such an ancient time, and after
such a notable order, must likewise have special causes for the ordenance of
it. Therefore the holy Ghost does show us three causes of this Union. One is,
the propagation Three causes of Marriage. Genesis 1. 27.
of children, signified in that when Moses says, He created them male and
female, not both male, nor both female, but one male, and the other female, as
if he created them fit to propagate other. And therefore when he had created
them so, to show that propagation of children is one end of Marriage, he said
unto them, Increase and Genesis 1. 28.
multiply, that is, bring forth children, as other creatures bring forth their
kind. For this cause Marriage is called Matrimony, which signifies Mothers,
because Why Marriage is called Matrimony.
it makes them Mothers, which were Virgins before: and is the seminary of the
world, without which, all things should Without Marriage, all things should be
vain.
be in vain, for want of men to use them, for God reserueth the great City to
himself, and this suburbs he has set out to us, which are regents by sea and
by land. If children be such a chief end of Marriage, then it seems, that
where there can be no hope of children, for age or other causes, there Marriage
This is signified in Deuteronomy. 23. 1.
is not so lawful, because it is maimed of one of his ends, and seems rather
to be sought for wealth, or for lust, than for this blessing of children. It is
not good grafting of an old head upon young shoulders, for they will never
bear it willingly but grudgingly.

Twice the Wife is called, the Wife of thy youth, as though when Prou. 5. 18.
men are old, the time of Marrying Mala. 2. 18.
were past. Therefore God makes such unequal matches so ridiculous every
where, that they please none but the parties themselves, until the time of
their dotage be expired.

The second cause is to avoid The second cause.
fornication: this Paul signifies, when he says, For the avoiding of 1. Cor.
7. 2.
fornication, let every man have his own wife. He says not for avoiding of
adultery, but for avoiding of fornication, showing, that fornication is
unlawful too, which the Papists make lawful, in mainteining Papists Stews.
their Stews, as a stage for fornicators to play upon, and a Sanctuary to
defend them, like Absoloms Tent, which was spread upon the top of the house,
that all 2. Sam. 16. 22.
Israel might see how he defiled his fathers concubines.

For this cause, Malachi says, Mal. 2. 15.
that God did create but one Woman for the man, he had power to create more, but
to show that he would have him stick to one, therefore he created of one
ribbe but one wife for one husband: and in the Arc, there were no more women
than men. But four 1. Pet. 3. 20.
wives for four husbands, although it was in the beginning of the world, when
many wives might seem necessary to multiply mankind. If any might have a
dispensation herein, it seems the King might be privileged before any other,
because of succession to the Crown, if his wife should happen to be barren.
And yet the King is forbidden to take many wives in Deuteronomy. 17. 17. as well as
Deuteronomy. 17. 17. 1. Tim. 3. 2.
the Minister in 1. Timo. 3. 2. showing, that the danger of the state, does not
counteruaile the danger of fornication. For this cause we read of none but
wicked Lamech before the Flood, that had more Genesis 4. 23.
wives than one, whom Iouinian calls a monster, because he made 2. ribs of
one. And another says, that the name of his second wife does signify a
shadow, because she was not a wife, but the shaddowe of a wife: for this cause
the Scripture never bids man to love his wives, but to love his Wife, and
says, They shall be two in one flesh, not three, nor Math. 9. 5.
four, but only two. For this cause, Solomon calls the whorish woman a
strange woman, to show that she should be a stranger to us, and we should be
strange to her. Prou. 2. 16.
For this cause, children which are borne in marriage, are called Liberi, which
signifies free borne: and they which are borne out of marriage, are called
Bastards, that is, base borne, like the Mule which is engendered of an Ass and
a Mare. Genesis 36. 24.
Therefore adulterers are likened Fornicators like the Devil. Mat. 13. 25.
to the Devil, which sowed another man's ground, other sow for a Harvest, but
they sow that which they dare not reap. Therefore children borne in Wedlock
were counted Gods blessing, because they come by virtue of that Psalm. 128. 4.
blessing, Increase and multiply. But Genesis 1. 28.
before Adam and Eve were married, God never said Increase, showing, that he
did curse and not bless such increase. Therefore we read not in all the
Scripture Bastards.
of one Bastard that came to any good, but only Iphtah, and to Iud. 11. 1.
show that no inheritance did belong They might be saved, but they had the
mark of a curse.
to them in heaven, they had no inheritance in earth, neither were counted of
the congregation, as other were. Deuteronomy. 23. 2.

Now, because Marriage was appointed for a remedy against fornication,
therefore the law of God inflicted a sorer punishment Leuit. 20. 10. Deuteronomy. 22.
22.
upon them which did commit uncleanness after Marriage, than upon him which
was not married, because he sinned, although he Married fornicators.
had the remedy of sin, like a rich these which steals, and has no need.

Now if Marriage be a remedy against the sin of fornication, The marriage of
Ministers.
then unless Ministers may commit the sin of fornication, it seems that
they may use the remedy as well as other: for as it is better for one man to
marry 1. Cor. 7. 9.
than to burn, so it is better for all men to marry than to burn; and
therefore Paul says, Marriage is Hebr. 13 4.
honorable amongst all men. And again, for the avoiding of fornication, 1.
Corin. 7.
let every man have his Wife. And as though he did forsee, that some would
except the Minister in time to come, in the first of Timo. 1. Tim. 3. 2.
3. 2. he speaks more precisely of the Ministers wife, than of any other,
saying, Let him be the husband of one Wise: and least ye should say that by one
wife, he means one Benefice like the Papists. He expounds himself in the
fourth verse, and says, that he must be one that can rule his house well, and
his children. Sure God would not have these children to be Bastards, and
therefore it is like that he aloweth the Minister a Wife. Therefore Paul said
well, that he 1. Cor. 7. 6.
had no commandment for Virginity, for Virginity cannot be commanded,
because it is a special gift, but not a special gift to Ministers, and
therefore they are not to be bound more tha^ other. A peculiar gift may not be
made a general rule, because none can use it, but they which have it. And
therefore in 1. Cor. 7. 17. he says, As God 1. Cor. 7. 17.
has distributed to every man, so let him walk. That is, if he have not the
gift of continency, he is bound to marry: and therefore Paul commands in
the seventh verse, whether he be Minister or other, If they cannot abstain,
let them marry, as though they tempted God if they married not. The Law was
general, It is not good for man to be Genesis 2. 1^
alone, exempting one order of men no more than an other. And again Christ
speaking of Chastity says, All men cannot receive this thing. Math. 19. 11.
Therefore unless we know, that this order of men can receive this thing:
Christ forbids to bind them more than other, and therefore as the Priests were
married that taught the Law, so Christ chose Apostles which were married, to
preach the Gospel. Therefore the doctrine of Papists, is the doctrine of
Devils, for Paul calls the forbidding of marriage, the 1. Tim. 4. 3.
doctrine of Devils, a fit title for all their books.

Lastly, if Marriage be a remedy against sin, then Marriage it self is no
sin: for if Marriage it self were a sin, we might not marry for any cause,
because we must not do the least evil that the greatest (...). 3. 8.
good may come of it: and if Marriage be not a sin, then the Be not thou
vain, and these words will not be offensive.
duties of Marriage are no sin, that is, the secreate of Marriage is not
evil, and therefore Paul says not only Marriage is honorable, but the bed is
honorable, that is, even Hebr. 13. 4.
the action of Marriage is as lawful, as Marriage. Besides Paul says, Let the
Husband give unto the Wife 1. Cor. 7. 3.
due benevolence: here is a commandment to yield this duty: that which is
commanded, is lawful; and not to do it, is a breach of the commandment.
Therefore Marriage was instituted before any sin was, to show that there is no
sin in it if it be not abused: but because this is rare, therefore after
women were delivered, God Leuit. 12. 4. 5. etc.
appointed them to be purified, showing, that some stain or other does creep
into this action, which had need to be repented, and therefore when they
prayed, Paul would not have them come together, 1. Cor. 7. 5.
least their prayers should be hindered.

The third cause is, to avoid the The third cause.
inconvenience of solitariness, signified in these words, It is not good for
man to be alone, as though he Genesis 2.
had said, this life would be miserable and irksome, and unpleasant to man, if
the Lord had not given him a wife to company his troubles. If it be not good
for man to be alone, then it is good for man to have a fellow: therefore as God
created a pair of all other kinds, so he created a pair of this kind. We
say that one is none, because he cannot be fewer than one, he can not be lesser
than one, he can not be weaker than one, and therefore the Wise man says, Woe
to him which is alone, that is, he which Eccl. 4. 10.
is alone, shall have woe. Thoughts and cares, and fears, will come to him,
because he has none to comfort him, as thieves steal in when the house is
empty; like a Turtle, which has lost his mate, like one leg when the other
is cut off, like one wing when the other is clipped, so had the man bin, if the
woman had not bin joined to him: therefore for mutual society, God coupled
two together, that the infinite troubles which lie upon us in this world,
might be eased, with the comfort and help one of an other, and that the poor
in the world might have some comfort as well as the rich: for the poor man
(says Solomon) is Pro. 19. 7. Pro. 27. 10.
forsaken of his own brethren, yet God has provided one comforter for him,
like Ionathans armourbearer, 1. Sam. 14. 7.
that shall never forsake A Wife is the poor man's riches
him, that is another self, which is the only commodity as I may term it,
wherein the poor do match the rich, without which, some persons should have
no helper, no comforter, no friend at all.

But as it is not good to be alone, so Solomon shows, That it is better Prou.
21. 9.
to be alone, than to dwell with a froward Wise, which is like a quotidian
ague, to keep his patience in ure. Such furies do haunt some men, like Saules
spirit, as though 1. Sam. 16. 14.
the Devil had put a sword into their hands to kill themselves, therefore
choose whom thou may enjoy, or live alone still, and thou shall not repent
thy bargain.

That thou may take and keep without repentance, now we will speak of the
choice, which some call the way to good wives dwelling, 3. The choice.
for these flowers grow not on every ground: therefore they say, that in wiuing
and striving, a man should take counsel of all the world. As Moses considered
what spies he sent into Chanaan, so thou Deuteronomy. 1. 23. 24.
must regard whom thou sendest to spy out a Wife for thee. Two spies for a
Wife.
Discretion is a wary spy, but fancy is a rash spy, and likes whom she
will mislike again.

In Zachary, Sin is called a Zach. 5. 7.
woman, which shows, that women have many faults, therefore he which chooses
of them, had need have judgment, and make an Anatomy of their bodies and
minds by squire and rule, before he say, This shall be mine. For the wisest man
says, I have found one man of a thousand, but a woman Eccle. 7. 30.
among them all have I not sound, as though there were a dearth of good women
over the world.

For help hereof in 1. Cor. 7. 39. we are taught to marry in the Lord, then
we must choose in the Lord too: therefore we must begin our Marriage where
Solomon began his wisdom. Give unto thy servant an understanding heart: so 1.
King. 3. 9
give unto thy servant an understanding wife. If Abraham's servant prayed the
Lord to prosper his business Genesis 24. 12.
when he went about to choose a wife for another, how should thou pray when
thou go about a wife for thy self, that thou may say after, My lot is
fallen in a pleasant ground. To direct thee to a right choice herein, the holy
Ghost gives thee two rules, Godliness and Fitnes: Godliness, because Godly and
fit.
our Spouse must be like Christ's spouse, that is, graced with gifts and
imbrodered with virtues, as if we did marry Holiness her self. For the
marriage of man and woman, is resembled of the Apostle to the Marriage of Christ
and Ephesians. 5. 29.
the Church. Now, the Church is called Holy, because she is holy. In the 6.
Cantie. she is called Undefiled, Cant. 6. 8.
because she is undefiled. In the 45. Psalm she is called fair Psalm. 45. 9.
within, because her beauty is inward: so our Spouse should be holy,
undefiled, and fair within. As GOD respects the heart, so 1. Sam. 16. 7.
we must respect the heart, because that must love, and not the face.
Covetousness has ever been a suter to the richest, and pride to the highest,
and lightness to the fa^rest, and for revenge hereof his joy has ever ended
with his wives youth, which took her beauty with it. The goods of the world
are good, and the goods of the body are good, but the goods of the mind are
better. As Paul commends Faith, and Hope, and Charity, but says the
greatest of 1. Cor. 13. 13.
these is Charity: so I may commend beauty, and riches, and godliness, but the
best of these is godliness, because it has the things which it wants, and
makes every state alike with her gift of contentation.

Secondly, the mate must be fit: A sit Wise.
it is not enough to be virtuous, but to be suitable; for diverse women have
many virtues, and yet do not fit with some men; and diverse men have many
virtues, and yet do not fit to some women: and therefore we see many times,
even the godly couples to jar when they are married, because there is some
unfitness between them which makes odds. What is odds but the contrary to
even? Therefore make them even (says one) and there will be no odds. From
hence came the first use of the Ring in Weddings, to represe^t The ceremony is
not approved, but the invention declared.
this euennes: for if it be straighter than the finger it will pinch, and if it
be wider than the finger it will fall of; but if it be fit, it neither pincheth
nor slippeth: So they which are like strive not, but they which are unlike, as
fire and water. Therefore one observes, that concord is nothing but likeness,
and that all strife is for unfitness: as in things when they fit not together,
and in persons when they suite not one another.

How was GOD pleased when 1. Sam. 2. 35.
he had found a King according to his own heart? So shall that man be pleased
which finds a wife according to his own heart, whether he be rich or poor,
his peace shall afford him a cheerful life, and teach him to sing, In love
is no lack. Therefore a godly man in our time thanked the Lord that The saying
of a godly man.
he had not only given him a godly wife, but a fit wife: for he said not that
she was the wisest, nor the holiest, nor the humblest, nor the modestest wife
in the world, but the fittest wife for him in the world, which every man should
think when that knot is tied, or else so often as he sees a better, he will
wish that his choice were to make again. As he did thank God for sending him
a fit wife, so the unmarried should pray God to send them a fit wife: for if
they be not like, they will not like.

This fitness is commended by the holy Ghost in two words: one is in the 2. of
Genesis and the other is Genesis 2. 18. 2. Cor. 6. 14.
in the 2. Cor. 6. 14. That in Gene. is Meet: God says, I will make man a
help meet for him. Showing, that a wife cannot help well, unless she be meet.
Further, it shows that man is such an excellent creature, that no creature
was like unto him, or meet for him till the woman was made. This meetnesse GOD
shows again in the 22. verse, where Moses says, that of Genesis 2. 22.
the ribbe which was taken out of man God built the woman: signifying, that as
one part of the building does meet and fit with another; so the wife should
meet and fit with the husband, that as they are called couples, so they may be
called paires, that is, like as a pair of gloves, or a pair of hose are like;
so man and wife should be like, because they are a pair of friends. If thou be
learned, choose one that loves knowledge: if thou be Martial, choose one that
loves prowess: if thou must live by thy labor, choose one that loves
busbandrie: for unless her mind stand with thy vocation, thou shall neither
inioye thy wife, nor thy calling.

That other word in the 2. Cor. 6. 14. is Yoke, there Marriage is called a Yoke.
Paul says, Be not unequally yoked. If Marriage be a yoke, then they which
draw in it must be fit, like two Oxen which draw the yoke together, or else all
the burden will lie upon one. Therefore they are called yoke fellows too, to
show that they which draw Phil. 4. 3.
this yoke must be fellows. As he which sows seed, chooses a fit ground,
because they say, it is good grafting upon a good stock: so he which will have
godly children must choose a godly wife: for like Mother (says Ezechiel) like
Ezekiel. 16. 44.
daughter. Now, as the Trauailer has marks in his way that he may proceed
aright: so the suitor has marks in his way that he may choose right.

There be certain signs of this Five rules in the choice of a good wife.
fitnes, and godliness, both in the man and the woman. If thou will know a
godly man, or a godly woman, thou must mark five things; the report, the
looks, the speech, the apparel, and the companions, which are like the pulses
that show whether we be well or ill. The report, because as the market 1.
goes, so they say the market men talk. A good man commonly Psalm. 112. 6 Pro.
107. Mar. 14. 9.
has a good name, because a good name is one of the blessings which GOD
promises to good men, but a good name is not to be praised from the wicked:
and therefore Christ says, Cursed are you when all men speak well of you:
that Luc. 6. 26.
is, when evil men speak well of you, because this is a sign that you are of
the world, for the world likes Ioh. 15. 19.
and praises her own. Yet as Christ said, Who can accuse me of sin? So it
Ioh. 8. 46.
should be said of us, not who can accuse me of sin? but who can accuse me
of this sin, or who ca^ accuse me of that sin? That is, who can accuse me
of swearing? who ca^ accuse me of dissembling? who can accuse me of
fornication? No man can say this of his thought, but every one should say it of
the act, like Zachariah and Elizabeth, Luke 1 6.
which are called unblameable before men, because none could accuse them of
open sins.

The next sign is the look, for 2.
Solomon says, Wisdom is in the face Eccl. 8. 7.
of a man: so godliness is in the face of a man, and so folly is in the face of
a man, and so wickedness is in the face of a man. And therefore it is said in
Esaiah 3. 9. The trial of their countenance testifies against them. As though
their looks could speak. One says well, a modest man dwelles at the sign of
a modest countenance, and an honest woman dwells at the sign of an honest
face, which is like the gate of the temple that was called Beautiful: Act. 3.
2.
showing, that if the entry be so beautiful, within is great beauty.

To show how a modest countenance, and womanly shamefastness, do commend a
chaste wife, it is observed that the word Nuptiae, which signifies the Marriage
of the woman, does declare the manner of her Marriage: for it imports a
covering, because the Virgins which should be married, when they came to their
husbands, for modesty and shamefastnes did cover their faces: as we read of
Rebeccah, which so soon as she Genesis 24. 65.
saw Isaac, and knew that he should be her husband, she cast a veil before
her face, showing that modesty should be learned before Marriage, which is the
dowry that God adds to her portion.

The third sign is her speech, or rather her silence; for the orname^t (...).
of a woman is silence: and therefore the law was given to the man rather than
to the woman, to show To Adam first, and to Moses after.
that he should be the teacher, and she the hearer. As the Echo answers
Maids must speak like an Echo.
but one word for many which are spoken to her; so a maids answer should be
a word, as though she sold her breath. The eye and the speech are the minds
Glasses; for out of the abundance of Math. 12. 34.
the heart (says Christ) the mouth speaks: as though by the speech we might
know what abounds in the heart: and therefore he says, By thy words thou
shall be justified, Math. 12. 36.
and by thy words thou shall be condemned. That is, thou shall be justified
to be wise, or thou shall be condemned to be foolish; thou shall be
justified to be sober, or thou shall be condemned to be rash; thou shall be
justified to be humble, or thou shall be condemned to be proud; thou shall be
justified to be loving, or thou shall be condemned to be envious. Therefore
Solomon says, A fools lips are Prou. 18. 7.
asnare to his own soul. Snares are made for other, but this snare catches a
man's self, because it bewraieth his folly, and causes his trouble, and
brings him into discredit. Contrariwise, The heart of the wise (says
Solomon) guides his Prou. 17. 23. Eccl. 12. 10.
mouth wisely, and the words of his mouth have grace. Now, to show that this
should be one mark in the choice of thy Wife, Solomon describing a right
Wife, says, She opens her mouth with wisdom, and Pro. 31. 26.
the law of grace is in her tongue. As Prou. 19. 15. Number. 19. 15.
the open vessels were counted unclean; so account that the open mouth has
much uncleanness.

The fourth sign is the apparel: 4.
for as the pride of the Glutton is noted, in that he went in purple every
Luke 16. 19.
day; so the humility of John is noted in that he went in hairecloath Mar. 1.
6.
every day. A modest woman is known by her sober attire, as the Prophet Eliah
was known by his rough garment. Look not 2. King. 1. 8
for better within, than thou see without; for every one seems better than
he is, if the face be vanity, the heart is pride. He which bids thee
abstain from 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.
the show of evil, would have thee to abstain from those wives which have
the shows of evil: for it is hard to come in the fashion, and not to be in
the abuse. And therefore Paul says, Fashion not your selves Romans 12. 2.
like unto this world: as though the fashions of me^ did declare of what side
they are.

The fifth sign is the company: 5.
for birds of a feather will fly together, and fellows in sin will be
fellows in league, as young Rehoboam 1. King. 12. 8.
chose young companions. The tame beasts will not keep with the wild, nor the
clean with the leprous. If a man ca^ be known by nothing else, then he may be
known by his companions; for like will to like, as Solomon says, Prou. 1. 11.
thieves call one another. Therefore when David left iniquity, he said, Away
from me al ye that work Psalm. 6. 8.
iniquity. Showing, that a man never abandoneth evil, until he abandon
evil company; for no good is concluded in this parliament. Therefore choose
such a companion of thy life as has chosen company like thee before: for they
which did choose such as loved profane companio^s before, in a while were
drawn to be profane too, that their wives might love them. When these rules
are observed, they may join together and say, as Laban and Bethuel said This
comes of the Lord, therefore Genesis 24. 50.
we will not speak against it. How happy are those in whom Faith, and Love,
and Godliness are married together, before they marry themselves? For none of
these Martial, and clowdie, and whining Marriages can say that Godliness was
invited to their Bridal; and therefore the blessings which are promised to
godliness do fly from them.

Now in this choice, are two questions. First, whether children may marry
without their parents Parents consent in marriage.
consent: and the second, whether they may marry with Papists or Atheists,
etc. Touching the first, God says, Honor thy father and thy Exodus 20.
mother. Now, wherein can thou honor them more, than in this honorable
action, to which they have preserved thee, and brought thee up, which
concerns the state of thy whole life? Again, in the first institution of
Marriage, when there was no Father to give consent, then our heavenly Father
gave his consent: God supplied the place of the Father, and brought Genesis 2. 22.
his Daughter unto her Husband, and ever since, the Father after the same
manner, has offered his Daughter unto the Husband.

Beside, there is a Law, that if a man deflowre a Virgin, he shall Exodus 22.
(...)
marry her: but if the Father of the Virgin do not like of the Marriage, then
he shall pay unto her the dowry of Virgins, that is, so much as her Virginity
is esteemed, so that the Father might allow the Marriage, or forbid it.

Again, there is a Law, that if Number. 30. 6.
any free man, or free woman make a vow, it must be kept. But if a Virgin make
a vow, it should not be kept, unless her Father approve it, because she is not
free: therefore if she did vow to marry, yet the Father has power by this Law
to break it. Therefore the Law speaks unto the Father saying, Thou shale
not take a Wife for Deuteronomy 7. 3.
thy son of strangers. Therefore Paul speaks to the Father, If 1. Cor. 7.
38.
thou give thy daughter to marriage, thou do well: therefore Jobs children
Job. 1. 3. and 10.
are counted part of Jobs substance, showing, that as a man has the
disposition of his own substance, so he has the disposition of his own
children. Therefore in Math. 22. 30. the Wife is said to be bestowed in
marriage, which signifies, that some did give her beside her self: Therefore
it is said, that Jacob served Laban, that Genesis 29. 18.
Laban might give him his daughter to wife. Therefore Saul says 1. Sam. 18.
17.
to David, I will give thee my eldest daughter to wife: therefore it is said,
that Judah took a wife Genesis 28. 6.
to Er his son. Therefore Sichem says to his Father, Get me this Genesis 34. 9.
maid to Wife. Therefore in the marriage of Isaak, we see Abraham's servant in
the place of Isaak, and Rebeccah the maid and her parents, Genesis 24. 51. 52. 53.
sitting in parliament together: therefore Sampson, though he had found a maid
to his liking, Iud. 14. 2.
yet he would not take her to wife, before he had told his parents, and craved
their assent. It is a sweet wedding, when the Father and the Mother bring a
blessing to the feast, and a heavy union which is cursed the first day that it
is knit. The parents commit their children to Tutors, but themselves are more
than Tutors. If children may not make other contracts without their good will,
shall they contract marriage which have nothing to maintain it after, unless
they return to beg of them whom they skorned before? Will you take your
fathers money, and will you not take his instruction? Marriage has need of
many counselors, and do thou count thy Father too many? which is like the
foreman of thy instructers. If you mark what kind of youths they be, which have
such haste, that they dare not stay for their parents advice, they are such as
hunt for nothing but beauty, and for punishment hereof, they marry to
beggerie, and lose their Father and Mother for their Wife: therefore honor thy
parents in this, as thou would that thy children should honor thee.

The second question is answered of Paul, when he says, Be not Marriage with
Papists. etc.
unequally yoked with Infidells. As we should not be yoked with Infidells, so
we should not be yoked with Papists, and so we should not be yoked with
Atheists, for that also is to be unequally yoked, unless we be Atheists too.
As the Jews might not marry with the Genesis 24. 3. Exo. 34. 16. Genesis 28. 1.
Mal. 2. 11. Ezra. 9. 12
Chananites, so we may not marry with them which are like Chananites, but as
the sons of Jacob said unto Emor which would marry their Sister, We may not
give our Genesis 34. 14. The Similitude holds in their saying, and not in their
meaning, for they speak truly, but they meant falsely.
Sister to a man uncircumcised, but if you will be Circumcised like us, then we
will marry with you. So Parents should say to suitors, I may not give my
Daughter to a man unsanctified, but if you will be sanctified, then I will give
my Daughter unto you. Though Heresy, and irreligion, be not a cause of
divorce, as Paul teaches, yet it is a cause of restraint, for we may not
marry all, with whom we may live being married. If adultery may separate
marriage, shall not idolatry hinder marriage, which is worse than it? Christ
says, Let Mat. 19. 6. Mar. 10. 9.
no man separate, whom God has joined; so I may say, Let no man join, whom
God does separate: For if our Father must be pleased with our Marriage, much
more should we please that Father which ordained Marriage. Shall I say, Be my
Wife, to whom I may not say Be my Companion? Or, Come to my bed, to whom I
may not say, Come to my table? How should my marriage speed well, when I
marry one to whom I 2. John. 10.
may not say God speed, because she is none of Gods friends? Does not he
marry with the Devil, which marries with the tempter? For Tempter is his
name, and Math. 4. 3.
to tempt is his nature. When a man may choose, he should choose the best; but
this man chooses the worst. He prays, Not to be led Luke 11. 4.
into temptation, and leads himself into temptation. Surely he does not
fear sin, which does not shun occasions; and he is worthy to be snared,
which makes a trappe for himself. When Solomon, the myrrour of wisdom, the
wonder of the world; 1. King. 11. 1. etc.
the figure of our Lord, by idolatrous Concubines is turned to an idolater, let
no man say, I shall not be seduced, but say, How shall I stand, where such a
Cedar fell? The Wife must be meet, as God said, Genesis 2. 18. But how is she
meet, if thou be a Christian, and she a Papist? We must marry in the Lord, as
Paul says: but how 1. Cor. 7. 39.
do we marry in the Lord, when we marry the Lords enemies? our Spouse must
be like Christ's Spouse, but Christ's Spouse is neither Harlot nor Heretic, nor
Atheist. If she be poor, the Lord reprooueth not for that: if she be weak,
the Lord reprooueth not for that: if she be hard favored, the Lord reprooueth
not for that: but none gives any dispensation Genesis 3. 4.
for godliness but the devil. Therefore they which take that privilege, are
like the^ which seek to Witches, and are guilty of preferring evil before
good. This unequal Marriage was the chief cause that brought the flood, and the
first beginning of Giants, and monstrous Genesis 6. 2.
births, showing by their monstrous children, what a monstrous thing it is for
believers and unbelievers to match together. In Matthew. 22. Math. 22. 11.
Christ shows, that before parties married, they were wont to put on fair
and new garments, which were called Wedding garments; a warning unto all which
put on Wedding garment.
Wedding garments, to put on truth and holiness too, which so precisely is
resembled by that garment more than other. It is noted in the 14. of Luke, that
of all them Note. Luke 14. 20.
which were invited to the Lords banquet, and came not, only he which had
married a Wife, did not desire to be excused, but said stoutly, I cannot
come. Showing, how this state does occupy a man most, and draw him often from
the service of God: and therefore we had not need to take the worse, for the
best are combersome enough. In the 2. of Job, it is Job. 2. 9. and 3. 1.
observed of the patient man, that he did not curse the day of his birth,
until his wife brake forth into blasphemy: showing, that wicked women are
able to change the stedfastest man, more than all temptations beside. Sampson
would take a Philistian to wife, but he lost Iud. 14.
his honor, his strength, and his life by her, least any should do the like.
But what a notable warning is that in 2. Chro. 21. 6. where the holy Ghost
says, Iehoram walked 2. Chro. 21. 6.
in the ways of Ahab, for he had the daughter of Ahab to wife, as though it
were a miracle if he had been better than he was, because his wife was a
temptation. Miserable is that man which is fettered with a woman that likes
not his religion, for she will be nibling at his prayer, and at his study, and
at his meditations, till she have tired his devotions, and turned the edge of
his soul, as Michol tried David, 2. Sam. 6. 16.
she mocked him for his zeal, and liked her self in her folly. Therefore as
Christ says, Remember Loths Luke 17. 32.
wife: so when thou marriest, remember Ichorams wife, and be not wedded to her
which has not the Wedding garment: but let unity go first, and let union
come after, and hope not to convert her, but fear that she will pervert thee,
least thou say after, like him which should come to the Lords banquet, I have
married a wife and Luke 14. 20.
cannot come.

Yet the chiefest point is behind, The duties of Marriage.
that is your duties. The duties of Marriage may be reduced to the duties of
Man and Wife one toward another, and their duties toward their children, and
their duties toward their servants. For themselves, says one, they must
think that they are like two birds, the one is the Cock, and the other The man
and wife like cock and dam.
is the Dam: the Cock flies abroad to bring in, the Dam sits upon the nest
to keep al at home. So God has made the man to travail abroad, and the
woman to keep home: and so their nature, and their wit, and their strength are
fitted accordingly; for the ma^s pleasure is most abroad, and the woman's
within.

In every state there is some one virtue which belongs to that calling more
than other; as Justice to Magistrates, and Knowledge to Preachers, and
Fortitude to Soldiers: so love is the Marriage virtue, which sings Music to
their whole life. Wedlock is made of two loves, which I may call the Marriage
compounded of two loves.
first love, and the after love. As every man is taught to love GOD before he
be bid to love his neighbor; so they must love God before they can love one
another.

To show the love which should be between man and wife, Marriage is called
Coniugium, which signifies a knitting or ioining together: showing, that
unless there be a joining of hearts, and knitting of affections together, it is
not Marriage indeed, but in show and name, and they shall dwell in a house like
two poisons in a stomach, and one shall ever be sick of the other.

Therefore, first that they may love, and keep love one with another, it is
necessary that they both love God, and as their love increases toward him, so
it shall increase each to other. But the man must take heed that his love
toward his Wife, be not greater than his love toward God, as Adams and Sampsons
were, for all Genesis 3. 6. Iud. 16. 17.
unlawful love will turn to hatred, as the love of Amnon did toward Thamar,
and because Christ 2. Sam. 13. 15. Math. 10. 37.
has forbidden it, therefore he will cross it. This made Vriah so fearful,
least the pleasure of his wife should draw his heart from God, that he would
not go to his own house, so long as he had cause to mourn and pray, although
he had a wife which feared God, like himself: and that you may see, it is no
cheap dalliance for the husband to make the wife, or the wife to make the
husband less zealous than they were. In Deuteronomy. 13. the wife which did draw her
husband from God, is condemned to dye: Therefore good wives, when their
husbands purpose any good, should encourage them like Jacobs wives, which Genesis
30. 16.
bad him do according to the word of God: and if they see them minded to any
evil, they should stay them like the wife of Pilate, which counseled her
husband not to condemn Christ: for seeing holiness is called the Wedding
M^^h. 27. 19.
garment, who shall wear this Wedding garment, if they Math. 22. 11.
wear it not which are wedded? When one holy has found another, then GOD
seems to make the marriage, and his Angels come to the feast.

To pass over sleights, which Best policy in marriage to begin well.
seldom prosper, unless they have some warrant. The best policy in Marriage,
is to begin well, for as bourds well joined at first, sit close ever after, but
if they square at first, they warp more and more. So they which are well
joined, are well married, but they which offend their love before it be settled,
fade every day like a Marigould, which closes her flower as the Sun goes
down, till they hate one another more then they loved at first.

To begin this concord well, it is They must learn one another nature.
necessary to learn one another nature, and one another affections, and one
another infirmities, because ye must be helpers, and ye cannot help, unless
ye know the disease. All the iarres almost which do trouble this band, do rise
of this, that one does not hit the measure of the others heart, to apply
themselves to either nature, whereby it comes to pass, that neither can
refrain, when either is offended; but one sharpneth another, when they had
need to be calmed: Therefore they must learn of Paul, to fashion 1 Cor. 9. 20
themselves one to the other, if they would win one another, and if any jar
do arise, in no wise divide beds for it; for the^ the Sun goes down upon
their wrath, and the means of reconcilement Ephe. 4. 25.
is taken away. Give passions no time; for if some man's anger stand but a
night, it turns to malice which is incurable. The Apostle says, that there
will be offenses in 1. Cor. 11. 19.
the Church; so sure there will be many offenses in Marriage: but as he says,
these are but trials who have faith; so these are trials who are good husbands,
and who are good wives. His anger must be such a mood, as if he did chide
with himself, and their strife as it were a sauce made of purpose to sharpen
their love when it waxes unpleasant; like Ionathans arrows which were not
shot to hurt, but 1. Sam 20. 20.
to give warning. Knowing once a couple which were both chollericke, and yet
never fell out, I asked the man how they did order the A sweet example,
teachin^ how copl^^ shall never fall out. G^^. 1^. 6.
matter that their infirmity did not make them discord. He answered me, when
her fit is upon her, I yield to her, as Abraham did to Sara, and when my fit
is upon me, she yields to me, and so we never strive together but a sunder. Me
thought it was a good example to commend unto all married folks; for every
one has his frenzy, and loves them that can bear his infirmity. Whom will
a woman suffer if she will not suffer her husband; and whose defects will a man
bear, if he will not bear hers which bears his? Thus much of their duties
in general, now to their several offices.

The man may spell his duty out of his name, for he is called Ephe. 5. 23.
the Head: to show, that as the eye, and the tongue, and the ear, are in the
head to direct the whole body, so the man should be stored with wisdom, and
understanding, and knowledge, and discretion, to direct his whole family, for
it is not right that the worse should rule the better, but that the better
should rule the worse, as the best rules all. The husband says, that his wife
must obey him because he is her better, therefore if he let her be better than
himself, he seems to free her from her obedience, and bind himself to obey
her.

His first duty is called Harting, that is, hearty affection. As they The
husbands first duty.
are handfasted, so they must be hartfasted, for the eye, and the tongue, and
the hand, will be her enemies, if the heart be not her friend. As Christ draws
all the Commandments to Love, so I may draw all their duties to love, which is
the hearts gift to the Bride. First, he must choose his love, and then he must
love his choice, this is the oil which makes all things casie. In Salomons
Song, which is nothing else but a description of Christ the Bridegroom, and
the Church his Spouse, one calls the other Love, to show, that though both
do not honor alike, yet both should love alike, which the man may do without
subjection.

The man is to his wife, in the Understand in his marriage only.
place of Christ to his Church: therefore the Apostle requires such an
affection of him toward his Spouse, as Christ bears toward his Spouse: for he
says, Husbands love your Wives as Christ Ephe. 5. 25.
loved the congregation, that is, with a holy love, with a hearty love, and
with a constant love, as the Church would be loved of Christ. Will not a man
love his glory? Why Paul calls the woman the glory of the man, for her
reverence 1. Cor. 11. 7.
makes him to be reverenced, and her praise, makes him to be praised. Therefore
he which loves not his Wife, loves his shame, because she is his glory. In
Ephesians. 5. 28. Paul says, He which loves his Wife, loves himself, for Ephe.
5. 28.
thereby he inioyeth peace and comfort, and help to himself in all his
affairs: therefore in the same verse Paul counsels husbands to love their
wives as their bodies. And after, in the 33. verse, as though it were too
little to love them as their bodies, he says, Let every one love his Wife as
himself, that is, body and soul too. For if God commanded men to love their
neighbors as themselves, Leuit. 19. 18.
much more are they bound to love their wives as themselves, which are their
next neighbors. As Elkanah did not love his wife 1. Sam. 1. 8.
less for her barrennes, but said, Am not I better unto thee than ten
sons? as though he favored her more, for that which she thought her self
despised. So a good husband will not take occasion to love his wife less for
her infirmities, but comfort her more for them, as this man did, that she may
bear with his infirmities too. When Christ says, that a man Mar. 10. 7.
should leave Father and Mother, to cleave to his Wife, he signifies, how
Christ left his Father for his Spouse, and that man does not love his wife so
much as he should until he affect her more than ever he did his father or
mother. Therefore when GOD bad Abraham forsake all his kindred: yet he bad him
not forsake his Wife. As Genesis 12. 1.
though the other sometime might be forsaken for God, but the wife must be kept
for GOD, like a charge which binds for term of life.

His next duty to love, is a fruit The husbands second duty.
of his love, that is, to let all things be common between them, which were
private before. The man and wife are partners like two owers Man and Wise are
two partners.
in a boat, therefore he must divide offices, and affairs, and goods with
her, causing her to be feared and reverenced, and obeyed of her children and
servants like himself; for she is as an under officer in his Common weal, and
therefore she must be assisted and borne out, like his deputy, as the Prince
stands with his Magistrates for his own quiet, because they are the legs
which bear him up. To show this community between husband and wife, he is to
maintain her as he does himself, because Christ says, They are no more two
but one. Mar. 10. 8.
Therefore when he maintains her, he must think it but one charge, because
he maintains no more but himself, for they two are one. He may not say as
Husbands are wo^t to say, that which is thine is mine, and that which is mine
is my own: but that which is mine is thine, and my self too. For as it is
said, He which has given us his Romans 8. 32.
Son, can he deny us any thing? So she may say, he which has given me
himself, can he deny me any thing? The body is better than the goods;
therefore if the body be mine, the goods are mine too.

Lastly, he must tender her as much as all her friends, because he The
husbands last duty.
has taken her from her friends, and couenanted to tender her for them all. To
show how he should tender her, Peter says, Honor the 1. Pet. 3. 7.
woman as the weaker vessel. As we do not handle glasses like pots, because
they are weaker vessels, but touch the^ nicely and softly for fear of cracks;
so a man must entreat his wife with gentleness and softnes; not expecting that
wisdom, nor that faith, nor that patience, nor that strength in the weaker
vessel, which should be in the stronger; but think when he takes a wife he
takes a Vineyard, not grapes, but a vineyard to bear him grapes: therefore he
must sow it, and dress it, and water it, and fence it, and think it a good
vineyard if at last it bring forth grapes. So he must not look to find a
wife without a fault, but think that she is committed to him to reclaim her
from her faults; for all are defectiues: and if he find the Proverb true,
that in space comes grace, he must rejoice as much at his wife when she
mendeth, as the Husbandman rejoices when his Vineyard begins to fructify.

This is far from civil wars Husbands must hold their hands and Wives
their tungs.
between man and wife; in all his offices is found no office to fight. The
very name of a wife is like the Angel which stayed Abraham's Genesis 22. 12
hand when the stroke was coming. If David, because he could not express the
good and comfort of Unity, was feign to say, Oh Psalm. 133. 1.
how good and joyful a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in unity?
Then weigh and judge how harsh and bitter a thing it is for man and wife to
live together in emnitie. For the first year after Marriage, God would not
have the husband Deuteronomy. 24. 5.
go to war with his enemies, but no year would he have him war with his
wife, and therefore God gave him that year to stay at home and settle his love,
that he might not war, nor jar after: for the God of peace dwells not in
the house of war. As a kingdom Math. 12. 25.
cannot stand if it be divided, so a house cannot stand if it be divided: for
strife is like fire which leaves nothing but dust, and smoke, and ashes behind
it. We read in the Scripture of Masters that stroke their servants, but never
of any that stroke his Wife, but rebuked her. Lot was drunk Genesis 19. 33.
when he lay with his daughters in stead of a wife; and is he sober which
strikes his wife in stead of his servants? The law shows Deuteronomy. 23. 2.
how a bond man should be corrected, but the wife is like a Judge which is
joined in Commission with her Husband to correct other. Will thou strike one in
his own house? no more should thou strike thy wife in her house. She is
come to thee as to a Sanctuary, to defend her from hurt, and can thou hurt
her thy self? Therefore Abraham was called Saras Genesis 20. 16.
Veil, because he should shield her; for a Veil is made to save. Abraham said
to Lot, Are we not brethren? Genesis 13. 8.
that is, may brethren jar? but they may say, are we not one? can one chide
without another? can one fight without another? He is a bad Ost, which
welcommeth his guest with stripes. Does a King trample his Crown? Solomon
calls the wife, the Crown of the husband, therefore he which Pro. 12. 4.
wounds her, wounds his honor: She is a free Citizen in thy house, and
has taken the peace of thee the first day of her Marriage, to hold thy hands
till she release thee again. Adam says of his Spouse, This is flesh of my
flesh: But no man says Paul, Ever hated his Genesis 2. 23. Ephe. 5. 19.
own flesh. So then, if a man ask whether he may strike his wife? God says
nay, thou may not hate thy wife, for no man hates his own flesh, showing,
that he should not come near blows, but think his wrath too much: for Paul
says, Be not bitter to your Col. 3. 16.
Wives: noting that anger in a husband is a vice. Every man is ashamed to lay
hands on a woman, because she cannot match him, therefore he is a shameless man
which lays hands on his wife. If a man be seen raging with himself, he is
carried to Bedlam; so these mad men which beat themselves should be sent to
Bedlam til their madness be gone. Solomon says, Delight continually Pro. 5. 16.
in her love: that is, begin, proceed and end in love. This counsel is broken
so often as they discord. In revenge whereof, he shows that their delight is
gone, because he calls Love their delight. Therefore as Paul says of
Bishops, A Bishop must be no striker; 1. Tim. 3. 31. Of his wife. Leu 19. 28.
Deuteronomy. 14. 1. 1. Ki. 18. 28 It is properly meant in mourning for the dead, but it
does imply an unlawfulness to hurt our selves,
so a Husband must be no striker, for he which strikes his own flesh,
breaks that law which says, Thou shall not make a skarre in thy flesh: and
is like the Baalites which wounded their own bodies. Thus we have sent a
letter unto Husbands to read before they fight. Now let us go home to Love
again. Would thou learn how to make thy match delightful? Solomon said,
Rejoice in her love continually. As though thou Pro 5. 19.
could not delight without love, and with love thou might delight
continually. Therefore Love is called the thankful virtue, because it
rendereth peace, and ease, and comfort to him that makes of her. So much to
Husbands.

Likewise the Woman may The Woman's duties.
learn her duty out of her names. They are called goodwiues, as goodwife A.
and goodwife B. Every Wife is called Goodwife; therefore if they be not
goodwiues their names do belie them, and they are not worth their titles, but
answer to a wrong name as Players do upon a stage. This name pleases them
well: but beside this a Wife is called a Yoke fellow, to Phil. 4. 3.
show that she should help her Husband to bear his yoke, that is, his grief
must be her grief; and whether it be the yoke of poverty, or the yoke of
envy, or the yoke of sickness, or the yoke of imprisonment, she must submit
her neck to bear it patiently with him, or else she is not his yoke fellow,
but his yoke, as though she were inflicted upon him for a penalty, like Jobs
Wife whom the Job. 2. 9.
devil left to torment him, when he took away all beside. The Apostle Romans
12. 15.
bids to rejoice with them that rejoice, and mourn with them that mourn.
With whom should the Wife rejoice rather than with her Husband? or with whom
should she mourn willinger than with her own flesh? I will not leave thee,
says Elisha to Eliah: so she should never 2. Kin. 2. 6.
leave him till death. Bear one another Gal. 6. 2.
burden (says Paul) who shall bear others burden if the Wife do not bear
her Husbands burden? Wicked Iezabel comforted her Husband in his sickness, and
1. Kin. 21. 5
Ieroboams Wife sought for his health, though she was as bad as he. God did not
bid Sarah leave her father, and her Country, as he Genesis 12. 1.
bad her husband, yet because he bad Abraham leave his, she left hers too,
showing that she was content not only to be his playfellowe, but his yoke
fellow too. Beside a yoke fellow, she is called a Helper, to help him in his
business, to help him in his labors, Genesis 2. 18.
to help him in his troubles, to help him in his sickness, like a woman
Physician, sometime with her strength, and sometime with her counsel: for
sometime as God confounds the wise by the foolish, and the strong by the
weak, 1. Cor. 1. 27
so he teaches the wife by the foolish, and helps the strong by the weak.
Therefore Peter says, Husbands are won by the conversation of their Wives.
As if he should 1. Pet. 3. 1.
say, sometime the weaker vessel is the stronger vessel, and Abraham Genesis 25.
2.
may take counsel of Sara, as Naaman was advised by his servant. 2. Kin. 5. 3.
The Shunamites counsel made her Husband receive a Prophet 2. Kin. 9. 10
into his house, and Hesters counsel made her Husband spare the Hest. 7. 3.
Church: so some have been better helpers to their husbands, than their
husbands have bin to them, for it pleases God to provoke the wise with the
foolish, as he did the Jews with the Gentiles. Deuteronomy. 32. 21.


Beside a Helper, she is called a Comforter too, and therefore the man Pro. 5.
18.
is bid to rejoice in his Wife, which is as much to say, that Wives must be
the rejoicing of their Husbands, even like David's Harp to comfort Saul.
Therefore it is said of Rebeccah, that she prepared 1. Sam. 16. 23. Genesis 27. 9.
meat for her husband, such as he loved: so a good Wife is known when her
words and deeds and countenances are such as her Husband loves, she must not
examine whether he be wise or simple, but that she is his wife, and therefore
they which are bound must obey, as Abigail loved her husband though he was a
fool: 1. Sam. 25. 3
for the Wife is as much despised for taking rule over her Husband, as he for
yielding it unto her. It becomes not the Mistress to be Master, no more than it
beseems the Master to be Mistress, but both to sail with their own wind.

Lastly, we call the Wife, Huswife, that is, house wife, not a street Genesis 38.
14. Genesis 34. 1. Why wives are called Huswiues.
wife like Thamar, nor a field wife like Dinah, but a house wife, to show that
a good wife keeps her house: and therefore Paul bids Tit. 2. 5.
Titus to exhort women that they be chaste, and keeping at home: presently after
Chaste, he says, keeping at home, as though Home were Chastities keeper. And
therefore Solomon depainting the Whore, Pro. 7. 12.
sets her at the door, now sitting upon her stalls, now walking in the
streets, now looking out of the windows, like curled Iezabel, as if she held
forth the glass 2. King 9. 30.
of temptation, for vanity to gaze upon. But Chastity cares to please but
one, and therefore she keeps her Closet, as though she were still at prayer.
The Angel asked Abraham, where is thy wife? Abraham answered, she is Genesis 18.
9.
in the Tent. The Angel knew where she was, but yet he asked, that we might
see how Women in old time did keep their tents and houses. It is recorded of
the Shunamite, that she did ask her 2. Kin. 9. 30
Husband leave to go unto the Prophet, though she went to a Prophet, and went
of a good errand, and for his cause as much as her own, yet she thought it not
meet to go far abroad without her Husbands leave.

Phidias when he should paint a Woman, painted her sitting under a Snailes
shell; signifying that she should go like a Snaile, which carries his house
upon his back. Solomon bad Shimei: Go not beyond 1. King. 2. 36. 37.
the river: so a Wife should teach her feet, go not beyond the door; she must
count the walls of her house like the banks of the Husbands should not keep
their Wives so straight, but Wives should not think their house their prison,
but as their Paradise where they would be.
River which Shimei might not pass, if he would please the King. For when Genesis
3. 2.
Adam was away, Eve was made a pray: if her Husband be from her, until he
return again, she must think her self a Widdowe, that is, separate from
man: for Vidua does signify a viro diuisa, that is, Widdowe does signify
divided from man: therefore now she must have no fellowship, no company with
men, because she is divided from man.

As it becomes her to keep home, so it becomes her to keep silence, and
always speak the best of her head. Other seek their honor in triumph, but she
must seek her honor in reverence, for A wife may not utter her Husbands
saults.
it becomes not any woman to set light by her husband, nor to publish his
infirmities. For they say, it is an evil bird that defiles his own nest: and
if a Wife use her Husband so, how may the Husband use the Wife? Because this
is the quality of that sex, to overthwart, and vpbraide, and sue the
pre-eminence of their Husbands, therefore the Philosophers could not tell how
to define a Wife, but called her The contrary to a Husband, as though nothing
A Wife the contrary to a Husband.
were so cross and contrary to a man, as a Wife. This is not Scripture, but
no slander to many. As David exalts the love of women 2. Sam. 1. 26. Pro.
21. 19.
above all other loves; so Solomon mounteth the envy of women above all other
enuies, stubborn, sullen, taunting, gainsaying, outfacing, with such a bitter
humor, that one would think they were molten out of the salt pillar into
which Loths Wife was transformed. Genesis 19. 26.
We say not, all are alike, but this sect has many Disciples. Does the ribbe
that is in a man's side fret him, or gall him? no Genesis 2. 20.
more should she which is made of the ribbe. Though a woman be wise and
painful, and have many good parts, yet if she be a shrewe, her troublesome
iarring in the end will make her honest behavior unpleasant, as her over
pinching at last causes her good huswiferie to be evil spoken off. Therefore
although she be a Wife, yet sometime she must observe the servants lesson, Not
answering again, and hold Tit. 2. 9.
her peace to keep the peace. Therefore they which keep silence, are well said
to hold their peace, because silence oftentimes does keep the peace, when
words would break it.

To her silence and patience she must add The acceptable obedience, which
makes a Woman rule while she is ruled. This is the Wives tribute to her
Husband; for she is not called his head, but Ephe. 5. 23.
he is called her head. Great cause has man to make much of his wife, for
great and many are her duties to him. And therefore Paul says, Wives submit
your selves Ephe. 5. 22.
unto your Husbands as to the Lord. Showing that she should regard his will as
the Lords will, but How far the Wife should obey.
withal as the Lord commands only that which is good and right: so she
should obey her Husband in good and right, orels she does not obey him as the
Lord, but as the tempter. The first subjection of Woman began at sin; for
when GOD cursed her for seducing her Husband, when the Serpent had seduced her,
he said, He shall have authority over thee. And Genesis 3. 16.
therefore as the man named all other creatures, in sign that they Genesis 2. 20.
should be subject to him, as a servant which comes when his Master calls
him by his name; so he did name the woman also in verse. 23.
token that she should be subject to him likewise. And therefore Asuerus made a
law, that every man Hest. 1. 20. 22. Number. 30. 7. Iud. 19. 26.
should bear rule in his own house, and not the Woman. Because she sinned
first, therefore she is humbled most, and ever since the daughters of Sara are
bound to Gen 18. 12. 1. Pet. 3. 6.
call their husbands Lords, as Sara called her husband, that is, to take them
for their Lords, for heads and governors. If ye disdain to follow Abraham's
Spouse, the Apostle bids you follow Christ's Spouse: for he says, Let a
wife be Ephe. 5. 24.
subject to her husband, as the Church is to Christ. A greater love than this
Ioh. 15. 13.
(says Christ) no man can have. So a better example than this no Woman can
have.

That the Wife may yield this The cause why many despise their husbands. 1. Tim
2. 9.
reverence to her Husband, Paul would have her attire to be modest and
orderly; for garish apparel has taught many gossips to disdain their
husbands. This is the folly of some men, to lay all their pride upon their
wives, they care not how they slouen themselves, so their wives iet like
Peacocks. But Peter does commend 1. Pet. 3. 5.
Sara for her attire, and not Abraham, showing that women should brave it no
more than men, and God made Eues coat of the same Genesis 3. 21.
cloth that he made Adams. They covered themselves with leaves, Genesis 3. 7.
and God derided them, but now they cover themselves with pride, like Satan
which is fallen down Luke 10. 18.
before them like lightning, ruff upon ruff, lace upon lace, cut upon cut,
four and twenty orders until the woman be not precious as her apparel, that
if any man would picture vanity, he must take a pattern of women, or else he
cannot draw her likeness. As Herodias Math. 14. 6.
was worse for her fine dancing, so a woman may have too many ornaments:
frisled locks, naked breasts, painting, perfume, and especially a rolling eye
are the forerunners of adultery, and he which has such a wife, has a fine
plague. Once women were married without dowries, because they were well
nurtured, but now if they waighed not more in gold than in goodness, many should
sit like nuns without husbands. Thus we have shadowed the man's duties to his
wife, and the woman's to her husband.

After their duties one to another, Their duties to their servants.
they must learn their duties to their family. One compares the master of
the house to the Seraphin, which came and kindled the Prophets zeal: so he
should Esai. 6. 6.
go from wife to servants, and from servants to children, and kindle them in
the zeal of GOD, longing to teach his knowledge as a Nurse to empty her
breasts. Another says, that a master in his family has all the offices of
christ: Reu. 5. 10.
for he must rule, and teach, and pray; rule like a King, teach like a
Prophet, pray like a Priest. To show how a godly man should behave himself in
his household, when the holy Ghost speaks of the conversion of any
housekeeper, lightly he says, that the man Act. 16. 13. and 18. 8.
believed with all his household. As Peter being converted, must convert his
brethren; so the master Luc 22. 32.
being converted, must convert his servants. For therefore God said, that he
would not hide his counsel from Abraham, because he Genesis 18. 17.
would teach his family: and surely all duty which is not done of
conscience, is but eye service, and fails at most need, as Ziba betrayed his
master when he should 2. Sam. 16. 3.
have defended him. Therefore before One simus was converted, Paul Phile. 11.
said, he was an unprofitable servant: but when he was converted, he calls
him more than a servant, because such a servant is better than many servants.
Therefore though Laban was wicked himself, yet Genesis 29. 27.
he rejoiced that Jacob his servant was godly, because GOD blessed him better
for him. Joshua says, I and my household will serve the Lord. Showing that
masters should receive Josh 24. 15.
none into their houses, but whom they can govern, as Ioshu^ did. Therefore it
is noted of Cornelius, that all his household served Act. 10. 2.
God like himself. This is reported also of Joseph and Marie for an example,
that they went up every year with all their family to worship at Jerusalem,
that their children Luc. 2. 41.
and their servants might learn to know God as well as they. These examples
be written for householders, as other are for Magistrates, and Ministers, and
Soldiers, that no calling might seek further than the Scripture for
instruction. Wherefore as you are masters now, and they your servants, so
instruct them and train them, as if you would show what masters they should
be hereafter.

After the care of their souls, they must care for their bodies; for if the
labourer is worthy of his Luc. 107.
hire which labors but a day, what is the servant worth which labors
every day? Therefore Paul is so earnest with Philemon to make much of
Onesimus his servant, that he desires Philemon to Phile. 17.
receive him as he would himself. Therefore because cruel and greedy Masters
should not use them too hardly, God remembered them in his creation, and made
every Genesis 2. 2.
week one day of rest, wherein they should be as free as their Masters: so God
pitieth the poor labourer from heaven, and every Saboath looks down upon
him from heaven, as if he should say, one day thy labors shall have an end,
and thou shall rest for ever as thou restest this day.

By this we see, as David did limit Ioab that he should not kill g. Sam. 18.
5.
Absalom, so God has bound masters that they should not oppress their
servants. Shall God respect thine more than thou? Art thou made fresher to thy
labor by a little rest, and is not thy servant made stronger by rest to labor
for thee? How many beasts and sheep did Laban lose only for hardly entreating
of a good servant? Genesis 31. 9.
Therefore that is the way to lose, but not to thrive. He which counts his
servant his slave, is in an error, for there is difference between believing
servants, and Infidel servants: the Infidels were made slaves to the Jews,
because GOD hated them, and would humble them, but their brethren did serve
the^ like helpers, which should be trained by them.

It is not a base nor a vile thing to be called a servant, for our Lord Esai.
42. 1. Math. 12. 18.
is called a servant, which teaches Christians to use their servants well for
Christ's sake, seeing they are servants too, and have one master Christ. As
David speaks of man, saying, Thou have made him a Psalm. 8. 6.
little lower than the Angels: so I may say of servants, that God has made
them a little lower tha^ children, not children, but the next to children, as
one would say inferior children, or sons in law: and therefore the
householder is called Paterfamilias, which signifies a father of his family,
because he should have a fatherly care over his servants, as if they were his
children, and not use the^ only for their labor like beasts. Beside, the name
of a servant does not signify suffering, but doing: therefore masters must
not exercise their hands upon them, but set their hands to work: and yet as
God lays no more upon his 1. Cor. 12. 13.
servants than he makes them able to bear; so men should lay no more upon
their servants than they are able to bear. For a good man (says Solomon) is
merciful to Pro. 12. 10.
his beast, and therefore he will be more merciful to his brother. That man is
not worthy to be served which cannot afford that his servants should serve
God as well as himself. Give unto God that which is Gods, and then thou may
take that which is thine. He which cares not for his family, (says Paul) is
worse than an Infidel: 1. Tim. 5. 8.
because Infidels care for their family. But as Agur prays, Give me not too
much nor too little, but feed me with food convenient. So Pro. 30. 8.
their care should not be too much nor too little, but convenient, or else they
are worse than Infidells too, because Covetousness is called Idolatry, which is
worse than Infidelity: for it is less rebellion Ephe. 5. 5.
not to honor the King, than to set up another King against him, as the
Idolaters do against the King of heaven,

Next unto servants instruction and labors, must be considered their
corrections. As Paul says, Fathers provoke not your children to Ephe. 6. 4:
wrath: So I may say, Masters provoke not your servants to wrath, that is, use
such reproves, and such corrections, that you do not provoke them, but move
them, that you do not exasperate them, but win them; for reuiling words and
unreasonable fiercenes, does more hurt than good. And therefore the law of God
did charge the Master that he should not inflict above forty stripes upon
his servant, Deuteronomy. 25. 2.
least he should seem despised in his eyes. For while a child, or scholar,
or servant does think that he is reproved for love, or beaten with reason,
it makes him think of his fault and be ashamed: but when he sees that he is
rebuked with curses and beaten with staves, as though he were hated like a
dog, his heart is hardened against the man which corrects him, and the
fault for which he is corrected, and after he becomes desperate, like a horse
which turns upon the striker: and therefore think that GOD even then chides
you, whensoever you chide in such rage. For though there be a fault, yet some
things must be winkt at, and some things forgiven, and some things punished
with a look; for he which takes the forfeit of every offense shall never rest,
but vex himself more than his servant.

Further, I have heard Experience The master must correct his me^, and the
mistress her maids.
say, that in these punishments it is most meet and acceptable to the
offender, that the man should correct his men, and the woman her maids: for a
man's nature skorneth to be beaten of a woman, and a maids nature is corrupted
with the stripes of a man. Therefore we read, that Abraham Genesis 16. 6.
would not meddle with his maid, but committed her to his wife, and said, Do
with her as it pleases thee. As if he should say, it belongs not to me but
to thee.

Lastly, we put the duty toward Their duties toward their children.
children, because they come last to their hands. In Latin children are called
Pignora, that is pledges, as if I should say, a pledge of the husbands love to
the wife, and a pledge of the wives love toward the husband: for there is
nothing which does so knit love between the man and the wife, as the fruit of
the womb. Therefore when Leah began to conceive, she said, Genesis 28. 31.
now my husband will love me, as though the husband did love for children. If a
woman have many defects (as Leah had) yet this is the mends which she makes her
husband to bring him children, which is the right Wedding Ring that seals and
makes up as it were the Marriage. When their father and mother fall out, they
pert up between them like little mediators, and with many pretty sportes make
truce when other dare not speak to the^. Therefore now let us consider what
these little ones may challenge of their parents, which stand the^ in sted of
Lawiers.

The first duty is the mothers, Mothers should nurse their children. Genesis 21.
7.
that is, to nurse her child at her own breasts, as Sara did Isaak: and
therefore Esaiah joins the nurces name and the mothers name both in one, and
calls them nurcing mothers: showing that mothers should be the nurces. So
when God chose a nurce for Moses, Exo. 2. 8.
he led the handmaid of Pharaohs daughter to his mother, as though GOD would
have none to nurse him but his mother. After, when the Son of God was borne,
his father thought none fit to be his Math. 2. 14
nurse but the Virgin his mother. The fountains of the earth are made to give
water, and the breasts of women are made to give suck. Every beast, and every
foul, is bred of the same that did bear it, only women love to be mothers,
but not nurces. Therefore if their children prove unnatural, they may say
thou followest thy mother, for she was unnatural first in locking up her
breasts from thee, and committing thee forth like a Cuckowe to be hatched in
the Sparowes nest. Hereof it comes that we say, he sucked evil from the dugge,
that is, as the Nurse is affected in her body or in her mind, commonly the
child draws the like infirmity from her, as the eggs of a Hen are
altered under a Hawke: yet they which have no milk can give no milk; but
whose breasts have this perpetual drought? Forsooth it is like the Gowte, no
beggars may have it, but Citizens or Gentlewomen. In the 9. of Hosee, dry
breasts are named for a curse; what lamentable hap have Gentlewomen to light
upon this curse more than other? Sure if their breasts be dry as they say,
they should fast and pray together that this curse might be removed from them.

The next duty is, Catechize Pro. 22. (...).
child in his youth, and he will remember it when he is old. This is the right
blessing which fathers and mothers give to their children, when they cause GOD
to bless them too. The wrong mother cared 1. King. 3. 26.
not though the child were divided, but the right mother would not have it
divided: so wicked parents care not though their children be destroyed, but
godly parents would not have them destroyed but saved, that when they have
dwelt together in earth, they may dwell together in heaven. As the Midwife
frames the body when it is young and tender, so the parents must frame the
mind while it is green and flexible, for youth is the seed time of virtue.
They which are called fathers, are called Luke 11. 2.
by the name of God, to warn the^ that they are in stead of GOD to their
children, which teaches all his sons. What example have children but their
parents? And sure the providence of God does ease their charge more than they
are aware; for a child will learn better of his father, than of any other.
And therefore we read of no Schoolemasters in the Scripture Except of Kings
sons.
but the parents: for when Christ says to the Jews, If ye be the sons of
Abraham, ye will do the works John. 8. 30.
of your father Abraham. He shows that sons use to walk in their fathers
steps whether they be good or bad. It is a merueilous delight to father and
mother when people say that their children are like them: but if they be like
them in goodness, it is as great a delight to other as to the parents: or else
we say that they are so like, that they are worse for it. Well does David call
children arrows, for if Psalm. 127. 4.
they be well bred they shoot at their parents enemies, and if they be evil
bred they shoot at their parents. Therefore many fathers want a staff to stay
them in their age, because they prepared none before; like old Eli which was
corrected himself for not correcting 1. Sa. 2. 29.
his sons. Are not children called the fruit of their parents? Therefore Psalm.
132. 11. Math. 12. 33.
as a good tree is known by bringing forth good fruit, so parents should
show their goodness in the good education of their children which are their
fruit. For this cause the Jews were 1. Sam. 1. 20 2. Sam 12. 24.
wont to name their children so when they were borne, that ever after if they
did but think upon their names, they would put them in mind of that religion
which they should profess, for they did signify something that they should
learn. An admonition to such as call their children at al adventures,
sometimes by the names of dogs even as they prove after. In the 1. King. 2.
2. we have David instructing his sons: In Genesis 39. Iaacob correcting his
sons: and in Job. 1. Job praying for his sons: These three put together,
Instructing, Correcting, and Praying, make good children and happy parents.

Once Christ took a child and set him in the midst of his Disciples, and
said, He which will receive Luc. 18. 17.
the kingdom of heaven, must receive it as a little child. Showing that our
children should be so innocent, so humble, and void of evil, that they may
be taken for examples of the children of God. Therefore in Psalm. 127. 4.
children are called the heritage of the Lord, to show that they should be
trained as though they were not men's children but Gods, that they may have Gods
heritage after. Thus if you do, your servants shall be Gods servants, and
your children shall be Gods children, and your Col. 4. 15. Phil. 1. 2.
house shall be Gods house, like a little Church when others are like a den of
thieves.

Now I speak to one which is The name of Stepmothers expounded, and their
duty.
a mother so soon as she is married: therefore peradventure you look that I
should show the duty of stepmothers. Their name does show them their
duty too; for a stepmother does signify a stedmother, that is, one mother
dies, and another comes in her stead; therefore that your love may settle to
those little ones as it ought, you must remember that you are their stedmother,
that is, in sted of their mother, and therefore to love them, and tender them,
and cherish them as their mother did. Further, these children are Orphans, and
therefore you must not only regard them as children, but as Orphane children.
Now, God requires a greater care over Widows and Ier. 22. 2. Deuteronomy. 14. 17.
and 24. 17. and 26. 12.
Orphans, than over any other women or children. Lastly, you must remember
that saying, As you measure unto other, so it shall be Mat 7. 2.
measured to you again. That is, as you entreat these children, so an other
may come after and entreat your children; for he which has taken away the
first mother, and sent you, can take away the second mother and send a third,
which shall not be like a stedmother to yours, unless you be like a
stedmother to these.

If these duties be performed in Marriage, then I need not speak Diuorcement
the physic of Marriage.
of Diuorcement, which is the rod of Marriage, and divides them which were one
flesh, as if the body and soul were parted a sunder. But because all perform
not their Wedlock vows, therefore he which appointed Marriage, has appointed
Diuorcement, as Math. 18. 9.
it were taking our privilege from us when we abuse it. As God has ordained
remedies for every disease, so he has ordained a remedy for the disease of
Marriage. The disease of Marriage is Adultery, and the medicine hereof is
Diuorcement. Moses licenced the^ to depart for hardness of heart, but Math. 19. 8
Christ licenseth them to depart for no cause but Adultery. If they might be
separated for discord, some would make a commodity of strife; but now they
are not best to be contentious, for this law will hold their noses together,
till wearines make them leave struggling, like two spaniels which are coupled in
a chain, at last they learn to go together, because they may not go a
sunder. As nothing might part friends, But if thine eye offend thee pull it
cut, that Mat. 5. 32.
is, if thy friend be a tempter: so Mat. 19. 9.
nothing may dissolve Marriage but Fornication, which is the breach of
Marriage: for Marriage is ordained to avoid Fornication, 1 Cor. 7. 10.
and therefore if the condition be broken, the obligation is void. And
beside, so long as all her children are his children, she must needs be his
wife, because the father and mother are man and wife: but when her children are
not his children, she seems no more to be his wife but the others, whose
children she bears, and therefore to be divorced from him. In all the old
Testament we read of no divorce between any, which shows that they lived
chaster tha^ we: yet no doubt this law was better executed amongst the^, than
amongst us. Such a care God has had in all ages and callings to provide for
the^ which live honestly: for Diuorcement is not instituted for the carnal,
but for the chaste, least they should be tied to a plague while they live. As
for the Adulterer and Adulteress he has assigned Leu. 20. 10.
death to cut them off, least their breath should infect others. Thus he which
made Marriage, did not make it inseperable, for then Marriage were a servitude.
But as Christ says of the Sabbath, The Sabbath was made for man, that is, Mar.
2. 27.
for the benefit of man, and not for the hinderance of man: so Marriage was
made for man, that is, for the honor of man, and not for the dishonor of man:
but if Marriage should turn to Fornication, Louit. 20. 10.
and when it is turned to Fornication, there might be no separation, then
Marriage were not for the honor of man, but for the trouble and grief and
dishonor of man. Therefore now ye have heard how Diuorcement is appointed for
a remedy of Fornication, if any be ashamed of this physic, let them be
more ashamed of the disease.

Because I have spoken more Conclusique
than you can remember, if you ask me, what is most needful to bear away? In
my opinion there is one saying of Paul, which is the profitablest sentence in
all the A sentence for the married to think upon.
Scripture, for Man and Wife to meditate often, and examine whether they find
it in themselves as they do in other, least their Marriage turn to sin,
which should further them in godliness. In the 1. Cor. 7. 32. it is said, The
unmarried 1. Cor. 7. 32.
man cares for the things of the Lord how he may please the Lord, but he that
is married cares for the things of the world, how he may please his wife.
Likewise, The unmarried woman cares for the things of the Lord how she may be
holy, but she that is married, cares for the things of the world how she may
please her Husband. As though their pleasing of God were now turned all to
pleasing one another, and their carnal love had eaten their spiritual love, as
the lean kine devoured the fat. Therefore it follows in the next Genesis 41. 4.
words, This I speak for your commodity: As though there were Verse. 34.
great commodity in remembering this watch word. All men have not the feeling
of Gods word, or else such a sentence might be an anchor to all which are
married, to stay them when any temptation goes about this change, which Paul
feared even in them which seared God before. If thou have read all this book,
and art never the better, yet catch this flower before thou go out of the
garden, and peradventure the sent thereof will bring thee back to smell the
rest. As the corpse of Hazael made the passengers to stand, 1. Sam. 1. 23.
so I have placed this sentence in the door of thy passage, to make thee
stand and consider what thou do before thou marriest. For this is the scope
and operation of it, to call the mind to a solemn meditation, and warn him
to live in Marriage as in a temptation, which is like to make him worse than he
was, as the Marriage of Iehoram did, if he use not Jobs preservative 2. Chro.
21. 6. Job. 9. 28.
to be ielous over all his life. The allureme^ts of beauty, the troubles
about riches, the charges of children, the losses by servants, the unquietness
of neighbors cry unto him that he is entered into the hardest vocation of
all other: and therefore they which have but nine years prentiship to make
them good Mercers or Drapers, have nineteen years before Marriage to learn to
be good Husbands and Wives, as though it were a trade of nothing but
Mysteries, and had need of double time over all the rest. Therefore so often
as you think upon this saying, think whether you be examples of it, and it
will waken you, and chide you, and lead you a straight path, like the Angel
which led the servant of Abraham. Genesis 24. 48.


Thus I have chalked the way, to prepare you unto Marriage, as the Levites
prepared their brethren 2. Chro. 35. 6.
to the Passover: Remember that this day ye are made one, and therefore must
have but one will. And now the Lord Jesus in whom ye are contracted, knit your
hearts together, that ye may love one another like David and Jonathan, and 1.
Sam. 18. 8
go before you in this life, like the Star which went before the Math. 2. 9.
Gentiles, that ye may begin, and proceed, and end in his glory. To whom be
all glory for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
A Treatise of the Lords Supper, in two Sermons.



Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin for Thomas Man, dwelling in Paternoster
row at the sign of the Talbot. 1591.

A Treatise of the Lords Supper; in two Sermons.
The first Sermon.
1. Cor. 11. 23, 24. The Lord Jesus in the night that he was betrayed, took
bread:

And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat: this is my
body, which is broken for you: this do ye in remembrance of me.


THE Word and the Sacraments are the two breasts wherewith our mother does
nurse us. Seeing every one receives, and few understand what they receive; I
thought it the necessariest doctrine to preach of the Sacrament; which is a
witness of Gods promises, a remembrance of Christ's death, and a seal of our
adoption: therefore Christ has not instituted this Sacrament for a fashion in
his Church to touch, and feel, and see, as we gaze upon pictures in the
windows, but as the woman which had the bloody Mat. 9. 20.
issue, touching the hemme of Christ's garment, drew virtue from Christ
himself because she believed: So Christ would that we touching these signs,
should draw virtue from himself, that is, all the graces which these signs
represent. Therefore as the Leuits 2. Chro. 35. 6.
under the Law, were bound to prepare their brethren before they came to the
Passover; so Preachers of the Gospel should prepare their brethren before
they come to the Supper of the Lord. For which purpose I have chosen this place
to the Corinthians, which is the cleerest and fullest declaration of this
Sacrament in all the Scripture.

The Lord Jesus in the night etc. The sum of all these words is, The division.
the institution, and use of the Lords Supper. First Paul shows the author
of it, The Lord Jesus, then the time when it was instituted, in the night that
he was betrayed, then the manner how he did institute it, he took bread: and
when he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave unto his disciples, etc. then
the end why he did institute it, for a remembrance of his death.

Touching the author, he which The Author.
is signified by it, was the author of it. The Lord Jesus has bid us to
Supper, I am not worthy (says John) to loose his shoe; so we are not
worthy to wait at his trencher, John. 1. 27.
and yet he will have us sit at his table. To him belongs the power to
ordain Sacraments in None but Christ may ordeyne Sacraments.
his Church, because he fulfilled the Sacraments of the Law. When Christ came
the Passover ceased, because he is our Passover, that is, the Lamb by whose
blood we John. 1. 29.
are saved. When Christ came, Circumcision ceased, because he is our
Circumcision, that is, the purifier and clenser of our sins. Revel. 7. 14.
Now these two Sacraments are fulfilled, he has appointed two other Sacraments
for them in sted of the paschal Lamb, which the Jews did eat, he has given
us an other Lamb to eat, which John calls the Lamb of God, that is John.
1. 29.
himself, upon whom all do feed, whosoever do receive this Sacrament with
an assured faith that Christ died to possess them of life. The breaking of the
bread, does signify the wounding of his body: the pouring of the Wine does
signify the shedding of his blood. The eating of the bread, and drinking of
the Wine, does signify that his flesh and blood do nourish in us life
eternal, as the bread and Wine do nourish the life present.

Instead of Circumcision, which began at Abraham, he has ordained Genesis 17. 10.
Baptism, which began at John, a more lively representation Who was therefore
called John the Baptist. Math. 3. 1. Revel. 1 5. Reu. 22. 14.
of the true circumcision of the heart, because it represents unto us the
blood of Christ which washes our souls, as the water in Baptism washes our
bodies.

Touching the time: In the night The time.
(says Paul) therefore this Sacrament is called The Lords Supper, Verse. 23.
because it was instituted at night when they used to suppe. But what night?
even that night (says Paul) when he was betrayed: that night which he should
have cursed, as Job did the day of his birth, Job. 3. 3.
if he had suffered against his will: that night when he should have thought to
destroy men, as men conspired to destroy him, that night (says Paul) this
Sacrament of grace, and peace, and life began. Even that night when we betrayed
him. Many nights did he spend in watching, and praying for us, and is there a
night now for us to kill and betray him? That was a dark night, when men went
about to put out the Sun which brought them light. Who can but wonder, to see
how Christ, and they for whom Christ came, were occupied at one time? when
they devised mischief against him, and sought all means to destroy him, then
he consulted how to save them, and instituted the same night this blessed
Sacrament, to convey al his graces and blessings unto them, Even that night
when they betrayed him.

The reason why this action was Why this Sacrament was instituted at night.
deferred until night, is, because that was the time appointed by the Law to
eat the Passover, which was like a predecessor of this Sacrament. The reason
why Why it was deferred till his last night.
he deferred until his last night, was, because the Passover could not be
ended, before the fullness of time, and the true Paschall Lamb were come to be
slain in stead of the other. Therefore how fitly did Christ end the Passover,
which was a sign of his suffering so presently before his suffering? And
beside, how sweetly did he confirm his Disciples faith, when as they should
see that the next day performed before their eyes, which ouernight both in the
Passover, and in the Sacrament, was so lively resembled unto them. If any from
this do gather, that we ought to eat the Lords Supper at night as Christ Why
we receive not the Lords Supper at night.
did, he must understand that we have not the same cause to do so which Christ
had, because of the Passover. And therefore the Church which has discretion
of times and places, has altered both the time, and the place, using the
temples in stead of the chamber, and the morning in stead of the evening: for
indifferent things are ruled by order and decency.

Touching the manner, He took Verse. 23. 24
bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave it unto them. He
would not eat it, nor break it, before he had given thanks to God. What need
he which was God, give thanks to God, but to show us what we should do, when we
eat our selves? In all things give thanks (says Paul) whereby 1 Thessalonians. 5.
18.
we declare, that all things come from God: but the wicked believe Note.
easier that God does take, than that he does give, and therefore they never
pray heartily unto him for any thing, nor feelingly thank him for it. For which
the Lord complains, saying: I have Mala. 1. 2.
loved you, yet ye say, wherein have thou loved us? showing, that we are
worse than the Ox, which Esai. 1 3.
knows his feeder. And if we acknowledge all things from God, yet we do like
Lot, Is it not a little Genesis 19. 20.
one (says he) when he craved to go unto Zoar, as though it were not much
which he asked: so we mince and extenuate the gifts of God, before we receive
them and after; like them which have a grace for dinner, and none for
breakefast, as though they had their dinners from God, and breakefasts of their
own. Our example did not so: Although it was but bread which he received, yet
he was more thankful for bread, than many which bury the fowls, and fishes,
and beasts, in their belly: for if a count of all were kept, for one that
prays Give us this day our daily bread, a hundredth take their bread, and Luke
11. 3.
meat, and sleep too, which never pray for it.

After he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave unto them, and said, Take,
eat: for when he had given thanks to God, then it was sanctified, and blessed,
and lawful to eat. So, when thou seruest Note.
God, then it is lawful for thee to use Gods blessings, then thou may eat
and drink as Christ did, but not before, for these things were created to
serve them which serve God; if thou do not serve him for them, thou
encrochest upon Gods blessings, and stealest his creatures, which are no more
thine, than thou art his, for the good God created all things for good men, as
the devils possessions are reserved for evil men. Therefore as Christ would
not break the bread, before he had given thanks to the founder, so know, that
there is some thing to be done, before thou receive any benefit of God, and
presume not to use his creatures with more liberty than his Son did, which
did not eat without giving thanks nor rise again without singing of a Psalm.
Mat. 26. 30.


It follows, This is my body. Here is the fruit of his thanks before, he
prayed that the bread and wine might be blessed, and they were blessed. As
Isaacs blessing showed it self upon Iaacob whom Genesis 27.
he blessed; so Christ's blessing appeared straight upon these mysteries: for it
could not be said before, this is my body, because it was mere bread; but
now it may be called his body, because his blessing has infused that virtue
into it, that it does not only represent his body, but convey his body, and
himself unto us. The efficacy of this blessing is in this Sacrament ever
since, sanctifying it unto us as well as it did to the Apostles, even as
Christ's prayer stayed Luk 22. 32.
Peter's faith after Christ was dead.

Because upon these words the Papists ground their Transubstanciation, that is,
that the bread is changed into Christ's flesh, and the Wine is turned into
Christ's blood, whereby we eat the same body which died upon the Cross, and
drink the same blood which issued out of his side, that you may see the
blindness of this Popish dream, I would have you but mark every word of
this Scripture how they make against Tra^substanciation, that you may see them
slain like Goliath with their 1. Sam 17. 51.
own sword. Even as GOD made Caiphas speak against himself; Ioh. 18. 14.
so the Scriptures which heretics allege, do make against themselves, like
the Baalites which 1. King. 18. 28.
wounded their own flesh. I may liken their allegations to Satan's, when he
tempted Christ in the Wilderness, he alleged but one Math. 4. 4.
sentence of Scripture for himself, and that Psalm out of which he Psalm. 91.
11.
borrowed it, makes so plain against him, that he was feign to pick here a
word, and there a word, and leave out that which went before, and skip in the
midst, and omit that which came after, or else he had marred his cause. The
Scripture is so holy, and pure, and true, that no word, nor syllable thereof
can make for the devil, or for sinners, or for heretics: yet as the devil
alleged Scripture, though it made not for him, but against him; so do the
Libertines, and Epicures, and Heretics, as though they had learned at his
school. Now there is no sentence of the scripture, which the wiser Papists
aledge bouldly for their Transubstantiation, but this, that Christ said, This
is my Math. 26. 26.
body, by which they may prove as well that Christ is a door, because he says,
I am the door: or a Ioh. 107 9.
Vine, because he says, I am a Vine, for his sayings are like. Figurative Ioh.
15 1.
speeches, must not be construed literally, but this is Heretics fashion. If
you mark, you shall see thorough out, that all the testimonies which the
Papists aledge for their heresies, are either tropes, or figures, or
allegories, or parables, or allusions, or dark speeches; which when they
presume to expound allegorically, or literally, without conference of other
scriptures, then they wander, and stray from the mark, or else it is
impossible, that the truth should mainteyne error, that is, that the scripture
should speak for heresy, if it were not perverted: therefore we see that Eve
never Genesis 3. 3.
erred, until she corrupted the text.

Now we will enter the lists with our adversaries, and see whether these words
do prove that the bread and wine are turned Arguments against Popish
Transubstantiation.
into Christ's body. Paul says, Jesus took bread: well then, yet it is
bread: when he had taken it, then he blessed it, what did he bless? the bread
which he took, 1
well then, yet it is bread: when he had blessed it, then he brake it, what did
he break? the bread which he blessed, well then, yet it is bread: when he had
broken it, then he gave it, what did he give? the bread which he brake, well
then, yet it is bread: when he had given it, then they did eat it, what did
they eat? the bread which he gave them, well then, yet it is bread: when they
did eat it, then he said, this is my body: what did he call his body? the
bread which they did eat, well then, yet it is bread. If it be bread all this
while, when he did take it, and bless it, and break it, and give it, and they
did eat it, when is it turned into his body? here they stand like the
Sadduces, as mute Math. 22. 34.
as fisshes.

Now that ye may see that not we only say it is bread and wine after the
consecration, in the 27. verse Christ himself does call it bread and wine
after he had given it, as he did before. And in Mark he says, I will drink
no more Mar. 14. 25
of the fruit of the Vine. Here Christ says, that it was the fruit of the
Vine which he drank, but his blood is not the fruit of Vines, but Wine,
therefore Wine was his drink, and not blood.

Beside, if you would hear Paul 2
expound Christ, he shows, that all our Fathers had the same substance 1.
Cor. 10. 4.
of Christ in their Sacraments, that we have in ours, for he says, They all
did eat the same Verse. 3. 4.
spiritual meat, and all drink the same spiritual drink. Straight he
says, that this meat and this drink Verse. 4.
was Christ. Mark that he says not only, They did eat the same meat that
we eat, but he says, that this meat was Christ: and not only so, but to
show that Christ is not a corporal meat, as the Papists say: he says, he is
a spiritual meat, as we say; therefore you see that we do not eat him
corporally, no more than our Fathers, but that as they did eat him
spiritually, so do we; for spiritual meat must be eaten spiritually, as
corporal meat is eaten corporally.

Again, for the signs to be turned 3
into the thing signified by them, is utterly against the nature of a
Sacrament, and makes it no Sacrament, because there is no sign: for every
Sacrament does consist of a sign, and a thing signified, the sign is ever an
earthly thing, and that which it signifies is a heavenly thing. This shall
appear in all examples, as in Paradise there was a very Tree for the Genesis 2. 9.
sign, and Christ the thing signified by it. In Circumcision there Genesis 17. 11.
was a cutting off of the skin, and the cutting off of sin. In the Passover
there was a Lamb, and Exo. 12. 3.
Christ. In the Sabbath there was Exo. 23. 11.
a day of rest, and eternal rest. In the Sacrifices there was an offering Heb.
9. 13.
of some beast, and the offering of Christ. In the Sanctuary there Exo. 30.
was the holy place, and heaven. In the Propitiatory there was the golden
Covering, and Christ our Exo. 25. 24.
cover. In the Wilderness there was a Rock yielding water, and Christ
yielding his blood. In the Exo. 17. 16.
Apparition there was a Dove, and Mat. 3. 16.
the Holy Ghost. In the Manna there was Bread, and Christ. In Ioh. 6. 49.
Baptism there is very Water Ioh. 1. 33.
which washes us, and Christ's blood washing us; so in the Supper of Christ
there is very Bread and Wine for the sign, and the body and blood of Christ
for the 1. Cor. 11. 19.
thing signified, or else this Sacrament is against the nature of all other
Sacraments.

Again, there must be a proportion between the Passover and the Lords
Supper, because this was figured by the other. Now, the Jews had in their
Passover, Bread, and Wine, and a Lamb; Exo. 12.
so Christ instituting his Supper, left Bread, and Wine, and a Lamb, Matthew. 16.
which name is given to himself, because he came like a Lamb, and Ioh. 1. 29.
died like a Lamb.

Again, if Christ's very body 5
were offered in the Sacrament, then it were not a Sacrament, but a Sacrifice;
which two differ as much as giving, and taking: for in a Sacrifice we give, and
in a Sacrament we receive, and therefore we say our Sacrifice, and Christ's
Sacrament.

Again, every Sacrifice was 6 Exo. 27.
offered upon an Altar. Now, mark the wisdom of the Holy Ghost, least we
should take this for a Sacrifice, he never names Altar when he speaks of it,
but, the table of the Lord. Therefore it is no doubt but the devil has kept
the name of Altar, that we might think it a Sacrifice. Again, if the bread
were Christ's flesh, and the wine his blood, as these two are separate one from
the other; so Christ's flesh should be separate from his blood, but his body
is not divided, for the^ it were a dead body. Again, that which remains
does nourish the body, and relish in the mouth as it did before, which could
not be, but that it is the same food which it was before. Again, I would
ask, whose are this whiteness, and hardness, and roundnes, and coldness? None
of them say that it is the whiteness, and hardness, and roundnes, and coldness
of Christ's body: therefore it must needs be the whiteness, and hardness,
and roundnes, and coldness of the bread, or else qualities should stand without
substances, which is, as if one should tell you of a house without a
foundation. Again, as Christ dwells in us, so he is eaten of us, but he
dwells in us only by says, Ephe. 3. 17. Therefore he is eaten only by
faith. Again, none can be saved, without the communion of the body: but if
all should communicate with it corporally, then neither infants nor any of our
fathers, the Patriarchs or the Prophets should be saved, because they received
it not so.

Again, Christ says not, this wine, but this cup, and therefore by their
conclusion, not only the wine should be turned into blood, but the cup too.

Again, Paul says, They which 13
receive unworthily, receive their own damnation. But if it were the flesh of
Christ, they should rather receive salvation than damnation, because Christ
says, He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood John. 6. 54.
has life everlasting.

Again, if they would hear an Angel from heaven, when Christ's 14
body was glorified, an Angel said to the women, He is risen, and is not Math.
28. 6
here, as if he should say, his body is but in one place at once, or else he
might have been there, though he was risen.

Again, why do they say in receiving this Sacrament ever since 15
the Primitive church, Lift up your hearts, if they have all in their mouths?
To end this controversy. Here we may say as the Disciples said to Christ,
Whether shall we go Ioh. 6. 68.
from thee? I mean we need not go to any other expositor of christ than
Christ himself. Therefore mark what he says: At first when Christ said, that
he was the bread of life, and that all which would Ioh. 6. 60.
live must eat him, they murmured until he expounded his words; and how did
he expound his words? Thus, He that comes Ioh. 6. 35.
unto me has eaten, and he that believes in me has drunk. After when he
instituted this Sacrament, in like words, they murmured not, which they would
as before, if he had not resolved them before, that to eat his body, and to
drink his blood, was nothing but to come to him, and believe in him. After he
had said so, they murmured not, because they did see some reason in it. As it
is plainly said, This is my body; so it is plainly said, these words are
spirit, that is, they must be understood spirituallie, and not literallie.

I did not allege the Fathers in my Sermon, but if any man suspend his assent,
till they bring in their verdit, let him hear them make confession of their
belief. Augustine says, the Lord doubted Aug. upon the 3. Psalm.
not to say, this is my body, when he gave only a sign, or Sacrament of his
body.

Tertullian says, this is my body, Ter. against Marcion the 4. book.
that is, a sign of my body.

Ambrose says, the bread and wine remain still the same thing 4. book 4.
chap. of Ferra.
that they were.

Theodoret says, after the consecration, In his first Dialog.
the mystical signs do not cast off their own nature, but abide still in
their first substance and form.

Origin says, the bread that is Upon the 15. of Mat.
sanctified with the word of God, as touching the material substance thereof
goes into the belly, and forth again like other meats.

Irenaeus says, that it has two Irenae 4. book. chap. 34. against Valentinus.
things in it, one earthly, and the other heavenly.

Cyrill says, Our Sacraments avouch not the eating of a man. Ad ob. Theod.
Anathematis. 11.


Ciprian says, the Lord calls bread made of many grains, his 1. book of
Epist.
body, and called wine made of many grapes, his blood.

Athanasius says, Christ made In that Gospel, whosoever speaks a word etc.
mention of his ascension into heaven, that he might withdraw his Disciples
from corporal and fleshly eating.

Chrysostom says, God gives us Hom. 60. to the people of Antioch. To
Caesarus the Monk.
things spiritual under things visible and natural. And again, being
sanctified, it is delivered from the name of bread, and is exalted to the name
of the Lords body, although the nature of the bread still remain.

And because they believe that the Pope cannot err, Pope Gelasius sets to
his hand, and says with the rest, Neither the substance of the bread, nor
nature of the Against Eutyches the Here.
wine cease to be, more than they were before.

Tell us Papist, do not these Fathers speak as plain as we? Can thou
avouch Transubstanciation more flatly than they deny it? How had this heresy
been chased, if the devil had hatched it in their time?

Thus the Scriptures on the one side, and the Fathers on the other side did so
trouble three arch Papists, Biel, Tonstal, and Fisher, that Gabriel Biel says,
how the body Upon the Canon lect. 40.
of Christ is in the Sacrament, is not found in the canon of the Bible.

Tonstal says, It had been better 1. book of the Sacrament. page 46.
to leave every man to his own conjecture, as they were before the Council
of Laterane, than to bring in such a question.

Fisher says, No man can prove Against the captivity of Babylon made by M.
Luther.
by the words of the Gospel, that any Priest in these days does consecrate
the very body and blood of Christ.

Here is fulfilled, Out of thine Luke 19. 22.
own mouth I will condemn thee. But we will not carry the matter so,
because a Judge must have two ears, therefore now let the^ speak. Because they
cannot tell how the The Papists allegations for the real presence.
bread and wine should be turned into flesh and blood, and yet appear bread
and wine still, they say it is a miracle: but how do they prove it? If they
contend it is a miracle, they must show us a sign, for every miracle may be
seen, like all the miracles of Moses, and Christ, and the Apostles: and
therefore a miracle is called a sign, because it may be seen like Exo. 4. 8.
and 21.
a sign, and the word signifies a wonder, as though we did see something to
wonder. And the Jews craving a miracle, said, Show us a miracle: as though
they were Exo. 6.
taught to judge of miracles by sight. All which does show that a miracle may
be seen, but here no miracle is seen.

Again, a miracle (especially in the time of the Gospel) is an extraordinary
thing, but they make this an ordinary thing: for if the bread and wine turned
into flesh and blood, then miracles are as common as Sacraments, and so because
they have Mass every day, they should work miracles every day. Lastly, this
seems strange, that Augustine, whom they so much honor, gathered all the
miracles which are written in the Scripture, and yet amongst all, speaks not
of this; therefore then it was counted no miracle: but Paul speaks of lying
miracles, and this 2 Thessalonians 2. ^
is one of them.

If they say that Christ can turn Object.
Bread and Wine into his body, and therefore he does. First they Answ.
must prove that he will: for they can do many things themselves which they
do not, because they will not: therefore it is an old answer, that from Can
to Will, no argument follows. The Leper did not say to Christ, If thou can,
thou will; but, If thou will, thou can. Mar. 1. 40.


But the question which they think cannot be answered, like their invincible
Nauies, is this. If the Bread be not his body, why Object.
does he call it his body? Resolve this knot and all is clear. Mark then and
we will loose it as well as we can: He says, This is my body, as he says
after, which is broken Answ.
for you. Why? his body was not broken before he suffered, how did he say
then, which is broken, before it was broken? There is no sense of it but this,
the Bread was broken, and signified that his body should be broken. Now, as
the breaking of the Bread did signify the breaking of his body, so the Bread
must needs signify his body: but as his body was not broken indeed when
the Bread was broken, so the Bread could not be his body indeed: for then his
body should have been broken when the Bread was broken: yet let them object
what they can.

If (say they) the Bread and Wine Object.
be not changed into his body and blood, why does he speak so darkly? he
might have spoken pla^ner.

I answer, though this seem Answ*
dark to Papists, yet it was not dark to the Apostles, they understood his
meaning well enough, and all the rest for 1215. years after Christ, before
Transubstanciation was spoken of. If the Apostles had not understood his
meaning, they would not stick to ask him as their manner was, until they were
acquainted with Christ's phrase, whensoever they doubted upon any of his
speeches, they were wont to come unto him, and say, Master, what is the
meaning? but Luke 8. 9.
they were used to such phrases: for it was Christ's manner to teach by
similitudes, showing one thing by another, which is the plainest manner of
teaching, and most used in holy Scripture, especially in the types and
shadows of this Sacrament. For example, Christ calls the Lamb the
Passover, in Math. 26. 17.
place whereof this Sacrament succeeded, and therefore presently after they had
eaten the Passover, Christ instituted this Sacrament to be used for it. Christ
(I say) called the Lamb the Passover, and yet the Passover was this, an
Angel passed over the houses of the Exo. 12. 27.
Israelites, and struck the Egiptians, this was not a Lamb, and yet because
the Lamb was a sign of this Passover, as the bread and wine is of Christ's
body, therefore Christ called the Lamb the Passover, as he calls the bread
and wine his body.

Again, Circumcision is called Genesis 17. 13.
the Covenant, and yet Circumcision was nothing but the cutting away of a skin:
but the Covenant is, In Abrams seed all nations shall be blessed, I will be
their God, and they shall be my people, I Genesis 12. 3.
will defend and save them, and they shall serve and worship me. This is not
Circumcision, and yet as though Circumcision were the Covenant it self, it is
called the Covenant, because it signified the Covenant, so Bread and Wine are
called Christ's body, because they signify Christ's body.

Again, Baptism is called regeneration, Tit. 3. 5.
and yet Baptism is a dipping of our bodies in water, but regeneration is the
renewing 1. Cor. 6. 11.
of the mind, to the image wherein it was created: this is not Baptism, and
yet as though Baptism were regeneration it self, it is called regeneration,
because it signified regeneration: so the bread and wine are called Christ's
body, because they signify Christ's body.

Again, the Cup is called the Luc. 22. 20.
new Testament, and yet the Cup is but a piece of metal, filled with Wine:
but the new Testament is, He which believes in the John. 3. 36.
Son, shall be saved: this is not a Cup, and yet as though the Cup were the
new Testament it self, it is called the new Testament, because it signifies
the new Testament: so the bread and wine are called Christ's body, because they
signify Christ's body. They which knew that the Lamb is not the Passover,
though Christ called it the Passover; that Circumcision is not the Covenant,
though God called it the Covenant; that Baptism is not regeneration, though it
be called regeneration; that the Cup is not the new Testament, though Christ
called it the new Testament; could they not as well understand, that the Bread
and Wine were not Christ's body, though Christ called them his body? As they
understood these speeches, so they understood this speech, therefore they
which say, that the bread and wine are Christ's body, because Christ says,
This is my body: Math. 26. 26.
may as well say, that the Lamb is the Passover, because Christ calls it
the Passover, that Baptism is regeneration, because Paul calls it
regeneration, that the Cup is the new Testament, because Christ calls it the
new Testament.

If every Sacrament was called by the thing which it signified, and yet never
any Sacrament was taken for the thing it self, what reason have they to take
this Sacrament for the thing it self, more than all the rest? It is the consent
of all Writers that a Sacrament is a sign, therefore not the thing signified:
no more than the bush at the door, is the Wine in the seller. If I call the
Prince a Phoenix, the University a Fountain, the Court a Pecocke, the City a
Sea, the Country an Eremite, why can the Papists understand me, and not
understand Christ? What a dark, and strange, and intricat, and incredible
speech had this bin for them, to understand grossly, and literally? would they
think, that they did eat Christ's body, when his body stood before them, and
he had told them before, that his body was like their body? Nay, this would
have required more words, and made them come again, with Master, what is the
meaning? for they were Luke 8. 9.
not so instructed yet before the resurrection, to believe every thing without
questioning, if it were contrary to sense and reason: but as they asked, who
had John. 4. 33.
given him any meat, when he said that he had meat, and they could see none:
so they would have asked, what meat is this which we see not? how can every
one of us eat his body, and yet he has but one body, and that body is whole
when we eat it? lo, he stands before us and says, that his body is like
unto ours, and yet he takes bread and breaks it, and gives it unto us to eat,
and when we eat it, he says This is my body: and yet his body stands before
us still. If his body Luk 24. 39.
be like ours (as he says) how can it be eaten and be there, for ours can not?
Thus they would have questioned, if they had not bin used to such phrases: but
as they could understand him when he called himself a stone, and a rock, and
a door, and a window, and a Vine, so they could pick out his meaning, when he
said that bread was his body: for he had told them before, that he was the
bread of eternal life. John. 16. 5.


Now the bread of eternal life is not eaten with teeth, for the body cannot
eat spiritually, no more than the soul can eat corporally, and therefore he
is such a bread as is eaten with faith, and so himself faith in the Gospel of
John. Ioh. 6. 35.
Mark this eating by faith, and all the strife is ended. Flesh and blood
indeed need not faith to chewe them, for the teeth can chew them well enough.
Therefore, if the Bread and Wine were the body of Christ, then we need not
faith to eat it, but all which have teeth might eat Christ's body, yea, the
Mice might eat it as well as men, for they eat the same bread that we do,
as well after it is consecrated, as before.

If this be not enough to batter the ruins of this vpstart heresy, I will
come to interrogatories, and see whether they have learned it by rote, or by
reason. If they ground their Transubstantiation upon these words of Christ
Math. 26. 26.
This is my body, which he spoke to his Disciples, I ask them, whether they
receive that body which was mortal, or that body which is glorified, because
one of Neither Christ's mortal body, nor his immortal body, can be in the same.
these bodies they must needs receive, either his mortal body, or his
glorified body. If they say, that it is his mortal body, the mortal body will
not profit them: for you see that mortal food is but for this mortal life,
neither has Christ a mortal body now to communicate unto them, because it is
changed to an immortal body, therefore they can not receive the mortal
body, because Christ has not a mortal body to give them. If they say that
they receive his glorified body, then they must fly from this text, for at
that time Christ had no glorified body.

When this Sacrament was instituted, and Christ said This is my body, his body
was not glorified, because the Sacrament was instituted before his death, and
his body was glorified after his resurrection. Therefore if they receive the
same body which the Apostles received, as they say they do, they cannot
receive a glorified body, because then Christ had not a glorified body to
communicate unto the^. Thus the rocks and sands are of both sides them, they
receive a body neither mortal, nor immortal: if Christ has any such body,
judge you. Here they stand like a fool, which cannot tell on his tale.
Nebuchadnezar dreamed a dream Dan. 4. 15.
and knew not what it meant.

Beside, I ask them to whom Christ spoke when he said, This Mar. 14. 24
is my body. Mark says, he spoke them, that is, to his Disciples: well then,
if these words, This is my body, were not spoken to the signs, but to the
persons, not to the bread and wine, but to the receivers: as the words which
follow, Do this in remembrance of me: if Christ spoke not to the bred, and
wine, but to his Disciples.
these words were not spoken to the bread and wine, then it is plain that they
do not change the nature of the bread and wine. If the nature of them be not
altered, then the substance remains, and then we receive no other substance
with them, because two substances cannot be in one place.

What then, is there nothing in More in the Lords Supper tha^ bread and wine.
the Sacrament but bread and wine, like a hungrey nunscion? Nay we say not that
the Sacrament is nothing but a bare sign, or that you receive no more than you
see: for Christ says, that it is his body, and Paul says, that it is the
communion of Christ's body and blood. 1. Cor. 10. 16.
Therefore there is more in Sacramental bread, than in common bread: though
the nature be not changed, yet the use is changed; it does not only nourish the
body as it did before, but it brings a bread with it which nourishes the
soul: for as sure as we receive bread, so sure we receive Christ: not only the
benefits of Christ, but Christ, although not in a Popish manner: yet we are so
joined unto him, as though we were but one body. As the spouse A similitude.
does not marry with the lands and goods, but with the man himself, and being
partaker of him, is made partaker of them: so the faithful do not only marry
with Christ's benefits, but with Christ himself; and being partakers of him,
they are made partakers of his benefits: for Christ may not be divided from his
benefits, no more than the Sun from his light. It is said, the Father gave
us Romans 8. 32.
his Son, and so the Son gives us himself. As the bread is a sign of his
body: so the giving of the bread is a sign of the giving of his body: like a
Pelican which lets her young ones suck her blood: so that we may say, the
Lord enuited us to Supper, and he himself was our meat. But if you ask how
this is? I must answer, it is a mystery: but if I could tell it, it were no
mystery. Yet as it is said, when three men walked in the midst of the
furnace, one like the Son of GOD D^^. 3. 25.
walked amongst them. So, when the faithful receive the Bread and Wine, one
like the Son of God seems to come unto them, which fills them with peace and
joy, and grace, that they marvel what it was which they received, besides
bread and wine. For example, thou make a bargain A similitude.
with thy neighbor for house or land, and receyuest in earnest a piece of
goulde, that which thou receyuest is but a piece of goulde, but now it is a
sign of thy bargain, and if thou keep not touch with him, happily it will
claspe thee for all that thou art worth, so that which thou receyuest is
bread, but this bread is a sign of an other matter, which passes bread.

Again, thou have an Obligation Another similitude.
in thy hand, and I ask thee, what have thou there, and thou say, I have
here an hundredth pounds: why (say I) there is nothing but paper, ink, and
wax: oh but by this say thou, I will recover an hundredth pounds, that is as
good. So beloved, this is as good, that under these signs, you receive the
virtue of Christ's body and blood by faith, as if you did eat his body, and
drink his blood indeed, which is horrible to think that any should devour
their God, thinking thereby to worship him, never any Heretic nor Idolater
conceived so grossly of their God, before the Papist. We read of a people which
did eat men, but never of any people which did eat their God. All the
Apostles say, that it was needful that Christ should take our flesh, but no
Apostle says, that it is needful that we should take Christ's flesh; for
all the blessings of Christ are apprehended by faith, and nothing is fit to
apprehend him whom we see not but faith: and therefore one of their own
pillars said, Believe, and thou Augustine.
have eaten. Faith does more in religion than the mouth, or else we might say
with the woman, Blessed Luke 11. 27.
are the breasts which gave thee suck, and so none should be blessed but Mary:
but Mary was not blessed, because Christ was in her body, but because Christ
was in her heart, and least this should seem incredible unto you, because Mary
is called blessed among Women. When Christ hard the woman say, Blessed are the
breasts which gave thee suck, he replied unto her, Blessed are they which hear
the word of God, and keep it, these are my Brethren, and Sisters, and Mother
Luke 8. 21.
(says Christ) as though the rest were no kin to him in heaven, though they
were kin in earth. Thus if Christ were in thy body, and thou should say as
this woman, Blessed is the body which has thee in it, nay would Christ say,
Blessed is the heart which has me in it. If Mary were no whit better for having
Christ in her arms, nor for having him in her body, how much better art thou,
for having him in thy belly where thou can not see him? must the sun needs
come to us, or else cannot his heat and light profit us, nay, it does us more
good, because it is so far off: so this sun is gone from us, that he might
give more light unto us, which made him say, It is good for you that I go from
you; therefore Ioh. 16. 7.
away with this carnal eating of spiritual things. Many daughters have done
virtuously, but thou (says Solomon) surpassest them all. So, Pro. 31. 29.
many Heretics have spoken absurdly, but this surpasses them all, that Christ
must be applied like physic, as though his blood could not profit us, unless
we did drink it, and swallowe it as a potion. Is this the Papists union with
Christ? is this the manner whereby we are made one flesh with Christ, to eat
his flesh? Nay, when he took our flesh unto him, and was made man, then we
were united to him in the flesh and not now. Christ took our flesh, we take
not his flesh, but believe that he took ours, therefore if you would know
whether Christ's body be in the Sacrament, I say unto you as Christ said unto
Thomas, touch, feel, Ioh. 20. 27.
and see. In visible things, God has appointed our eyes to be judges, for as
the spirit discerns spiritual objects, so sense discerns of sensible
objects. As Christ taught Thomas to judge of his body, so may we, and so
should they: therefore if you cannot see his body, nor feel his body, you
may gather by Christ's saying to Thomas, that he would not have you believe
that it is his body, for my body (says Christ) may be seen, and felt. And
thus Transubstanciation is found a liar.

Now if you ask me, why Christ calls the sign by the Why christ calls
the bread his body.
name of the thing it self, I ask thee again, May thou say when thou
see the picture of the Queen, this is the Queen, and when thou see the
picture of a Lion, this is a Lion: and may not Christ say when he sees a thing
like his body, This is my body?

I showed you before, that every Sacrament is called by the name of the thing
which it does signify, and therefore why should we stumble at this, more than
the rest? The reason why the signs have the name of the things, is to strike a
deeper reverence in us to receive this Sacrament of Christ reverently,
sincerely, and holyly, as if Christ were there present in body and blood
himself. And surely, as he which defaceth the Queens Seal, is convicted of
contempt and treason to her own person, so he which profaneth these seals of
Christ, does not worship Christ, but despise him, and that contempt shall be
required of him, as if he had contemned Christ himself. This is the reason,
why Christ calls the signs of his body, his body, to make us take this
Sacrament reverently.

It follows, Do this in remembrance of me. That is, these signs Verse. 24.
shall be a remembrance of my death: when you break the bread you shall
remember the wounding of my body; and when you drink the wine, you shall
remember the shedding of my blood. If we must do this in remembrance of Christ's
body, which was broken like the bread, it is an argument that his body is not
there, because remembrance is not of things present, but of things absent, we
remember not, but we see that which is before us. This might put the Papists in
remembrance that Christ is not sacrificed now, when we do but remember his
sacrifice: this is not Christ's sacrifice, but a remembrance of his sacrifice;
he was sacrificed before, and now he is applied, least his sacrifice should be
in vain. This was done once really, when he offered himself upon the
Cross, therefore that offering was called a sacrifice, because he was If
Christ's body were in the Sacrament, it were not a Sacrament but a sacrifice.
sacrificed indeed; but this offering is called a Sacrament, because it is but
a sign of his sacrifice. If Christ in this Sacrament were offered indeed, then
it should be called a sacrifice as his once offering was; but because it is but
a remembrance of his sacrifice, therefore it is called a Sacrament. This is not
a sacrifice of Christ, but a sacrifice of our selves. Least we should take it
to be a sacrifice of Christ, Christ himself calls it a remembrance of his
sacrifice, Do this in my remembrance. Here is our work as Christ has done,
so must we do, so we minister, and so you receive: we can give you nothing
but that which we have received from him, as Paul says. Therefore if Christ
did not give his mortal body which stood before them, and could not profit
the^, nor his glorified body, which was not glorified then, and when it was
glorified ascended up unto heaven, and there abides, how can these iugling
Priests make their God again which made them? They can no more turn wine into
blood, and bread into flesh, than they can command a Gnat to become a Cammell:
for it is a greater work to make GOD, than to make the world. Therefore as
Christ says, When they tell you, here Math. 24. 23.
is Christ, and there is Christ, believe them not: So, when they tell you that
Christ is in heaven, and that Christ is in earth, in this place and that place,
believe them not: for Elias ascension was a figure of Christ's ascension: when
Elias was ascended, yet some sought for his 2. King. 2. 17.
body upon earth: so though christ be ascended, yet many seek his body upon
earth: but as they could not find Elias body, so these can not find Christ's
body, although they have sought 300. years. But if his body were upon
earth, as they say, should we handle it and touch it, now it is glorified?
After his resurrection he said to Mary, Ioh. 20. 17.
Touch me not, because his body was glorified, that is, not to be touched
with fingers any more, but with faith. Therefore we read of none which
touched his body after it was risen, but only Thomas to setle his faith. Thus
you see we need to suborn no witnesses; for every word in this text which
they allege for Transubstanciation, does make against Transubstanciation,
whereby if Antichrist does signify the^ which are against Christ, you see who
may be called Antichrist. There is no question in Popery (except Purgatory
the Popes publican and tasker) about which the Papists are at such civil
wars among themselves, as about this Transubstanciation. They cannot tell
when the change begins, nor what manner of change it is, nor how long the
change continues, some hang one way, and some an other, like the Midianites
which Judge. 7. 22.
fought one against another. And no marvel though their consciences stagger
about it: for to show you the right father of it, it was one of the dreams of
Innocentius the 3. in the year of our Lord 1215. so many years passed A
Monster of his age.
before Transubstanciatio^ was named, and then a Pope set it first on foot: so
it came out of Rome the grandame of all heresies, and for want of Scriptures,
has been defended with fire and sword, and swallowed more Martirs, than all
the gulfes of the Papal sea beside.

Now when the doctrines of men go for scripture, you shall Eight absurdities
which follow Transubstantiation.
see how many errors rush into the Church: for grant but this to Innocentius,
as the Papists do, that the bread and wine are changed into Christ's body.
First, it 1
will follow, that Christ's body is not ascended up to heaven, because it
remains upon earth, and so one of the articles of our faith shall be
falsified, which says, He is ascended into heaven, or if he Act. 1. 9. 11
be ascended, and descended again, an other article will be falsified, which
says, that he sits Romans 8. 34.
at the right hand of his father, that is as Peter says, he abides in heaven.
Act. 3. 21.
Secondly it will follow, that 2
Christ has not a true body, but a fantastical body, because it may be in
many places at one time; for if his body be in the Sacrament, he must needs
have so many bodies as there be Sacraments; nay, he must have so many bodies as
there be bits in every sacrament. Thirdly it will follow, that his body is
divided from his soul, 3
and consequently is a dead body, because the bread is only changed into his
body, and not into his soul. Fourthly it will follow, that 4
the wicked and profane, and reprobat, may receive Christ as well as the
godly, because they have a mouth to eat as well as the best. Fifthly it will
follow that Christ's 5 Hebr. 9. 28. and. 10. 12.
sacrifice once for all was not sufficient, because we must sacrifice him
again, and break his body and shead his blood, as the Jews crucified him
upon the Cross. Sixthly it will follow that the bread 6
being turned into the body of our redeemer, has a part in our redemption as
well as Christ. Seauenthly it will follow, that Christ 7
did eat his own body: for all the Fathers say that he did eat the same
bread which he gave to his Disciples. Lastly it will follow, 8
that a Massing Priest shall be the creator of his creator, because he makes
him which made him, all these absurdities are hatched of Transubstantiation.

Thus when men devise articles of their own, while they strike upon the
handuill the sparks fly in their face; and they are like the man which began
to build and could not finish it. When I see the Papists in so many
absurdities for intertaining one error, me thinks he seems like a Collier
which is grimed with his own coals. Therefore as in manners we should think
of Peter's saying, Whether is it meet to obey GOD or men? So in doctrines we
should think, whether it be meet to believe Act. 5. 29.
God or me^? Thus you have heard the author of this Sacrament, the Lord Jesus,
the time when it was instituted, in the night that he Conclusion.
was betrayed, the manner how it was instituted, after thanks giving, the end
why it was instituted, for a remembrance of his death, and the discovery of
Transubstanciation, one of the last heresies which Babylon hatched. Now, they
which have been Patrons of it before, should do like the father and mother of
an Idolater, that is, lay the Deuteronomy. 13. 6. and 9.
first hand upon him to end his life. Thus I end. Think what account ye shall
give of that ye have heard.

In this Sermon, leaf C. section 11. lin. 3. for he spoke them, read, he
spoke to them.

A Treatise of the Lords Supper.
The second Sermon.
1. Cor. 11. verse. 25, 26, 27, 28. 25 After the same manner also he took the
cup, when he had supped, saying, This cup is the New Testament in my blood:
this do as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me.

26 For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye show the
Lords death till he come.

27 Wherefore, whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink the cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.

28 Let a man therefore examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread,
and drink of this cup.


HEre I am to speak of the second service (as it were) at the Lords Table, and
of that preparation which is like the Wedding garment that every man must
bring unto this banquet. These words are diversely repeated of the Evangelists.
Here it is said, This cup is the new testament in my blood. In Matthew and in
Mat. 26. 28
Mark, it is said, This cup is my blood of the new testament. This Mar. 14. 25
is the first mention which Christ makes of a Testament, as though now his
promises deserved the name of a Testament, because the seal is set unto them,
which before this Sacrament was not sealed, but like a bare wrighting, without
a signet. This word Testament, does imply a promise, and therefore teaches us,
that the Sacrament does confirm and strengthen, and nourish our faith, because
it seals the promise which we should believe.

Here is to be noted, that Christ does not only speak of a Testament, but he
calls it a new Testament, which words never met together before, as though
the Law were for the old man to mortify him, and the Gospel for the new man
to comfort him again: or, as if the old Testament had so washed her face, and
changed her apparel at Christ's coming, that one would not think it the
same, but a new Testament, because even now she was shadowed with a thousand
Ceremonies, and now they are gone from her, like a mist at the sun rising. As
Christ calls love a new Commandment, because he renewed Ioh. 13 34.
it like a law worn out of memory, so he calls the promise of salvation a
new testament. Every testament is confirmed with blood; the old Testament was
confirmed by the blood of Goats, and Bullocks, and Rams, but Heb. 9. 18.
the new Testament is confirmed by the blood of Christ, My blood (says Christ)
is the blood of the new Mat. 26. 28
Testament: nay this Cup (says Christ) is the new Testament. You Luk 22. 20.
may see then that they may gather as well out of Christ's words, that the Cup
is the new Testament, as that the Wine is his blood. For Christ says, This Cup
is the new Testament, as well as he says, This Wine is my blood, or This
bread is my body. Beside, when Christ speaks of a new Testament, he implies,
that the old Testament Heb. 8. 13.
is fulfilled, the Sacrifices, and Ceremonies of the Law, did signify Christ
before he came, therefore they are fulfilled in his coming, no mo Sacrifices,
no mo Ceremonies, For types and figures
for the truth is come. Sacrifices and Ceremonies are honorably, buried with
the Priesthod of Aaron, let them rest, it is not lawful to violate the
Sepulchers of the dead, and take their bodies out of the earth, as the Witch
would raise Samuel out of his 1. Sam. 28. 14.
grave. Therefore they which retain Ceremonies, which should be abrogated,
relics of Judaism, or relics of Papisme, may be said to violate the
Sepulchers of the dead, and disturb the deceased, like the Witch, which
presumed to raise Samuel out of his grave.

This testament is called a testament in blood, because the testament and will
of a man is confirmed, when the man is dead; so Christ confirmed his Testament
by his death. Moses says, that life is in the blood, so the blood of Christ is
the Leuit. 17. 11.
life of this Testament. If Christ's blood had not been shed, this Testament
made unto us had been unprofitable, as the Testament of a Father is to his
Son, if the Father should not die but live. Therefore the Apostle says,
without Heb. 9. 22.
shedding of blood there is no remission of sins. Therefore the Testament or
covenant of the remission of our sins, is called the Testament in blood; the
blood of Christ is the seal of the Testament which we have to show unto GOD
for the remission of our sins, and the two Sacraments are a seal of that
blood to witness that it was shed.

Again, this is a matter regarded in Testaments and Wills; to the Testament
of him that is dead, no man adds or detracteth, but as the Testator made it,
so it stands without alteration: so Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Revel. 22. 18.
should this Testament of Christ, and this Sacrament of Christ no man should
alter it now he is dead: for he which adds or detracteth has a curse in Gods
book. Therefore Christ when he instituted this Sacrament, commanded, do this,
that is, do as I do, least they should swerve one whit from his own manner:
yet how many gaudes have the Papists added to it, that he which had heard
Christ say, Do this in remembrance of me, and should see how they handle the
matter in their Mass, could see nothing to remember Christ by, but a veil to
hide Christ from him. Therefore this Commandment was repeated again when he
gave The popish receiving under one kind confuted.
the wine, Do this, etc. as he commanded them to eat the bread in remembrance
of him, so he commands them to drink the wine in remembrance of him: nay, he
speaks more precisely of the wine than of the bread; for he says of the Wine,
Drink you all of this, which he says not of the bread. Mat. 26. 27
Surely Christ did foresee that some proud Heretics would do otherwise after
him, even as it is come to pass: for the Papist does break this commandment
of Christ, as flatly as Saul brake the commandment of Samuel. Samuel
commanded him to kill the 1. Sam. 15. 9.
fat and the lean: Saul killed the lean, but not the fat; so Christ
commands to receive bread and wine, they teach to receive bread, but not
wine: Christ says, Drink you all of this, they say drink not all of this:
Christ gave the bread and wine to all, they give the bread to all, and the wine
to some: their Priests receive all, but the people must content themselves with
half: the Priest eats and drinks, but the people must not drink for spilling
on their clothes. Is this the Church which cannot err? Do they think to
hemme Christ in their Mass, and shut his ordinance out of their Mass? The
Soldiers Mat. 27. 35
divided Christ's coat, but these divide his body, and separate the bread and
wine which Christ has joined. Paul speaks of heretics which taught, Touch
not, taste Colos. 2. 21.
not, handle not: so these say, touch not, taste not, handle not, when they
should say, Touch, and taste, and handle. Of all Heresies either old or new,
there is none so injurious How the Popish Priests do iniure the people.
to the common people, as the pasture of shauelings Popery, for they may not
read the Scriptures; they may 1 2 3
not come to Counsels; they may not examine that which is taught them; they
may not be bu^ied 4
without a mortuarie; they may 5
not drink at the Communion, as though their Priests were their Lords.
Therefore we may say as a Heathen did, There is no charity in the Papists
Sacrament, because like Ananias, the Priests keep back Act. 5. 2.
that which they should distribute, and mangle the Sacrifice as though Ely his
sonns had left their hook 1 Samuel 2. 13
to the Massing Friars. Thus that ye may know who succeed the Pharisees, they
have fulfilled that which the Pharisees did, that is, By their own
Commandments they have made the Commandment of Mar. 7. 13.
God of no effect. For whereas the purpose of Christ was to tie our faith wholly
to himself, that we should not seek for any thing without him, knowing that
the maintenance of this life has need both of meat and drink, to teach us
that all sufficiency is in himself, by bread and wine he shows, that he is
in stead both of meat and drink, that is, in stead of all: which signification
is taken away where the wine is not given as well as the bread. Therefore as it
is said of a horrible and odious crime, Consider the matter, and give sentence:
Iud. 19. 30.
so I wish all to consider this Innovation, and give sentence of it. Can there
be any cleerer contradiction to the Word, or bolder check to Christ, than when
he says, Drink you all of this, to say, drink not all of this? As when God
said, Ye shall die: the devil said, ye shall not Genesis 2. 17. Genesis 3. 4.
die, shall we go now to a Counsel, or a Father, or a Doctor to inquire
whether this doctrine be like Christ's doctrine? I do verily think that none
here is so simple but that he sees, that if any thing can be contrary to
Christ's speech, this is contrary to it. But this is only their detraction
from the Sacrament.

Now you shall hear their additions to the Sacrament, look upon their
vestures, and their gestures, and their Altars, and their pix, and their
incense, and their becks, and their nods, and their turnings, all this is more
than Christ did, and therefore the Prophet may say again, Who has required
Esai. 1. 12.
this of you? Did Christ command you to do more than he did, and not do as
he did? therefore let them which have eyes to see, be thanckfull for their
light, when they hear how blind they were, whom God gave over to be seduced.

The fruit of this Sacrament is Verse. 24.
noted in these words, which is Math. 26. 28.
broken for you, which is shead for you, that is (as Matthew entreats) shed
for the remission of sins. As al was made for us, so all which Christ Genesis 1.
spoke, he spoke for us, and all which Christ did, he did for us, 2. Cor. 4. 15
and all which Christ suffered, he suffered for us, that the sins of men
might be forgiven, and yet so few apprehend this benefit, that the way to
Heaven is called a narrow way, as though all these Math. 13. and 14.
pains did ransom but a small number, and certain order of men. All are not
saved by Christ's death, but all which are saved, are saved by Christ's death:
his death is sufficient to save all, as the sun is sufficient to lighten all:
but if any man wincke, the sun will not give him light: so, if any man
contemn, and will not receive, Christ will not thrust him into heaven, but
every man shall have that which he chooses (as David says) Blessing to him
that loves Psalm. 109. 16.
blessing, and cursing to him which loves cursing. There wants not a hand to
give, but a hand to take. I would (says Christ) but you would Mat. 23. 37
not. Stretch forth thy hand, and here is Christ's hand, which takes Gods
hand, and man's hand, and ioynes them together, and then the remission of sins
is sealed. This is the will and testament of Christ.

He had no goods, nor lands, nor money, to give by his testament. A rich man
when he dies, bestows the money which he has gathered, and forgiueth many
debts which are owing him, but Christ had nothing to give, nor any thing to
forgive. The Lord of all had least of all, and he might say like his servant
Peter, Act. 3. 6.
Gould and silver have I none, no not a grave to bury his body in, but the
grave which Joseph made for Mar. 15. 46
himself, served to bury Christ. His Father was a Carpenter, but never made
any house for himself: Mat. 13. 55
his Mother lay in a stable Luke 2. 16.
for want of a Chamber: his Disciple was feign to borrow twenty Math. 17. 27.
pence for him of a fish: therefore when one offered, Master, I will Luke 9.
57.
follow thee, thinking to gain by his service, like them which retain to
noble men; he replied unto him, The foxes have holes, and the fowls have
nests, but the son of man has not a house to hide his head: showing, that
the beasts and fowls were richer than he; therefore when he had nothing to
give, he gave himself, and when he had no debtors to forgive, he forgave his
enemies: what then, this is a Luke 23. 34.
poor and weak testament, which gave nothing; oh the goodlyest testament that
ever was made, for it brings to us the remission of sins. Is it such a
matter to forgive sins? yea, the greatest benefit in all the world, nay, a
greater benefit than all the world: for A similitude of man's state.
thus it stood, thou had committed high treason against the Queens
person, thou art detected, apprehended, accused, convicted, and condemned upon
it, to be hanged, and drawn, and quartered, and thy quarters to be set up
for a spectacle, like a carcass which thou have seen hanging upon a gibbet,
and the Crows pecking upon it. What a horror, and shaking to thy mind to think
of that day, when all these torments, and shame, and fear shall surprise thee
at once, which would make thee quake and tremble if thou should see but
another so disme^bred before thy face? Thou have no comfort now but this, when
I have suffered I shall be free; before to morrow at this time all my pain
will be past, though my shame continue and my children be beggars. What
grace, what favor, what mercy, now, to pardon thee all this, and save thy
life, and set thee at liberty, as though thou had never offended? So I and
thou, and every one here had committed treason against the King of Kings, and
stood condemned for it, not to suffer and then to be free, like them which
break the laws of men, but to suffer and suffer, and ever to suffer all that
the devils would heap upon us. Then came the mercy of God for Christ which
shed his blood, like an vmpire between God and us, and said as Esaiah said to
Hezekiah, His words are not so, but the effect of his words. 2 King. 20 5. Luk
7. 15.
Thou shall not die but live, loose him, let him go, for he is mine. So we
were stayed like the widows son when he was carried to his grave. This is
the benefit of Christ's death, and this Sacrament is the remembrance of it,
and therefore whenever we receive it, this addition comes with it, which is
shed for the remission of sins: our Math. ^^. 2^^.
fault was so heinous and grievous, that no ransom could counteruaile it,
unless God himself had suffered for us. Being in this extremity, neither
man, nor Angel offered his life for us, but the Prince himself, which should
have crucified us, came to be crucified of us, for us, that we might say with
steadfast faith, I believe the The merciful Article.
remission of sins, not the satisfaction of sins, but the remission of
sins. Mark this distinction against Popish merits of works, or penance,
Christ has satisfied and not we; we are remitted and not Christ: therefore we
say in our Confession, I believe the remission of sins, which I may call the
merciful Article, because it is the quintessence and sweetness of all the
twelve. Therefore who but Antichrist durst deprave it? If there be a
satisfaction for our sins by our works, or by our Pilgrimages, or by our
Masses, or by our penance, let Christ never be called a forgiuer, but an
exchanger like the Pope, which sells his pardons. Wretched creatures which
will not receive the Lord when he comes to their door. Christ says, take for
nothing, and they say no, we will not take but buy. Vile base miserable men
disdain to take grace of God without satisfaction, but they will cope with the
Lord, and give him so many Pilgrimages, fast so many days, hear so many
Masses, and pay so many works for it, until they have done as much good as
they have done evil. Our sins are infinite, and God is infinite, but our
works are finite, in number and measure, how can they answer then to that
which exceeds number and measure? Therefore be content with Joseph's brethren
to take your money again, and say that you have corn for Genesis 42. 25.
nothing, that is, you are saved for nothing, or else when you say, I believe
the remission of sins, you lie unto God, because you do not believe the
remission of sins, but satisfaction for sins, like the papists.

It follows, As often as ye shall Verse. 26.
eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye shall show the Lords death till he
come. Here are three invincible arguments, Three arguments against
Transubstantiation in one verse Deuteronomy. 17. 6.
like the three witnesses under which every word does stand. First we are
said to eat bread; the^ it is not flesh but bread. Secondly we are said to
show the Lords death; then it is but a show or representation of his death.
Thirdly it is said, until he come; if he be to come, then he is not come; if
he be come, how can we say, until he come. The effect of this verse was showed
in these words, Do this in remembrance of me: for to say, Do this in
remembrance of me, and to say, so often as you do this you show my death, is
much at one; so that if you call this Sacrament a show of Christ's death, as it
is called here, then it is not Christ; or if you call it a remembrance of
Christ, as it is called there, yet it is not Christ, but a show, or remembrance
of Christ: but this is such a show, and remembrance, that the next verse says,
Whosoever receives it unworthily, (...). (...).
is guilty of the body and blood of Christ.

Will ye know who receives unworthily: In verse 29. Wha(...) is to receive
vnwo^th^l^
Paul says, he discerns not the Lords body: that is, which puts no
difference between this bread and other, but eats like a child the meat
which he knows not. My sheep (says Ioh. 10. 27.
Christ) know my voice: as they discern Christ's words, so they discern
Christ's body, and therefore so often as they come to the Lords Table, they
seem to come into the Lords presence: there they greet and kiss and embrace
one another with affections, which none can know, but they that feel, like
John, which leaped in Luke 1. 41.
the womb, so soon as Christ came near him.

Will ye know beside, what it How receyuers may be guilty of Christ's death.
Mar 14. 44. Mar. 15. 15
is to be guilty of the body and blood of Christ, even as Judas was guilty for
betraying him, and Pilate for delivering him, and the Jews for crucifying him,
so they are guilty which receive this Sacrament unworthily, as Pilate and
Caiphas and Judas were. If they be Mar. 15. 25
guilty of Christ's death, they are guilty of their own death too, as if
they had committed two murders; and therefore Paul says Verse. 30.
after, that many of the Corinthians died only for the unworthy receiving of
this Sacrament. As the word is the savor of death to 2. Cor. 2. 16
the^ which receive it unworthily, so the Sacrament is the savor of death to
the^ which receive it unworthily: it never goes into their mouth, but they are
Traitors ipso facto, and may say to Hell, this day I have taken possession of
thee, because I am guilty of Christ's blood. Therefore it follows
immediately, Let a man examine himself How we should be prepared before we come
to the Lords table
before he eat of this bread, or drink of this Wine, as if he should say, if
he which receives this Sacrament unworthily, be guilty of Christ's death, like
Judas which hanged himself: if these signs be received to salvation or
damnation like the word, the next lesson is, to examine your selves before you
receive, least you receive like the sun of perdition, which swalowed the
bread and the Devil together. Therefore, Let a man examine himself, and so
let him eat: that is, let him examine first, and receive after, for if 1. Sam.
9. 13
we should receive the bread of the earth reverently, how should we receive the
bread of heaven? When Iehonadab came to Iehu his chariot, he said, Is thy heart
upright 2. King. 10. 15.
as my heart is toward thee? So, when we come to the Lords Table, he would have
our hearts upright to him, as his heart is to us, for who feasteth his enemies
and mockers? the golden Ring sits highest at our Table, but the wedding
garment James. 2. 2.
sits highest at this Table. It is safer eating with unwashed hands, then
with an unwashed heart. The Jews were taught to choose the Lamb of the
Passover on the tenth day of the first month, in which month they came out
of Egypt: and on the 14. Exo. 12. 3. and 6.
day after, they were taught to eat him, so they had four days respit
between the chosing, and the killing, to prepare and sanctify themselves for
the Passover, which was a sign of the Lords Supper. This admonished them,
that the matter now to be performed, was very weighty, and therefore they were
deeply to consider it, for now was the action, and sum of all salvation in
handling: if they did prepare themselves so before they did receive the figure
of this Sacrament, how should we be prepared before we receive the Sacrament it
self? Therefore as Josiah commanded the Levites 2. Chro. 35. 6.
to prepare the people; so Paul advises the people to prepare themselves,
that is, to examine whether they have faith, and love, and repentance, before
they come to this feast. By this all may see, first that Paul would have every
lay All are bound to know the Scriptures.
man so skillful in the Scripture, that he be able to examine himself by it;
for this admonition is not to them which minister the Sacrament, but to all
which receive the Sacrament. And the rule by which we must examine our selves,
is the law which we should obey: therefore if the rule be unknown, the
examination must be undone. Our doctrine must be examined by the doctrine of
the Act. 17. 11.
Prophets and Apostles; our prayers must be examined by the six Note.
petitions of Christ's prayer; our belief must be examined by the twelve
articles of faith; our life must be examined by the ten Commandments of
the Law. Exo. 20. 1. etc.
Now, he which has his Touchstone may try gold from copper, but he which has
it not, takes one for the other. Therefore, before Paul's Examine, you had need
to learn Christ's Search, Search the 2. Cor. 13. 5
Scriptures, and they will lighten Ioh. 5. 39.
you to search your selves. This is the doctrine with which I will end, and
the necessary point for which I choose this text, to teach you (if I could)
that Christian art how to examine your selves.

Let a man examine himself before Verse. 28.
he eat. Here is first an examination. Secondly, an examination of our The
division.
selves. Thirdly, an examination before we come to the Sacrament. Touching the
first, here Paul says Examine your selves, but in 2. Cor. 13. he doubleth his
charge, Prove your selves, and again at next word Examine your selves, as if
he should say, this work must be done when it is done, because it is never
thoroughly done, and therefore we must double our examination, as Paul doubleth
his counsel. If a man suspect his enemy, he will try him with a question, if
that will not search him, he will put forth another, if that be spied, he will
move another, like one which puts diverse keys into a lock until it open.
So he which examineth, must try and try, prove and prove, search and search,
for the angel of darkness is like an angel of light, and we have no way to
discover him, but that of 2. Cor. 11. 14.
John, Try the spirits. God examineth 1. John 4 1.
with trials, the Devil examineth with temptations, the world examineth with
persecutions: we which are thus examined, had need to examine too. If any man
skill not what Examining means, the very word Examine, is so pregnant, that
it prompteth us how we should examine, for it signifies to put our selves unto
the Touchstone, as if we would try Gold from Copper. Therefore one says, that
Examination is the eye of the soul, A description of true Examination.
whereby she sees her self, and her safety, and her danger, and her way
which she walks, and her pace which she holds, and the end to which she
tends: she looks into her glass, and spieth every spot in her face, how all
her graces are stained, then she takes the water of life, and washes her blots
away. After, she looks again, and beholds all her gifts, her faith, fear,
love, patience, meekenes, and marketh how every one does flourish, or wither. If
they fade and decay, that she feels a consumption, then she takes
preservatives, and restoratiues of prayer, and council, and repentance, before
the sickness grow: thus every day she lets down a bucket into her heart,
to see what water it brings up, least she should corrupt within, and perish
sodeinly.

To hear, and read, pray, and fast, and communicate, is a work of many, but
to examine these works, is the fashion of few, and therefore Jeremy
complayneth, No man says, What have I done? Iere. 8. 6.
as if he should say, no man examineth himself: and therefore in all the
scripture it is said but of one, That he feared all his works, as Job. 9. 28.
though he durst not think, nor speak, nor do any thing before he had
examined what it was, from whence it came, and whether it went: so the more
precious treasure is deeper hid in the ground. Mat. 13. 44


The second point is, to Examine our selves, Paul says, Try all 1 Thessalonians. 5.
21.
things, much more should we try our selves. The good sower does sow his own
ground, but the bad sower does sow an other man's ground, as the Devil did,
Mat. 13. 25
The Disciples of Christ said, Master, is it I, not Master, is Math. 26. 22.
it he. The disciples of John asked, Master, what shall we do? Luke 3. 10.
not Master, what shall they do? we must obey some, and hear others, and
admonish others, and love all, but examine our selves. That which we apply unto
others, the Apostle applies unto our selves; for when we speak of an
examiner, we intend one which examineth other: when we speak of an accuser,
we intend one which accuses other: when we speak of a Judge, we mean one
which judges others, but the Scripture cries, Examine thy self, accuse thy
self, judge thy 1. Cor. 11. 13.
self, that is, be not curious to search a more in thy brothers eye, Mat. 7.
3.
but pull out the beam which is in thy own eye. This does show that they
which sit in Gods chair to judge others, commonly have greater faults
themselves, tha^ they whom they use to judge: and therefore Christ calls
their fault a beam, and the others a mote. This made David say, Examine thy
Psalm. 4. 4.
heart, thy heart is thy own heart, therefore thou must examine whether thou
pray, whether thou watch, whether thou fast; and not whether he pray, whether
he fast, whether he watch, as the Pharisie Luk 18. 11.
examined the Publican, least thou have Peter's check: when he examined what
John should do, Christ said, What is that to thee? Ioh. 21. 22.
follow thou me. Thou art a private man, and have a private examination,
therefore let thy question be, What have I done? and make thy Anatomy of thy
self.

See beloved, we may not believe our selves before we have examined our
selves: for we are false hearted, and the notablest cosoner that deceives
most; for one time that he deceives others, ten times deceives himself.
Because the flesh is a wily servant, and will 2. King. 5. 25.
lie like Gehezi to his own master, and face him that it has not sinned when
it comes from sin: therefore as Elisha examined 2. King. 5. 2^.
his servant, so the soul must examine her servant, that is, man must be
ielous of himself, and take himself for a liar, for a flatterer, for a
dissembler, until he be thoroughly acquainted with himself: for no man is so
often beguiled, as by himself, by trusting his double heart, and taking his
own word without further trial. If Paul had bid us examine others, we
would have sifted them like Satan, Satan has desired to sift, Luke 22. ^8.
thee, says Christ to Peter, so we have a desire to sift others: even Peter
which was sifted of Satan, longed to sift John, and know what he should do,
before he hearkened to his own charge. Therefore the help of examination is
a needful preservative, although we were as sound as Peter. They which are
suspected of crime do not examine themselves, but are examined of others, least
they should be partial: but a christian must examine himself of his crime,
and be his own judge, his own accuser, and his own condemner: for no man
knows the spirit of man but the spirit 1. Cor. 2. 11
which is in man, which will condemn him if he be guilty, and tell him all
that he has done, and with what mind he did it, and what he deserves for it.
This is the private araignement, or close Sessions, when Conscience sits in her
chair to examine, and accuse, and judge, and condemn her self, because she
will not be condemned of God.

Thus holy men have kept their Sessions at home, and made their hearts the
forman of the Jury, and examined themselves as we examine others, the fear
of the Lord stood at the door of their souls, to examine every thought
before it went in, and at the door of their lips, to examine every word
before it went out, whereby they escaped thousand sins which we commit, as
though we had no other work. So thou should sit in judgment of thy self,
and call thy thoughts, and speeches, and actions, to give in evidence against
thee, whether thou be a Christian, or an Infidel, a son or a bastard, a
servant or a rebel, a Protestant or an hypocrit* if thou find not faith, nor
fear, nor love, nor zeal, when thou examinest thy self, let no man make thee
believe that thou art holy, that thou art sanctified, that thou art a
Christian, that thou art a believer, that thou art a Gospeller, because thou
art worse than thou seem to thy self; for every man is partial to
himself when he is most humbled. Therefore if my heart tell me that I do not
love God, whom shall I believe before my self? As Solomon says, No man can
search the heart of the king: ^ro. 25. 3.
so Paul says, No man knows the spirit of any man, but the spirit which
(...). Cor. 2. 11.
is in man, that is, no man feels the heart of man so well as himself. And
yet himself although he have lived with it ever since he was borne, does
not know his own heart unless he examine it narrowly, no more than he
knows his own bones, or his veins, or his sinews, or his artires, or his
muskles, how many are in his body, or where they lie, or what they do. This
seems strange that a man should not know his own heart, yet it is true that
the best of us all does not know his own heart, though he have dwelt with it
from his mothers womb. For Christ says to his disciples, even to his
disciples, You know not of what spirit you are, that is, you think better of
your Luk 9. 55.
selves than you are, and know not what the clock strikes within. There is a
zeal without knowledge, and there is a knowledge without zeal; there is a
faith without obedience, and there is an obedience without faith; there is a
love without fear, and there is a fear without love, and both are hypocrites.
Therefore as Dalilah searched where Sampsons Iud. 16. 6.
strength lay, so let every man search where his weakness lies, and always be
filling the empty gap.

Now this examination must (...)
go before us to the Sacrament. Every meat works according as it is
digested, and this meat works according as it is received. 1. Cor. 11. 29.
Therefore when Christ had taught what we should do in receiving the Sacrament,
now Paul shows what we should do before we receive the Sacrament, Let a man
examine himself.

There is a hearing, and a preparatiue Luke 8. 18.
before hearing. There is a praying, and a preparatiue before praying. There is
a receiving, Eccle 4 17.
and a preparatiue before receiving, which if it be wanting, the receyuer
receives uncomfortably, the prayer prays idly, the hearer hears
vnfrutefully, like those which eat before hunger, and drink before thirst.

This preparatiue before hearing and praying, and receiving, does signify,
that there is a kind of physic in these three, for preparatiues are ministered
always before physic: and as the preparatiue which goes before, makes way
to the physic, or else it would do no good, but hurt: so unless examination
go before the Sacrament, we seal up the thretnings which are written against
us, in stead of the promises which are made unto us, for the Sacrament is a
seal, and therefore seals good or evil, as every other seal does.

The preparatiue before we receive, is to Examine. As John was the forerunner of
Christ, so examination is the forerunner of the Sacrament, like the harbinger,
The second examination.
which rides before to prepare the rowme. For, if Job commanded his sons to
sanctify Job. 1. 5.
themselves before they did come to his sacrifice, how should we sanctify our
selves before we come to Christ's Sacrament, wherein we are commanded to do as
the Lord himself did which instituted it? It is said, that the Chamber wherein
Christ did institute this Sacrament, was trimmed; Luke 22. 12.
the Chamber wherein the Apostles received this Sacrament was trimmed: If Judas
Chamber, his inner chamber had been trimmed so too, he had received this
Sacrament with as much comfort as the other disciples did: but because his
heart was not trimmed, therefore he was the first which was condemned for the
unworthy receiving of this Sacrament. Adam did not think that death Genesis 3. 6.
had bin in an Apple, so you would not think that death should be in bread: but
as a coal has fire in it beside the coal it self, which fire does either
warm or burn; so this meat has another meat in it beside that which is
seen, which does ever save or destroy: therefore he which comes to this
spiritual meat, must examine whether he have a spiritual mouth, as well as a
carnal mouth, or else he shall receive no more than he sees, and that which
he sees not shall destroy him. No man (says Christ) puttesh new wine into old
vessels, least the vessels break Mar. 2. 2^.
and the wine leake. This Wine is new Wine, therefore put it into new
vessels, holy vessels, sanctified vessels, or else it will leake forth and
break the vessel, and thou shall have no more taste of it, than while the
relish of bread is in thy mouth. When Christ comes to our house, shall we
not look whether our Chamber be trimmed, as the Chamber was trimmed against
his coming to the Passover? But how shall we trim it?

When a man takes an office, he examineth his substance: when he takes a trade,
he examineth his skill: when he goes to fight, he examineth his strength, but
these wants are no wants when he goes to the Sacrament. Will thou know now
upon what articles thou must inquire at that time, that is, how thou should
examine thy self?

As some prayer may be at all 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16.
times, and some rejoicing may be at all times, so some examination is at all
times. Thus Job examined Job. 9. 28.
himself every day, nay, every hour, because he skanned all that he did.

But there is a special examination before the Sacrament, because it is the
bread which is received to salvation, or damnation; because 1. Cor. 11. 29.
it is the feast, to which, whosoever comes without his wedding garment,
shall be cast Mar. 22. 11 13.
into utter darkness, because it is a seal which seals a curse or a blessing.
Therefore here thou shall have both the daily oppositions, and the sacramental
oppositions.

Four examinations we propose The communicants Catechism
unto you, which shall be the communicants Catechism. The last is the sum of
all, which leads immediately to the Sacrament, as a guest is handed to the
Table.

Thou shall try strange spirits 1 The first examination upon the marks of true
spirits and the false, in our selves or other. 1. King. 22. 11.
by their manner of speaking, plainly, or doubtfully, boldly, or fearfully,
therefore we read that the oracles of the heathen had a double meaning, and
that the false Prophets never spoke boldly, but where their patrons were ready
to flesh them.

By the proportion of faith: for 2
every heresy is contrary to some article of our belief, as every sin is
against some of the ten Commandments.

By the event of their speeches: for they take not effect, as it is said 3
in the 18. of Deuter. and therefore Deuteronomy. 18. 22. Mat. 7. 15. 4 Mat. 7. 16.
they are called false prophets.

By their fruits: for none of the false Prophets were good men.

By their success: for if they be 5
not of God, they will come to naught, as the Arians and Manichees and
Pelagians are vanished, as if they had never been, so time Act. 5. 38. Mat. 15.
13
shall wear out every doctrine that is not truth.

Thou shall try thine own spirit 1
by the motions that it has to good, or evil.

By the first cause, or preparation 2
which thou had unto it, for whatsoever it be, thy thoughts will be where
thou love: to verify that saying, Where a man's tresure is, there will be his
heart, for Math. 6. 21
lightly, the beginning is a picture of the end, and the act is like the
thought which set it a work.

By the manner of thy consolation 3
in it, whether it be of knowledge, or ignorance, whether it be constant, or
mutable, calm, or boisterous, simple, or mixed, for as a clear fountain
yields clear streams, so a pure heart has pure joys.

Whether it bring to Christ, or 4
take any thing from him to thy self, like all the parts of Popery. If it
abide all these questions, and draw thee not from any good, then thou may
say, it is from God, water the seed O Lord which thou have sown. Then come
to the second examination.

If I ca^ make thee discern whether an other be a Christian, by that thou
shall know whether thy self be a Christian, which that thou may come to
observe this direction, and thou shall see of what side thou art. The second
examination upon the differences between the wicked and the godly.


It must needs be, that they which walk to contrary ends, should go diverse
ways: therefore there be mo differences between the children of God, and the
children of the world, then there be between men and beasts.

First, they are distinguished 1
in Will: for the wicked strive to bring Gods will to their will, like Balaam,
which when he had an Numb. 22. 19.
answer, stayed for another: but the faithful labor to bring their will to
Gods will, like Christ, which said, not as I will, but as thou Math. 26. 39.
wilt.

They are distinguished in Faith. 2 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2
All men have not faith (says Paul) but the just live by faith: as if he Romans
1. 17.
should say, the just believe, and the unjust believe not. The just believe,
and apply that they believe to themselves. The wicked may believe like the
Devils, but Iam. 2. 19.
their faith is like a gadding hen, which carries her eggs to other, and never
lays at home, so they believe that other shall be saved, but not themselves.

They are distinguished in Hope, for because the wicked hope not 3
for any mends of God, therefore they never defer their reward, but if they do
any good, they are trumpets of it themselus, for fear Math. 6. 2.
it should not be blased enough, and therefore Christ said, that the Pharisees
had their reward already because they were boasters of their works; and if they
do no good but evil, yet they would be 2. Tim 3. 2.
magnified as much for evil, as other are for good. But the faithful are
likened to handmaides, Psalm. 123. 2.
which wait their reward, their left hand sees not when their right hand does
well, and they are Math. 6. 3.
afraid to take honor of men, for losing their honor with God, like John
baptist, which made his Ioh. 1. 21.
virtues meaner then they were, and debased himself, when he might have got a
name above his Lord.

They are distinguished in obedience, 4
therefore Christ teaches us to judge men by their fruits Math. 7. 17
as an infallible rule: for the evil tree will bring forth evil fruit, and
the good tree good fruit, and neither can change his property, although the
evil fruit is sometimes beautiful, and the good fruit sometimes blasted.

They are distinguished in Repentance, 5
for the wicked do but weep for their sins past, but the godly purpose to
sin no more: so Pharaoh, Saul, and Judas said, I Exo. 10. 16. 1. Sam. 15. 30.
Math. 27. 4. Dan. 3. 18. Psalm. 51. 17.
have sinned, but Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego said, We will not sin,
therefore the heart of the godly is called a contrite heart, but the heart of
the wicked is called a heart that cannot repent. Beside as Christ Romans 2. 5.
Luke 8. 30.
cast out a legion of devils at once, so the godly would be purged of all their
sins together, but the wicked never consent to leave al, but as Naaman said,
Let the Lord spare me in this: so ever he excepteth 2. King. 2. 18.
one sin, which is his beloved sin, like Herod, which reformed Math. 14. 3
many things, and yet would not leave his brothers wife.

They are distinguished in Charity, 6
for ye shall never see the wicked love their enemies: and therefore when the
Pharisees could not love their enemies, they taught that men might hate their
enemies: Math. 5. 43
and Christ speaking of publicans and sinners, exhorts his disciples not to
love like them, because Luke 6. 32.
they loved none but their friends.

They are distinguished in Prayer, 7
for the wicked can not pray, therefore David says, they call not Psalm. 14. 4.
upon the Lord, as if they had not Zach. 12. 10. Rom 8. 16. Math. 6. 7.
the spirit of prayer, and therefore Christ calls their prayers babbling, for
they think not of God when they speak unto him.

They are distinguished in Patience; 8
no hipocrite can bear the cross, but says like Caine, It is Genesis 4. 13.
Act. 16. 25.
heauyer then I can suffer, but Paul and Silas sing in prison, for a faithful
man would have something to humble him, and rejoices to bear his masters
marks, because the wounds of a lover are sweet. Gal. 6. 17.


They are distinguished in the use of adversity, for this is a proper and
peculiar mark of Gods children, to profit by affliction: and therefore we
read not in all the punishments of the wicked, that one of them said like
David, It is good for me that I have bin afflicted. Psalm. 119. 71.


They are distinguished in Humility, 10
for the wicked are not humbled before the cross, like Pharao that never
sorowed, but Exo. 8. 8. 15
when he suffered: but the Apostles learned humility of their master Mat. 11.
29
before their persecution came.

They are distinguished in their 11
judgment of the word, for to the wicked it seems the hardest and simplest,
and vnpleasantest book that is, and therefore Paul says, ^. Cor. 1. 18.
that it is foolishnes unto them. But to the godly, it seems the wisest, and
eloquentest, and sweetest, and easiest book of all other, as though God did
suddenly bring the understanding of it to them, as Jacob ^on 27. 20.
said of his veneson: according to that, He that will do his will, shall Ioh.
7. 17.
know his doctrine.

They are distinguished in their 12
judgment of GOD. The wicked are persuaded now and then of Gods mercy for the
present time while they feel it, as the Jews Exo. 15. 20.
praised him always when he did as they would have him, but they can not
persuade themselves, that God will be merciful to them still, like Job, which
said, Though the Job. 13. 15.
Lord kill me, yet will I trust in him: therefore the hope of the righteous is
called, hope in death. Beside, Pro. 14. 32.
if the wicked love God, it is but for his benefits, as Saul loved Pro. 23. 18.
1. Sam. 10. 6
him for his Kingdom. And this is always to be noted, that in the wicked the
fear of hell is greater, then their hope of heaven, but in the faithful, the
hope of heaven is greater, than their fear of hell.

They are distinguished in their 13
delights: for the sport of the ungodly is folly, like Belshazzars: and Dan. 5.
4.
therefore when they are sick, or troubled, they never run to the Word for
comfort, as though Gods promises pertayned not to them, but to feasts, or
tables, or tales, or music, as Saul did to 1. Sam. 16. 23
the harp: but all the delights of the godly are like David's dance about the
Arc, they are never 2. Sam. 6. 14.
merry, but when they are doing well, nor at peace, but when their prayers
have overcome God, like Jacob. Genesis 32. 28.


They are distinguished in their opinions of death: for the faithful 14
long to be dissolved, and although Phil 1. 23.
they might live ever in continual prosperity, yet they would not stay so
long out of heaven: Luke 2. 29.
but the wicked would never be dissolved; because death comes always unto the^
like a Iayler to hale unto prison, as Ahab said to Michaiah, that he never 1.
King. 22. 8.
prophesied good to him. Hereby a man shall know whether he have faith; for
if he believe the promises, he will be glad to receive them.

They are distinguished in their 15
sense of sin. Wicked men feel the loathsomnes of their vices, but none but
the faithful feel the defects of their righteousness. The natural man never
complains of his good works, but vaunteth of them: but a godly man finds
fault with his prayers, and his alms, and his watches, like Isaiah Esai. 64.
6. Psalm. 16. 2.
that said, his righteousness was like a menstruous cloth. As Christ Math. 4.
1. and 2.
met the tempter in the Wilderness, a place of prayer, and fasting, and
meditation; so a godly man meets the tempter in his prayers, and in his
fasts, and in his meditations, that is, he finds some let or spot, or want in
all his devotions. Therefore, unless thy righteousness mislike thee, as well as
thy prophanes, know that yet thou art no further than the wicked.

They are distinguished in their 16
ends: for the children of God propose the glory of God, and level all their
thoughts, speeches and actions, as if they were messengers sent to carry him
presents of honor. Thus did David, when he Psalm. 103. 1.
said, All that is within me praise the Lord: as though himself had rather be
without praise, than his master: but the children of the world set up their
own glory for their mark; like Nebuchadnezzar Dan. 4. 27.
which said, for the honor of my majesty. Therefore they speak, and look,
and walk, as if they did say to their tongue, and eyes, and feet, and
apparel, as Saul said to Samuel, Honor me before this 1. Sam. 15. 30.
people.

Lastly, they are distinguished in 17
perseverance: for the zeal of the wicked lasts not, and therefore God
says, They are soon turned out Exo. 32. 8.
of the way: but the zeal of the faithful was represented by the fire of the
temple which never Leuit. 6. 12.
went out.

Then come to the third Examination. As the devil tempts thee to see what
thou will do for him; Math. 4. 9.
so thou must tempt thy self, and get of thy soul what it would do for God,
and what it would suffer for him, which has suffered death for it. Therefore
here we will set down certain Intergatories whereof thou shall examine it.

First, whether thou have the heart of Joshua, to worship God as Josh. 24. 15.
boldly as thou do, though all the world did renounce him, and every one did
mock thee as they did Noah while he built the Arc?

Whether thou would not deny Christ as Peter did, if thou Mat. 26. 70
were in Peter's straights, and nothing to succor thee but thy policy?

Whether thou would not steal, if thou did see a booty as fit as Achan,
which thou might catch up and no man spy Josh 7. 21.
thee?

Whether thou would refuse a bribe like Elisha, if thou did meet with
one which were as 2. King. 5. 16.
willing and able to give it as Naaman?

Whether thou would not deceive, if thou were in such an Luke 16. 6. Although
this is a parable, yet it carries the signification of an history.
office as the false Steward, whose master referred all unto him, and knew not
when he kept any thing back?

Whether thou would not fulfill thy lust as David did, if thou 2. Sam. 11. 4
had his opportunity and allurement, and might do it without danger of
law like a King, as David might?

Whether thou would not tell a lie as Abraham did, if it stood Genesis 12. 13.
upon thy life, which made him twice dissemble that his wife was his sister,
least he should dye for Genesis 20. 2.
her beauty?

Finally, if it should be said unto thee as the devil said to Christ, All
these will I give thee, if thou will Math. 4. 9.
fall down and worship me, that is no more, but if thou will sin, whether
thou would yield or no.

If thou have sinned thus and thus before, I will not say therefore the Lord
will not hear thee, but David says, If I regard wickedness in Psalm. 66. 18
my heart, the Lord will not hear me, that is, if for any cause a man purpose
and carry a mind to sin when he is tempted, the Lord is so far from
helping him, that he will stand like Baal, as though he 1. King. 18. 26
did not hear him; for he has a Traitors mind as deep as any, which thinks,
for a Dukedom I would betray my Prince, though he never play the Traitor in
his life.

Now we come to that examination, The fourth examination.
which is the epitome or abridgement of all these; for memory is short, and
all are not of one strength, but some run, and some go, and some creep, and
all do well, so long as they strive Heb. 6. 1.
to perfection. The matters whereof The receivers articles
principally the mind should be examined before the Sacrament, are these.

First, whether thou have faith, 1
not only to believe that Christ died, but that he died for thee: for Esai. 59.
20
as the scripture calls him a Redeemer, so Job calls him his Redeemer. Job.
19. 25.


The second article is, whether 2
thou be in charity, not whether thou love them which love thee, but whether
thou love the^ which hate thee: for Christ commands us to love our enemies.
Math. 5. 44


The third article is, whether 3
thou repent, not for thy open and gross sins, but for thy secret sins, and
petty sins, because Christ says, that we must give account for every idle
word. Mat. 12. 3^


The fourth article is, whether 4
thou resolve not to sin again for any cause, but to amend thy evil life,
not when age comes, or for a spurt, but to begin now and last till death, for
Christ is Alpha, and Omega, both the beginning, Reave. 22. 13.
and the end, as well in our living, as in our being, which has made no
promise to them which begin, but to them which persevere. Reave. 2. 10.


The last article is, whether thou can find in thy heart to dye for 5
Christ, as Christ dyed for thee, for we are bid not only to follow him, but to
bear his cross: and therefore we are called servants, Luk 12. 38 2. Tim. 2.
3. and 4.
to show how we should obey, and we are called souldyers, to show, how we
should suffer.

These are the receyuers articles, whereof his conscience must be examined,
before he receive this Sacrament: happy is he which can say, All these have I
kept: for the Dove was not so welcome Genesis 8. 11.
to Noah, as this man is to Christ. But if thou find not these affections
within, but a nest of vices, leave thine offering at the Altar, Mat. 5. 24.
and return to thine examination again, for thou art not a fit guest to sup
with the Lord, until thou have on this Wedding garment. Mat. 22. 11
How is it then that some regard their other garments more then this? Paul
says, Examine your selves, and they examine their apparel, if they have new
clothes in the country, then they are ready to receive. I have known many
kept from the Sacrament a whole year together by their masters, for nothing
but for want of a new suit to set them forth with their fellows.

Others respect whether it be a fair day, that they may walk after Service,
making that day upon which they receive, like a Scholars Thurseday, which he
loves better then all the days in the week, only because it is his play day.
Marvel not now if you have not felt that comfort after the Sacrament which you
looked for, for it is comfortable to none, but to the^ which prepare their
hearts, and examine themselves before, because it is not the mouth, but the
heart which receives comfort.

Now it may be that the most which are here, have brought a mouth, and not a
heart: these go away from the Sacrament to despite Christ, as Judas went from
the Sacrament to betraye John. 1^. 3^
him.

The other go away, like one which has received a cheerful countenance of
the Prince, all his thoughts are joy, and the countenance of the Prince is
still in his eye. As he which has eaten sweet meat has a sweet breath: so
they which have eaten Christ, all their sayings and doings are sweet like a
perfume to men, and incense to GOD: their peace and conscience, and joy of
heart, and desire to do good, will tell them whether they have received the
bare signs, or the thing signified. Every one which receives this Sacrament,
shall feel himself better alter it, like the Apostles, or else he shall find
himself worse after it, like Judas. Hereby ye shall know whether ye have
received like the Apostles, or like Judas. Thus we have ended the doctrine of
the Lords Supper. Now, if you can not remember all that I have said, yet
remember the text, that is, Examine your selves before you receive this
Sacrament hereafter.

FINIS.
THE Examination of Usury, in two Sermons.

Taken by Characterie, and after examined.



Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin for Thomas Man, dwelling in Paternoster
row at the sign of the Talbot. 1591.

To the Reader.
Here thou have the Sermons which have bin often desired, because of the
matter fit for this City. One says, that he would never speak to Usurers,
and Bribemongers, but when they be upon their death beds: for he which lives
by sin, resolves to sin, that he may live. But when he goes to hanging, Judas
will Mat. 27. 4.
say, I have sinned. If I speak not to Usurers upon their deathbed, yet I
speak to Usurers which shall lie upon their deathbed. Three things do give
me hope. One is, that all hearts are in the hands of God, to call them at what
hour Act. 9. 15.
he list, and therefore Saul may become an Apostle. The next is, that the third
crow does waken more then the former, and therefore after the crowing of other,
this crow may happily be heard. The last is, that there is no sin, but some
men have bin reclaimed from it, and so may Usurers from their sin.

Therefore go my book like David against Goliath, and sight the Lords 1. Sam.
17. 51.
battles against Usurers. The Lord give that success to his doctrine in these
leaves, that it may consume Usurers, as Ioshuah drove out the Chananites before
him. If I could take but this one Josh. 5. 1.
weed out of the Londoners Garden, I were answered for my health and my
strength spent amongst them. Read with thy best mind, and thou shall profit
more.

Thine H. S.

The Examination of Usury; in two Sermons.
The first Sermon.
Psalm. 15. verse. 1. and 5. Lord, who shall dwell in thy tabernacle? Who shall
rest in thine holy mountain?

He that gives not his money to Usury.


THese two verses must be considered together, because one is the question,
and the other is the answer: David demands Verse 1.
who shall come to heaven? and GOD tells him that Usurers shall not come
thither: as if he should say, They shall go to hell. Therefore as Paul
taught Timothy to warn the^ which are rich, 1. Tim. 6. 17.
as though they had more need to be warned than other: so this sentence
seems to be penned for a warning to the rich, because it strikes upon the
rich man's vice.

I have spoken of Briberie and Simonie, and now I must speak of their sister
Usury. Many times have I thought to speak of this Theme, but the arguments
which are alleged for it, have made me doubtful what to say in it, because
it has gone as it were under a protection. At last you see it falls into my
text, and therefore now I cannot bauke it any longer. Therefore if any here
have favored this occupation before, let him now submit his thoughts unto Gods
thoughts; for I will allege nothing against it, but that which is built upon
the rock.

Usury is the sin which God will try now whether you love better than his
word: that is, whether you will leave it if he forbid it: for if he flatly
forbid it, and yet you wilfully retain it, then you love Usury better than
Gods word. Therefore one says well that our Usurers are Heretics, because
after Usurers heretics.
many admonitions, yet they maintain their error, and persist in it
obstinatly as Papists do in Popery. For this cause I am glad that I have any
occasion to griple with this sin, where it has made so many spoils, and where
it has so many patrons: for it is said that there be more of this profession in
this City, than there be in all the land beside. There be certain sins which
are like an unreasonable enemy which will not be reconciled to death, and this
is one of those everlasting sins which live and die with a man. For when he
has resigned his pride and his envy and his lust, yet Usury remains with
him, and he says as Naaman said, Let the Lord be merciful 2. Kings. 5. 18.
unto me in this: let me have a dispensation for this, as though this were a
necessary sin, and he could not live without it. There be three sins
which are counted Three sins counted no sins.
no sins, and yet they do more hurt than all their fellows, and those are
Briberie, Nonresidencie, and Usury: these three because they are gainful are
turned from sins to occupatio^s. How many of this City for all that they are
Usurers, yet would be counted honest me^, and would feign have Usury esteemed
as a trade: whereas if it were not so gainful, it would be counted as great a
sin as any other, and so it is counted of all but them which live by it. This
is the nature of pleasure and profit to make sins seem no sins, if we
gain any thing by them, but the more gainful a sin is, the more dangerous
it is, and the more gainful Usury is, the more dangerous it is. I will
speak the more of it, because happily you shall not hear of this matter
again.

First I will define what Usury The contents of this treatise.
is, then I will show you what Usury does signify: then I will show the
unlawfulness of it: then I will show the arguments which are alleged for it:
then I will show the punishment of it: then I will show you what opinion we
should hold of them which do not lend upon Usury, but borrow upon Usury.
Lastly, I will show you what they should do which have got their riches by
Usury.

Touching the first, Usury is The definition of Usury.
that gain which is gotten by lending, for the use of the thing which a man
lends, couenanting before with the borrower to receive more tha^ was
borrowed: and therefore one calls the Usurer a legal thief, because before
he Usurers steal by law.
steal, he tells the party how much he will steal, as though he stole by
law. This word more, comes in like a sixth finger, which makes a monster,
because it is more than should be. Another defining Usury, calls it the
Contrary to Charity: for Paul says, Love seeks not her own, but Usury
seeks an others which is not her own* therefore Usury is far from love,
but God is Love, says John, therefore ^. John. ^. 8.
Usury is far from God too.

Now, all the Commandments of God are fulfilled by love, which Christ notes
when he draws all the Commandments to one Commandment, which is, Love
Matthew. 22. 37.
God above all things, and thy neighbor as thy self: as if he should say,
he which loves GOD, will keep all the Commandments which respect God, and
he which loves his neighbor will keep all the Commandments which respect
his neighbor: therefore to maintain love, GOD forbids all things which
hinder this love: and among the rest here he forbids Usury, as one of her
deadliest enemies: for a man can not love and be an Usurer, because Usury is a
kind of cruelty, and a kind of extortion, and a kind of persecution, and
therefore the want of love does make Usurers: for if there were love there would
be no Usury, no deceit, no extortion, no slaundering, no revenging, no
oppression, but we should live in peace and joy and contentment like the
Angels; whereby you see that all our sins are against our selves: for if
there were no deceit, then we should not be deceived: if there were no
slander, then we should not be slandered: if there were no envy, then we
should not be envied: if there were no extortion, then we should not be
iniuried: if there were no Usury, then we should not be oppressed. Therefore
Gods law had been better for us than our own law: for if his law did stand,
the^ we should not be deceived, nor slandered, nor envied, nor injured, nor
oppressed. God has commanded every man to lend freely, and who would not Luke.
6. 35.
borrowe freely? Therefore they which brought in usury, brought in a law
against themselves.

The first Usurers which we read of, were the Jews, which were forbidden to
be Usurers, yet for want of faith and love, Ezekiel Ezekiel. 18. 22. Nehe. 25.
and Nehemiah does show how the Jews, even the Jews which received this law
from God himself, did swerve from it as they did from the rest. First, they
did lend upon Usury to strangers; after they began to lend upon Usury to
their brethren, and now there be no such Usurers upon earth as the Jews which
were forbidden to be Usurers. Whereby you may see how the malice of man has
turned mercy into cruelty. For whereas lending was commanded Deuteronomy. 15. 10.
for the benefit of men, Usury has turned it to the undoing of men: for they
take when they seem to give; they hurt when they seem to help; they damage
when they seem to vauntage: therefore it is well noted that Usury has her
name of biting, and 2.
she may well signify biting; for many have not only been bitten by it, but
devoured by it, that is, consumed all that they have: therefore as the Apostle
says, If you bite Galat. 5. 15
one another, take heed you be not devoured one of another: so I may say if
you be Usurers one to another, take heed you be not devoured one of another,
for Usurers are biters. As the name of the Devil does declare what an enemy
he is; Because it signifies
so the name of Usury does declare what an enemy she is. That an adversary.
you may know Usury for a byter, her name does signify biting. Neschec.
If there were one biting Usury, and another healing Usury, then Usury
should have two names; one of biting, and another of healing: but all Usury
signifies biting, to show that al Usury is unlawful. Now, you have heard
what Usury is, and of what it is derived, you shall hear the unlawfulness of
it.

First, it is against the law of charity, 1. The unlawfulness of Usury.
because charity bids us to give every man his own, and to require no more
than our own; but Usury requires more than her own, and gives not to other
their own. Charity rejoices to communicate her goods to other, and Usury
rejoices to gather other men's goods to her self.

Secondly, it is against the law 2.
of Nations; for every Nation has some law against Usury, and some
restraint against Usurers, as you shall hear when we speak of the punishment.

Thirdly, as it is against the law of Nations, so it is against the law 3.
of Nature, that is, the natural compassion which should be among men. You
see a river when it goes by an empty place, it will A Similitude.
not pass until it has filled that empty place, and then it goes forward
to another empty place and fills it, and so to another empty place and
fills it, always filling the places which are empty: so should we, the
rich should fill the poor, the full should fill the hungry, they which abound
should fill them which want, for the rich are but Gods Amners, and their riches
are committed to them of God to distribute and do good as GOD does himself:
As the water is charitable after a sort, so is the air, for it goes to
empty places too, and fills them as the water does. Nature cannot abide that
any place should be empty, and therefore the air though it be a light
body, and so naturally ascends upward: yet rather than any place in the
earth should be empty, the air will descend as it were from his throne, and go
into caves, into dens, and into dungeons, to fill them. If the rich were so
good to their empty brethren, as the air and water are to other empty
things; as there is no empty place in the world, so there should be no empty
person in the world: that is, the rich in Israel would fill the poor in
Israel, but the rich make the poor to fill them, for Usurers feed upon the
poor, even as great fishes devour the small. Therefore he which said Let there
not be a beggar in Israel, Deuteronomy. 15. 4.
said too, let there not be an Usurer in Israel, for if there be Usurers in
Israel, there will be beggars in Israel, for Usurers make beggars, even as
Lawyers make quarrellers.

Fourthly, it is against the law of God. First, it is forbidden in Exo. 22. 4.
where it is said, If thou lend money unto my people, that is, to the poor
withthee, thou shall not oppress them with Usury: here Usury is called
oppression, therefore if oppression be a sin, Usury is a sin too. Secondly,
it is forbidden in Leu. 25. 36. where it is said, Thou shall not give thy money
to Usury, nor lend thy vittailes for increase. Here you may see, that men may
be Usurers of vittailes and other things, as well as of money. Thirdly, it is
forbidden in Deuteronomy. 23. where it is said, Thou shall not lend unto thy brother
upon Usury. And least you should say, that he means but one kind of
Usury, he shows, that he means all kinds of Usury: for after he says, as
usury of money, usury of vittailes, usury of corn, or usury of any thing
which is given to Usury: because some are not Usurers of money, but some are
Usurers of vittailes, some are Usurers of Cloth, some are Usurers of Corn,
some are Usurers of Wine, some are Usurers of Oil, and some of one thing, and
some of an other, and none would be counted Usurers, but they which lend money
upon Usury; therefore God forbids so preciselie Usury of any thing,
showing, that all Usury is unlawful. It is a miserable occupation to live by
sin, and a great comfort to a man when he looks upon his Gold and Silver,
and his heart tells him, all this is well gotten, and when he lies upon his
deathbed, and must leave all to his children, he can say unto them, I leave
you mine own; but the Usurer can not say, I leave you mine own, but I leave
you other men's, therefore the Usurer can never dye in peace, because if he dye
before he make restitution, he dies in his sin. When Christ raised Lazarus
from death, after he had Ioh. 11. 37.
layne four days in the grave, he wept so over his Sepulcher, that the
standers about said one to an other, See how he loved him, As it may be said
of Christ, See how he loves us, so it should be said of us, See how they love
their breethren. For Christ said to his Disciples, Love one an other, as I Ioh.
13. 34.
have loved you. But it may be said of the Usurer, See how he hates his
breethren, and hear how he loves them: for he loves them in words, and
hates them in deeds. He says that he loves them, and that he lends for
compassion, but it is for compassion of himself, that he may gain by his
lending. The Usurer loves the borrower, as the Iuye loves the Oak: The Iuye
loves the Oak to grow up by it, so the Usurer loves the borrower to grow
rich by him. The Iuye claspeth the Oak like a lover, but it claspeth out all
the juice and sap, that the Oak can not thrive after: So the Usurer lends
like a friend, but he couenanteth like an enemy, for he claspeth the borrower
with such bands, that ever after he diminishes, as fast as the other
increases.

Christ expounding the commandment Understand that his sermon upon the
mount, is an exposition of the Commandments, or else the text will not seem
to implie this. Luc. 19. 8.
which forbids to steal, says, lend freely, showing that Usury, because
she lends not freely, is a kind of theft, and the Usurers a kind of thieves,
for else this exposition were not right. Therefore Zacheus, as though he had
stolen other men's goods, when he began to repent, he restored them again four
foulde, even as thieves are enjoined to restore four fould for that which Exodus
22.
they have stolen, so Zacheus restored four foulde, as though he had stolen.
It seems that Zacheus was no great thief, because he restored four foulde
for all that he had gotten wrongfully, for he got but the fourth part of his
goods wrongfully at the most, or else he could not have restored four fould
again. But now, if some should restore four fould, for all that they have
gotten wrongfully, they should restore more than they have, because all which
Usurers get, they get wrongfully: for their occupation is a sin, and
therefore one says, Because they cannot restore four fould here, they shall
suffer an hundredth fould hereafter. Amaziah is forbidden to strengthen 2.
Chro. 2^.
himself with the armies of Israel, only because Israel had offended God; if
Amaziah might not join the armies of Israel with his armies to strengthen him,
dare thou join the goods of the poor with thy goods to enrich thee? When
God set Adam his work, he said, In the sweat of thy brows Genesis 3. 19.
shall thou live: not in the sweat of his brows, but in the sweat of thy
brows: but the Usurer lives in the sweat of his brows, and her brows: that
is, by the pains and cares, and labors of an other, for he takes no pains
himself, but only expects the time when his interest will come in, like the
belly which does no work, and yet eats all the meat. When God had finished
his creation, he said unto man, and unto beasts, and unto fowls, and unto
fishes, increase and multiply, but he never Genesis 1.
said unto money, increase and multiply, because it is a dead thing which
has no seed, and therefore is not fit to engender. Therefore he which says
to his money, increase and multiply, begets a monstrous birth, like Anah,
which devised a creature Gen 36. 24.
which God had not created before. Christ says to his Disciples, If you love
but them which love you, Mat. 5. 46.
what are you better then the Publicans, for they love their brethren: so I may
say, if you will lend to none but to them which will pay you Usury for it,
what are you better tha^ the Jews, for the Jews would lend for Usury, and if
you be no better than the Jews, then you shall speed no better than they: for
as Christ said, Except your Mat. 5. 20.
righteousness do exceed the righteousness of the Pharisees, your reward shall
not exceed the reward of the Pharisees, so, except your charity do exceed
the charity of the Jews, your reward shall not exceed the reward of the
Jews. All this does show, that the Usurer is like Esau, of whom God said,
Esau have I hated. Now in the 112. Psalm, Malac. 1. 3.
you shall see who is like Jacob, of whom God says, Jacob have I loved: for
there David says, a good man is merciful, and lends, and Verse. 5.
straight upon it he sets this crown, he shall never be moved, but be had
in perpetual remembrance: as if he should say, this is the good man's Usury,
this is his increase, even a good name, and everlasting joy. Again in the 23.
of Exodus it is said, Lend unto him which wants without Usury, that the Lord
may bless thee: as if he should say, let the Lord pay the increase, fear not
to be loosers by doing good, for God has given his word to Malac. 3. 10.
requite it himself. As he says to them which were afraid to pay tithes, and
offer sacrifice, Try me if I will not power down a blessing upon you: so he
seems to say unto Deuteronomy. 15. 10.
them which are afraid to lend, try me if I will not power down a blessing
upon you. Whom will you trust, if you do not trust your Creator, your
Father, your Redeemer, your Preserver, and your Savior.

Now you have heard the unlawfulness of Usury, you shall hear how many kinds
there be of it. As other Crafts are called Mysteries, so I may fitly call it,
the mystery of Usury, for they have devised more sorts of Usury, than there
be tricks at Cards, I cannot reckon half, and I am afraid to show you all,
least I should teach you to be Usurers, while I dissuade you from Usury, yet I
will show you some, and the same reasons which are aledged against these, shall
condemn all the rest.

Some will not take Usury, but they will have the use of your pasture, 1. The
kinds of Usurers.
or your land, or your orchard, or your teame, or your kine, until you pay
the money again, which in that time will grow to a greater gain to the
Usurer, and a greater loss to the borower, than if he had paid more money than
other Usurers are wont to take.

Some will not take Usury, but 2.
they will take plate, and vessel, and tapistree, and bedding, and other
household stuff, to use and wear, until their money come home, which will
lose more in the wearing, than the interest of the money would come to. This
Usury is forbidden in the 2. of Amos, where God co^plaineth saying, They lie
down upon the clothes which are laid to pledge: showing, that we should not
lie down upon such clothes, that is, we should not use or wear the thing
which is laid to pledge.

Some will take no Usury, but 3.
they will take a pawn which is better than the money which they lend, and
then they will covenant, that if he bring not the money again by such a day,
he forfitteth his pawn: which day the Usurer knows, that the poor man is
not able to keep, and so keeps the pawn for his money, which is worth twice
his money. This Usury is forbidden in Leuit. 25. where it is said, Thou shall
not take Usury or vauntage: as if he should say, thou shall not take the
forfeiture; for then thou take vauntage, when thou take more than thou
lendest.

Some will not take Usury, but 4.
they will buy some thing at a small price, and then covenant with the borrower
that he buy the same again of the same price at such a day, which day the
Usurer knows that the borrower is not able to keep, and so he gets for a
little that which the other might have sold for much more. This Usury is
condemned in the 1 Thessalonians. 4. where it is said, Let no man defraude or
circumuent his brother in any thing.

Some will not take Usury, but they will lend out their money to 5.
occupiers, upon condition to be partakers in their gains, but not in their
losses: so one takes all the pains and abides all the venture, and the other
which takes no pains, reapeth half the profit. This Usury is forbidden in 2.
Thessa. 3. 10. where it is said, He which will not work let him not eat.

Some will not take Usury, but 6.
if he be a Labourer, or a Mason, or a Carpenter, which borrows of him, he
will covenant with him for so many days work, he shall labor with him so
many days, or so many weeks for no money, but the lone of money. This Usury
is condemned in Luke 10. 7. where it is said, The labourer is worthy of his
hire.

Some will not take Usury, but 7.
if you have not present money to pay for their wares, they will set a high
price of them, for the forbearing of the time, and so they do not only sell
their wares, but they sell time too: that is, they do not only sell their
own, but they sell Gods own. Therefore one says of these, When he sells
the day he sells the light, and when he sells the night he sells rest:
therefore when he would have the light of heaven, and the rest of Paradise, it
shall be said unto him that he has sold both already. For he sold light
when he sold the day, and he sold rest when he sold the night: and therefore
now he can have neither light nor rest.

There be other Usurers which 8.
will not lend themselves, but give leave to their wives, and they play like
hucksters, that is, every month a penny for a shilling, which is one hundred
for another in the year.

But that I was informed of the^ since this Sermon was preached, I 9.
had left out our capital Usurers, which will not lend any money, because they
dare not require so much gain as they would have: but if you would borrow an
hundred pound, they will give you wares worth three score pound, and you shall
answer them an hundred pound for it. These are the Usurers general which lurk
about the City like Rats, and Wesels, and Fulmers, of whom may be said the
same which is said of the devils, they seek whom they may devour. 1. Pet. 5.
8.


There be other Cosins to Usurers, 10.
which are not counted Usurers, such as take money for that which they should
give freely: such as take as much for a counterfeit as for the best: such as
take a fee of a Client and do him no pleasure: such as take money for Masses,
and Dirges, and Trentalls, and Pardons, and such like drugs, which do no more
good than fire out of the chimney. This is a kind of Usury and deceit beside,
which one day they will cast away as Judas did his thirty pence.

Now you have heard the kinds of Usury, you shall hear the arguments
Objections made by Usurers.
which are devised for Usury.

Sin is never complet until it be excused: this is the vauntage which the
devil gets by every sin, whenever he can fasten any temptation upon
us, we give him a sin for it, and an excuse to boot, as Adam our father
did. First he sinned, and then he excused: Genesis 3.
so first we sin, and then we excuse: first an Usurer, and then an excuser.
Therefore every Usurer will defend Usury with his tung, though he condemn
it with his conscience. If the Image makers of Ephesus had not lived by Images,
they would have spoken for All. 19. 25.
Images no more than the rest: for none stood for Images but the Image makers:
so if the Usurers did not live by Usury, they would speak for Usury no more
than the rest: for none stand for Usury but Usurers.

It is an easy matter, if a man be disposed, to speak something for every
vice; as some defend the Stews: some defend Nonresidencie: some defend
swearing by my faith: some defend bowling upon the Saboath: and some defend
Usury. But, will you plead for Iud. 6. 31.
Baal? (says Ioash) that is, will you plead for sin which will plead
against you? A sin is a sin when it is defended: nay, a sin is two sins when
it is defended: for he which breaks one of the least Commandments (says
Christ) and teaches Math. 5. 19.
others to do so, is the least in the kingdom of heaven. A Squire of low
degree is a Squire of no degree: so the least in the kingdom of heaven is none
of the kingdom of heaven. Who then is the least in the kingdom of heaven? not
he which breaks the least of the Commandments, but he which teaches others
to do so: that is, he which by defending, and excusing, and minsing, and
extenuating his sin, incourageth others to sin too.

To defend Usury, they distinguish upon it, as they distinguish of lying: as
they say, there is a pernicious lie, and an officious lie, and a merry lie,
and a godly lie: so they say, there is the Merchants Usury, and the Strangers
Usury, and the Widows Usury, and the Orphans Usury, and the pooremans
Usury, and the biting Usury, and the charitable Usury, and the necessary
Usury. As God said, ye shall die, and the woman Genesis 2.
said, peradventure ye shall dye, and the Serpent said, ye shall not dye; so
there be three opinions of Usury: Three opinions of Usury.
some say like God, thou shall dye, they think that Usury is utterly
unlawful, because God has utterly forbid it: some say like the woman,
peradventure thou shall dye, they doubt whether Usury be utterly unlawful or
no, because it is so much tolerated: some say like the Serpent, thou Gen 3.
shall not dye, they think that Usury is lawful, because it is gainefull, as
Saul thought that the Idolaters 1. Sam. 15. 9.
beasts should not be killed because they were fat. But as he was commanded
to kill the fat beasts, as well as the lean, so we are commanded to kill fat
sins as well as lean sins; gainefull sins as well as prodigal sins.

They which plead for Usury, object these arguments. First they 1. Objections
for Usury.
say, God does allow some kind of Usury, for in Deuteronomy. 23. it is said of a
stranger thou may take Usury. I perceive no scripture speaks for Usurers.
Of a stranger (says God) thou may take Usury: but thou take Usury of
thy brother, therefore this condemns thee, because thou use thy brother
like a stranger. Here stranger does signify the Jews enemies, whom they were
commanded to destroy: therefore mark how much this makes against Usury,
which they object for Usury. God does not license the Jews to take Usury of
any, but their enemies whom they might kill: They might not be Usurers unto
any, but to them of whom they might be destroyers, whom they might slay, of
them only they might take Usury: showing that Usury is a kind of punishment,
and such a kind of punishment, as if we are to kill a man, it were a very fit
punishment for him, and therefore the Jews might take Usury of none, but them
whom they might kill.

Secondly, they say that they lend for compassion, and so make Usury 2.
a work of charity. This were charity not to be partakers in our gains, but
to be partakers in our losses, but Usurers will be partakers in our gains, but
not in our losses; nay, though we lose, yet they will gain: is this charity?
it is cold charity to partake in our gains, and not in our losses.

Thirdly, they say, if he gain 3.
and I gain too, is not this well, may he not consider my friendship and be
thankful? yes, he may be thankful, but no man is bound to be thankful, but
when he has received a good turn, then he is tried whether he will be
thankful or no: and if he requite thy courtesy, then he is thankful, but if
thou bind him to requite it, then thou art covetous.

Fourthly they say, Usury is necessary for Orphans and Widows, 4.
and Strangers, which have no other way to get their living, and therefore
some Usury must be tolerated. If Usury be necessary for us, how did the
Jews without it? Did God think it good for the state of their common weal to
be without Usurers; and is it good for the state of our common weal to have
Usurers? this is wisdom against God.

Fifthly they say: If I may not 5.
gain by the money which I lend, I will lend no more, but keep my money to my
self: nay, that is as bad to keep thy money from them which need, as to lend
thy money for Usury. For Christ says, from him which borrows, Mat. 5. 42.
turn not away thy face. Therefore thou art bound to lend. As he has a
curse in Prou. 11. which keeps his Corn when he should fell it to them
which hunger; so he has a curse in Eze. 18. which keeps his money when he
should lend it to them which want.

Sixthly they say, because Usury 6.
comes of biting, the biting Usury is only forbidden, and none but the biting
Usury: why then all Usury is forbidden, for all Usury comes of biting, to
show that all Usury is unlawful.

Lastly, they aleadge the Law of the land for it, and say, the Queens 7.
Statute does allow us to take upon Usury ten in the hundredth. These are
like the Jews which said, We have a law, and by our law he shall dye: when
they John. 19. 7.
could not say by Gods law he shall die, then they said by our law he shall
dye: so when they cannot say by Gods law we may take Usury, they say by man's
law we may take Usury, this is the poorest defense of all the rest: for if
Gods law forbid thee, can any law of man excuse thee? As it would not serve
Adam to say, the woman bad me, so it will not serve Genesis 3.
the Usurer to say, the Law does license me. But he cannot say, the Law does
license me: for though peradventure our law do tolerate more than should be
tolerated, yet I would have you know, that our law does not allow ten in
the hundredth, nor five in the hundredth, nor one in the hundredth, nor any Usury
at all: but there is a restraint in our law, that no Usurer take above ten in
the hundredth, it does not allow ten in the hundredth, but punishes that
tyrant which exacteth above ten in the hundredth. It is much like that
tolleration which we read of divorces. For the hardness of men's hearts,
Christ says, that Mat. 19. 7.
Moses did suffer the man and wife to part asunder: So for the hardness of
men's hearts, our Moses our Prince is fame to suffer as it were a kind of
Usury, because otherwise no men would lend.

These are the best excuses which our Usurers have to plead for themselves,
against they come before the tribunal of GOD; and if their reasons will not
stand before men nor their own conscience, how will they stand before the
Lord?

Now, you long to hear what What the Usurer is like.
the Usurer is like. To what shall I liken this generation? They are like a
Butlers box: for as all the counters at last come to the Butler; so all the
money at last comes to the Usurer, ten after ten, and ten after ten, and ten
to ten, till at last he receive not only ten for an hundredth, but an hundredth
for ten. This is the only difference, that the Butler ca^ receive no more than
he delivered: but the Usurer receives more than he delivers. They are like
a Moth; even as a Moth eats a hole in cloth, so Usury eats a hole in
silver: If you have a piece of silver which is as much as an hundredth pounds,
in one year Usury will eat a hole in it as big as ten pounds: in two years
she will eat a hole as big as twenty pounds: in three years she will eat a
hole as big as thirty pounds. Nay, now they say, he is but a bad husband which
cannot eat a hole as big as fifty pounds in a year: that is, which cannot
gain half in half: how many holes have these Moths eaten in poor men's
garments? They are like Nonresidents, that is, such bad members that no man
speaks for them but themselves. As no man stands for Nonresidencie but he
which is a Nonresident, or he which would be a Nonreside^t: so no man stands
for Usury but he which is an Usurer, or he which would be an Usurer. They
are like Iezabel, which said, Let me alone, I have a way. If there be no 1.
King. 21. 7.
way to live (says the false Steward) I know what to do, I will deceive: so
if there be no way to live (says the Usurer) I know what to do, I will
oppress: If I Luke 16. 4.
cannot live by buying, nor by selling, nor by flattering, nor by laboring, I
will live by oppression. But as one in his Comment speaks to the false
Steward, Thou say I know what to do, but do thou know what thou shall
suffer? So I say to Usurers, you say you know what to do, but do you know
what you shall suffer? In deed he knows not what to do, which knows not to
do well: and therefore Christ said of his persecutors, that they knew not
what they did. Luc. 23. 34.


Now I may conclude with Paul, I have not spoken but the Lord 1. Cor. 7. 10.
and therefore as the Lord said unto Saul, that he persecuted him; so Act. 9.
22.
they which resist this doctrine do contemn him, and not me.

The end of the first Sermon.
The Examination of Usury.
The second Sermon.
IT remains that we speak of the Usurers punishment: Then, what may be
thought of them which do not take Usury, but give Usury. Lastly, what they
should do, which have got their riches by Usury.

To begin with the punishment, The punishments of Usurers.
not only Gods law, but even the Cannon law does so condemn Usury, that
first it does excommunicate 1.
him from the Church, as though he had no communion with Saints.

Secondly, it does detain him 2.
from the Sacraments, as though he had no communion with Christ.

Thirdly, it does deprive him of his Sepulcher, and will not suffer 3.
him to be buried, as though he were not worthy to lie in the earth but to lie
in hell.

Lastly, it makes his will to be no will, as though his goods were 4.
not his own: for nothing is ours but that which we have rightly got: and
therefore we say, It is mine by right, as though it were not ours, unless it be
ours by right. This is the judgment of man's law.

Now you shall hear the judgment of Gods law. A Usurer does receive two
Incomes; one of the borrower, and another of the revenger; of the borrower he
looks for gain; but of the revenger he looks for punishment: therefore all the Scripture prophecieth evil unto him, as Michaiah did to Achab. Solomon
says, He Prou. 28. ^.
which increases his riches by Usury, gathers for them which will be
merciful to the poor. As if he should say, when he has laden himself like
a cart, he shall be vnloden like a cart again, and they shall inherit his
money for whom he did never gather it. For, he which is unmerciful to the
poor, means not to gather for them which will be merciful to the poor:
but Solomon says, That they shall be his heirs which will be merciful as
he was unmerciful.

Now mark whether this prophecy of Solomon be true, I know not how many in
this City do increase by Usury; but this prophecy seems to be verified
of many: For it is noted, that the riches and lands of Aldermen and Merchants,
and other in London, do not last so long, nor endure so well, as the riches and
lands of others in the Country, and that their children do not prove so well
as others, nor come to that place in the Common weal, which for their wealth
their parents looked that they should come to. I can give no reason for it but
the reason of Solomon, He which increases by Usury, gathers for them which
will be merciful to the poor. That is, their riches shall go from their
heirs to Gods heirs, according to that, The riches of the sinner is laid up
for Pro. 13. 22.
the righteous: that is, the righteous shall enjoy that which the wicked
gathers. All riches are uncertain, but the riches which are evil gotten,
are most uncertain: They may be called mooueable goods, for they are very
mooueable, like the clouds which never rest til they fall as they climed. God
says, that he will smite the Izek. 22. 13.
Usurer with his fist, not with the palm of his hand, but with his fist,
which gives a greater blow. As his hands were shut against the poor, so Gods
hands shall be shut against him, that his punishment may be like his sin. But
if you will hear their final sentence, David says here, That they shall not
dwell in Gods temple, nor rest in his holy mountain. Then we will seek no
more punishments, for this punishment is all punishments, If they shall not
come to heaven, whose then shall those riches be? nay, whose then shall the
owner be when that day comes? If he shall not rest in heaven, then he shall
rest in Hell where no rest is. Then says one, the Usurer shall Note.
cry unto his children, Cursed be you my children, because you were the cause
of these torments, for least you should be poor, I was an Usurer, and robbed
other, to leave riches unto you. To whom, the children shall reply again,
nay, Cursed be you father, for you were the cause of our torments; for if you
had not left us other men's goods, we had not kept other men's goods. Thus when
they are cursed of God, they shall curse one another, curse the Lord for
condemning them, curse their sins for accusing them, curse their parents for
begetting them, and curse themselves, because they cannot help themselves. As
they which are blessed do nothing but bless, so they which are cursed do
nothing but curse. This is the second Usury which the Usurer shall receive of
God, after he has received Usury of men, then the name of Usury shall be
fulfilled, as it signifies biting, so when it has bitten other, it shall bite
the Usurer too, and never rest biting; then they shall wish that they could
restore again as Zacheus did, and Luke 19.
shall not restore because their money is gone. Therefore if Christ be come to
your hearts, as he came to Zacheus house, restore now as Zacheus did, and
escape this judgment. This is the end of the Usurer and his money, if they stay
together till death, yet at last there shall be a division. The Devil Note.
shall take his soul, the earth shall take his body, the strangers shall take
his goods, and the mourners shall rejoice under their blackes, and say,
Wickedness is come to the grave. Therefore, if thou would not be counted an
Usurer then, refrain to be an Usurer now, for they which are Usurers now,
shall be counted Usurers then. Thus you have heard the Usurers payment.

Now if you will know whether Whether it be unlawful to give Usury.
it be unlawful to give Usury, as it is unlawful to take Usury, I wish that
you could resolve your selves, that I might not speak of it: for I have
heard some Preachers say, that there be some truths which they would be loath
to preach, and so there be some truths which I would be loath to preach,
because many hear by halues, and some for malice or ignorance will take things
otherwise than they are spoken, yet because I have promised, I will speak some
thing of it.

Well then, may we neither take Usury, nor give Usury? I know that Jeremy
says, I have Iere. 15. 10.
not lent upon Usury to others, neither have others lent upon Usury to 1. Ob.
me; as though both were unlawful, not only to take Usury, but to give
Usury. But thereby Jeremy does signify, that he was Answer.
no medler in the world, whereby they should envy him like other men, and
therefore he clears himself chiefly from Usury, because Usurers were most
enuyed. And to show that he was not an Usurer, he says, that he was not a
borrower, which is more lawful than to be an Usurer, like a man which says I
do neither hate him, nor know him. Why it was lawful to know him, but to
prove that he did not hate him, he says, he does not know him: So Jeremy, to
prove that he had not lent upon Usury, does say, that he never borrowed
upon Usury, which many will do that will not lend. The best Expositors give
this sense of it. I know beside, that 2. Ob.
Christ did cast forth the buyers out of his temple, as well as the sellers,
but that was not for buying, Answer.
but for buying in the temple, where they should not buy, but pray: or else it
was as lawful to buy any thing, as it is lawful to use it.

I know beside, that it is a common 3. Ob.
saying, if there were no buyers, there would be no sellers, if there were no
bribe giuers, there would be no bribe takers. But in this case it may be rather
said, if Answer.
there were no takers, there would be no giuers, for the giver does not make
the receiver to take, but the receiver does make the giver to give, because he
will not lend unless the other will give him for the lone: therefore as we
say, the receiver makes a these: so I may say, the receiver of Usury makes
the giver of Usury. Therefore I would be loath to compare them which are
constrained to borrow upon Usury, unto them which did buy in the temple, and
were not constrained more than they which sold in the temple. Much less may I
compare them which give Usury, unto them which take Usury: for there is as
great odds between them, as there is between giving and taking, or between
covetousness and necessity, for one is covetousness, and the other is
necessity. He which lends for Usury, lends for covetousness, but he
which borrows upon Usury, borrows for necessity.

Now, for necessity God has allowed many things; as for necessity it was
lawful for Adams sons to marry with Adams daughters, because there were no
other women. For necessity it was lawful for David to eat the Show bread,
because he had no other food. For necessity it was 1. Sam. 21. 6.
lawful to work, and heal, and fight upon the Saboath, which L^^k. 13 10.
was not lawful, but for necessity. Therefore for necessity why may not a
man pay more than he borrowed, seeing no Scripture does forbid us to pay more
than we borrow, but to require more than we lend. Some do think that as GOD
did use the ambition of Absalom, and the malice of Pharaoh, and the treachery
of Judas unto good; so men may use the covetousness of usurers unto good: that
is, to help at a need, when a man is like to be undone, and his children
cast away, and his Lease forfeited, and many inconveniences beside like to
ensue (which you know better than I) unless he have present money at some
time to prevent a mischief. For example hereof, I may allege how Iaacob did
use the sin of Laban: Genesis 31. 53.
Laban did evil in swearing by Idols, but Iaacob did not evil in receiving
such an oath of him, though it was an unlawful oath. So, though the Usurer do
evil in taking Usury, yet a man does not evil in giving Usury. Beside, I
may allege the example of Abraham and Abimelech: Abraham Genesis 21. 32.
made a covenant with Abimelech; to confirm this covenant, Abraham swear, and
Abimelech swear, Abraham swear by the true God, but Abimelech swear by his
false Gods, and yet Abraham did receive this oath and sinned not. So, if her
Majesty and the Turk should make a covenant, the Turk would not swear as the
Queen would swear; for the Queen would swear by the Lord, but the Turk
would swear by Mahomet: if it be lawful then to receive such an oath, though
it be an unlawful oath, why may it not be lawful for me, to give more than
I borrowed, though it be unlawful for the Usurer to take more than he
lended? Beside, a Prince may not pardon a wilful murderer, yet I think that no
man will say in have, that he which has committed murder may not take a pardon.
As this unlawful giving does not make the taking unlawful; so the other
unlawful taking does not make the giving unlawful. Beside, it is lawful to
suffer injury, though it be unlawful to offer injury: It is lawful to
suffer injury, as Christ paid tribute, Mat. 17. ^9
which was injury; but it is not lawful to offer injury, because there are
six Commandments against it.

Now, to take Usury, is as it were to offer injury; but to give Usury, is as
it were to suffer injury: therefore though I may not take more than I
borrowed, yet I may give more than I borrowed.

Moreover, I may compate giving of Usury to swearing; if a man swear without
cause he sins; but if he swear as the word teaches him to swear, he
sins not: so, if a man borrow upon Usury and borrow without cause, he
sins, because he feeds the Usurer: but else, as a man may swear in some
case, so in some case a man may borrowe upon Usury, that is, in case of
necessity, when a man must needs borrow, and can borrowe of none but of
Usurers.

Lastly, I may allege that Usury and Usurer are never read in the scripture,
but they signify him which takes Usury, not him which gives Usury: and
therefore the Scripture seems to forbid taking, but not giving.

Many reasons more are alleged which I cannot refute, and therefore I will not
contradict them: yet I mean not to decide the question, because I will not be
mistaken; but if some should come unto me in that necessity and extremity
which I can imagine, and ask; may I borrowe money of these Usurers to save my
life, or my credit, or my living, seeing no man will lend me freely? I would
answer him as the Prophet answered Naaman, neither do nor do not, but go in
peace. I will not forbid thee nor I will not condemn thee, but if thy
conscience condemn thee not, I think thy sin one of the least sins; and
as Naaman prayed, Lord be merciful 2. King. 5. 18.
unto me in this: so I think the Lord will be merciful unto thee in this: but
if thy conscience go against it: then do it not, for it is sin to thee
though it be free for another, because whatsoever is not done of faith is
sin. I charge Romans 14. 23.
you in the fear of GOD that you do not mistake that which is said, for I
know no learned preacher, nor learned writer of other mind. Yet least you
should mistake the matter, as I distinguished of lenders, so I will distinguish
of borrowers.

If some may borrow upon Usury, it does not follow that all Diverse kinds of
borrowers.
may borrowe upon Usury, because all have not the like cause: therefore do
not say that I teach you to borrowe upon Usury, for I think that the most in
this city which borrowe upon Usury, should not borrowe as they do, because
they rather maintain Usury, than supply their necessity. Some I know borrow
for mere necessity; if any may be allowed, those are they: but there is a
kind of borrowers in this City which feed Usurers as the bellows kindle the
fire; for they have no need to borrow, but because they would be rich, and
richer, and richest of all: therefore they will employ all the money which they
can borrowe, thinking to get more by the use of it, than the Usury of it does
come too. This makes the^ sell their wares so dear, because they must not
only gain the price but the interest beside, and more than the interest too,
or else they gain nothing. These borrowers are in another predicament than
those which borrowe for necessity: and therefore if they be not old enough
to answer for themselves, I am too young to answer for them. There are other
borrowers as I have heard, which for some secret cause would seem barer and
needier than they are, either because they would not be charged deeply with
Subsidies, or else because they would compou^d with their Creditors for a
little: therefore they will have always some thing for Usury, that their
Creditors may think them bare of money, or that other may pity the^ in their
charges. These are like those Foxes which have wealth enough to pay their
debts, and yet lie in prison because they would defraud their Creditors. I
doubt not but there be more sorts than I know, I cannot hunt every corner
because I want experience: but this is my conclusion, I would Note.
have no man pay interest unto Usurers but for necessity, even as a trauailer
gives his pursse to a thief, because he cannot choose. Thus you have heard
what I can say of them which take Usury, and them which give Usury.

Now you would understand the last question. If you have bin Usurers already,
what you should What Usurers should do with their gains.
do with that money which you have gained by Usury, surely even as Zacheus
did, restore it again. If you cannot say as Samuel 1. Sam. 12. 3.
said, whose goods have I taken? then you must say as Zacheus said, Luke 19.
8.
whose goods have I kept? The best thing is, to do no man wrong, but the next
to that is, to make him amends. This God signifies when he says, put away the
execrable Josh. 6. 18.
thing from you, that is, let no unlawful thing stay in your hands, like the
wedge of Achan which he had got by sin. The same law serves for all which
is got wrongfully, which was instituted against thieves, Restore it again:
Exodus 22.
the reason of this law is, because the sin is not remitted, until the debt
be restored, for as humility is the repentance of pride, and abstinence is
the repentance of surfeit, and alms is the repentance of covetousness, and
forgiveness is the repentance of malice, so restitution is the repentance of
Usury; as he which is not humble does not repent his pride, he which does
not abstain does not repent his gluttony, he which does not forgive, does
not repent his malice, so he which does not restore, does not repent his
Usury. For how can he be said to repent for his Usury, which lives by Usury
still. Therefore Daniel says to Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. 24.
Break off thy sins by righteousness, showing, that nothing but righteousness
can break unrighteousness. As diseases are healed by the contrary, so pride is
healed by humility, gluttony by abstinence, malice by forgiveness, covetousness
by alms, and Usury by restoring. This Paul calls, The revenge of a
Christian, 2. Cor. 7. 11.
when he takes revenge upon his sins, and punishes his lusts, so that he
makes them do contrary to that which they would do. Therefore you must
restore that which you have got by Usury, or else you do not repent of your
Usury. As a Camel when he comes home, casts off his burden at the door,
that he may enter into his Stable, so they which are laden with other men's
goods, when they go to heaven, must leave their burden where they had it,
least they be too gross to get in at the narrow gate. But as the Disciples of
Christ said, this is a hard speech, so to them which John. 6. 60.
have got most that they have by unlawful means, this is a hard speech, to
bid them restore it again: there be two great rubs in the way.

First, the loss which they shall sustain, if they restore again all Two
objections.
which they have got unjustly. Then the difficulty to restore it unto the
right parties. If you ask me, as Amaziah asked the Prophet, How shall we do
for those hundredth 2. Chro. 25. 9.
tallents? How shall I live when al is gone which I have got wrongfully? I can
say no more than the Prophet said to him, The Lord is able to give thee more
than this. Zacheus did not fear how he Luke 19.
should live, but Zacheus did fear to offend: so thou should not fear to
restore other men's goods, but thou should fear to keep other men's goods:
and as Zacheus lived when he had restored, so thou shall live when thou have
restored. He which says, Try me if Mala. 3. 10.
I will not power down a blessing, try him whether he will not power down a
blessing; for he has promised to bless the lender as well Deuteronomy. 15. 10.
as the sacrificer. He which is the Lord of all, can give thee more than thou
need: but if you can not restore to the owner, nor to his heirs, the^ give
it to the poor, for they are the next heirs, and repent that thou have kept
it so long: but in no wise thou may keep it to thy self, because it is
none of thine.

When Hezekiah was like to die, Esaiah said unto him, Set thy Esai. 38. 6.
things in order before thou die. That which he advised him, he advises all;
set your things in order before you die. What is this to set things in order,
but to restore unto every one his own? When thou bequeathest thy body to the
earth, then thy body is set in order: when thou bequeathest thy soul to God,
then thy soul is set in order: when thou bequeathest thy goods to the owners,
then thy goods are set in order: therefore if thou die with other men's goods in
thy hand, then thou die before thou have set things in order, and then thou
die in thy sins, and then no promise in all the Scripture appertains unto
thee, because nothing is promised unto sinners but unto penitent sinners.
Therefore that you may not die in your sins, it is necessary to make
restitution before you die, or else you die in your sin, and are crossed out
of all the joys of heaven. Therefore as Abner said to Ioah, 2. Sam. 2. 26.
Know thou not that it will be bitterness in the latter end? So remember
whether this course will be sweet or bitter in the end.

Thus you have heard the definition of Usury, and the deriuation of it, and
the unlawfulness of it, and the kinds of it, and the punishment of it, and the
arguments which are alleged for it, and what may be thought of them which do
not take Usury but give Usury, and what they should do which have got their
living by Usury.

Now, seeing you may not be Usurers to men, let every man hereafter be an
Usurer to GOD, which promises; If thou leave father, or mother, or wife, or
children, Math. 19. 29.
or house, or land for him, not ten in the hundredth, but an hundredth for ten;
nay an hundredth for one, and in the world to come life everlasting: that is, a
thousand for one. That we may receive this Usury, let us pray that the words
which we have heard out of this Psalm, may dwell with us till we dwell in
heaven.

FINIS.

