THE Pride of King Nabuchadnezzar. Dan. 4. 26. 27.

By Henry Smith.

SIC CREED
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Scarlet. 1591.

Dan. 4. 26. 26 At the end of twelve months, he walked in the royal palace
of Babel.

27 And the King spoke and said, Is not this great Babel that I have built for
the house of the kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the honor of my
majesty.


I Have chosen this story of Nabucadnezer, wherein you may see his pride, his
fall, and restitution. This Nabuchadneezer was a wicked king, and therefore God
warned him by a dream, and by Daniel to amend his life, but all would not
serve: he made many shows, but revolted again, therefore at the last GOD gave
him over for a time, and he became like a beast until he acknowledged his
power to come from God. A warning to all rulers to remember that one ruler is
above which must be served of them all, or else all their buildings and
treasures, and guard, will not shield them from judgment when the stroke
comes, no more than they could save Nabuchadneezer.

At the end of ^welue months (says Daniel) this king walked in his royal
palace. The Prophet shows that he had deserved this punishment before, and
that his dream which he had did tell him how that his kingdom should depart
from him for his pride: yet this respite was granted him, for twelve months,
like the forty days which were granted to the Ninevites: Jonas. 3 4. 5
To try what he would do upon his warning, and whether he would repent as the
Ninevites did, therefore the holy Ghost shows how the time ran, and how he
lived after. As if he should say, if he would return yet, and be warned by
the dreams, and by the Prophet which I sent him, I will stay my hand, and his
kingdom shall not depart from him: but here he shows that he forgot his
dream like a dream, and was more desirous to know* what it meant, than to be
warned by it the twelve months ran month after month. Now his dreams are
gone, he thinks that all his ended, yet Nabuchadneezer is all one, therefore
he gets him up into his palace amidst his delights, to beak himself as
it were in the Sun of all his pleasures, where in deed he hastened God to take
al his pleasures from him, when he should have repented, as Daniel willed
him, and ripped up his sins, and bewailed his life, and poured forth tears,
and prevented his judgment with prayer upon his knees, then was he stalking
in his galleries, and thinking what sin should be next, to fill up the number
of his rebellions, that GOD might not spare him when he judged.

So the wicked will not suffer the prophesies of God against them to be vain,
but they will put God in mind of their punishments and sin, till the
punishment come to fulfill the threatninges due unto them.

Some think that Nabuchadneezer walked upon the roof of his palace, from
whence he might see all parts of the City round about him. Math. 4. 8.
Like the mountain whither the Tempter lead Christ, to show him the beauty of
the world.

This Daniel would signify, that the King lived in ease as he lived before,
and pleased himself in vanity still, Math. 3. 10
for all his warning, and turned his time of repentance to sin. Therefore the
Lord would defer no longer, but cut him down like the barren fig tree, to
teach us to take mercy while it is offered, to repent while we have time, and
if God speak but once to us, to lay it up in our hearts for ever: not look to
be spoken to again, because God is not bound to warn us at all. One would
have thought that Nabuchadneezer would have remembered his warning while he
lived, which had such a strange and fearful dream, and after an other
dream to confirm it, and after such a Prophet to expound it, and the
exposition of it threatening such a downe-fall unto himself. One would have
thought he could not have forgotten it though he had lived until this day. But
like a wonder, which lasts but nine days: so is the repentance of them that
are accustomed to sin. When sin is rooted, it sticks hard, and who shall
weed it? Though God should send us dreams, though he should show us visions,
though he should raise up Prophets, Daniell himself cannot make this black
Moore white, which has been ever black. We may see this in our selves, for
what need we to hear so often of repentance, more than of anything else: but
it is such a thing that we can not frame ourselves to. If we be warned of any
thing but of sin, one warning will serve: but we are so incorporate and
inured with sin, that a thousand Sermons will not serve: so custom has made
sin stronger in many than the word of God. Well remember, or consider, or
apply it how he will, after twelve months God will come, and take account of
his dreams, and of his Prophet which he sent to see what Nabuchadneezer has
profited by them. Although lied have leaden feet, which are long a^ coming,
yet he has iron hands, which, when he comes will strike home.

Now God comes and finds Nabuchadneezer upon his Towers, when he should have
cast himself down to the ground, and thought upon his dreams, and Daniel, to
humble his pride. He was pearched upon his roof, and there he begins to crow
of his wealth: Is not this great Babel, that I have built for the house of my
kingdom by the might of my power, and for the honor of my majesty? See how
the man stands in admiration of his vanity, like an usurer which doteth of
his money as though he had deserved immortal fame for spending his money
vainly, to lay one stone upon another.

Is not this great Babel, etc. he should have said: Is not this
Nabuchadneezers folly, which he has built for a mock to his name, and an
impeachment to his wisdom, for men to say when they pass by, look how our
King has bestowed his revenues, here lie our subsidies, and our tributes in
these stone walls? But Nabuchadneezer thinks that every man will praise him
for his folly. Therefore as a woman when she is pricked up in her bravery,
thinks that all do admire her, and has as goodly opinion of her self, as
the Pecocke has of his feathers, and frames al her tricks, and speeches, and
gestures accordingly: So when Nabuchadneezer sat in his palace, and saw such
sheeres about him, now, says pride, thou must frame thy looks, and gestures,
and speeches accordingly, or else the Kings palace will be brauer than the
King himself. So he begins to exalt his mind higher than his palace, and
to look and speak stouter then he did before: the temptation was no sooner in
his heart, but it was in his mouth, and he pleased himself therein so well,
that he could not refrain, being alone, but as a fool, admires himself in a
glass: so he, when he was alone, and no body with him, yet he strouted
alone, and bragged by himself, to think what a jolly fellow he was. Now men
begin to talk of his buildings. By this we may see how wealth and honors
change manners, and how a gay coat, or a wrought handkercher, or a gold
ring can brave a man's mind, and make him look and speak after another
fashion than he did. It is a wonder to see what power these petty vain toys
have over the mind, to alter and change a man suddenly, when he thinks
better of himself that day he wears them, than any day else.

Is not this great Babel, etc. Before the holy Ghost lays Nabuchadneezers
words, mark how he comes unto them. The King spoke and said: was not one
enough, but he must say, spoke and said? This doubling of the words shows,
that he spoke with a premeditated pride from his heart root, which should out
whether it were sin or no, come what will come. For the holy Ghost does
bring in other speeches with He said, and no more: but here he says, He
spoke and said, as though he spoke twice, not as he spoke at other times,
but like a man at defiance, which could not recall any word that he said,
but if he could say more, he would say it to anger him. Did I call it great
Babel? I may call it great Babel. Did I say that I built it? I will say that I
built it. Did I add for the honor of my majesty? Let it go for the honor of
my majesty. Thus he spoke and said, as though he would be constant in his
pride, although he were constant in nothing else.

Is not this great Babel, which I have built for the house of the kingdom by
the might of my power, for the honor of my majesty?

Three things I note in this saying.

First, what a glorious opinion Nabuchadneezer had of his vain buildings, out
of these words, Is not this great Babel?

The second, that he terms himself the founder of it, as if he had done
all without an help, in these words, which I have built by the might of my
power.

The third is, that in all his work he sought nothing but vain glory out of
these words, for the honor of my majesty.

These three sins Nabuchadnezzer does bewray in one brag: and in all these
three we are so like him, that the beasts were not so like him, when he
became like a beast. First we have not so wonderful an opinion of God, or of
his word, or of heaven, as we have of our own acts, although we never be
able to do half that Nabuchadnezzer did then, yet this is our manner, to
attribute all to our selves, whatsoever it be, riches, or honors, or health, or
knowledge, as if all came by labor, or policy, or art, or nature: if we
cannot draw it to one of these, then we think it fortune, though we
understand not what fortune is: for if we did count our selves beholding unto
God for them, we would find some time to be thankful to him. Lastly, when
we ouer-viewe these matters, this is our solace and comfort, to think with
ourselves, these are the things that make us famous and spoken of, and pointed
at, and there we end, as though it were enough to be pointed at. Is not this
great Babel?

That which one loves seems great and precious above all which he loves
not, although they are better then it: so do these buildings seem unto
Nabuchadnezzer. One would think, that a house, though it were a fair house,
were not a matter for a King to be proud of: stone walls are not so precious,
that he should repose all his honor upon lime and mortar. But this is a just
thing with God, that vain men should have vain prosperity, and vain comfort,
and vain glory, that they may deceive them when they trust to it. Therefore
as the faithful soul looks upon the word, or up to heaven, and says to it
self, is not this my joy, is not this mine inheritance: so the carnal man,
when he looks upon his buildings, or his money, says unto himself, is not
this my joy, is not this my life: and while he pores and gapes to long upon
it, by little and little the love of it grows more and more in his heart,
until at last he minds nothing else. This was the first dotage of
Nabuchadnezzer.

The second was, which I have built by the might of my power. What a vant was
this to say, that he built Babel, when al histories record, that it was built
by Semiramis before Nabuchadnezzer was. Wherefore does he boast of that which
an other did? The answer is easy: why do other so now? We see that every man
does labor to obscure the fame of others, that they may shine alone, and bear
the names, especially in buildings. If they do but add or alter any thing in
their schools or hospitals, or colleges, they look straight to be counted
the founders of them.

And thus the first founders of many ancient places are forgotten: so it is
like that Nabuchadnezzer did add or alter some thing in this City, and
therefore he took all to himself. But if Semiramis, or any other had not
built it but Nabuchadnezzer had been the founder of (as he would seem) yet
this had been a proud and arrogant speech to say, which I have built: for it
was not he that could build Babel, no more than Nemrod could finish Babel:
Psalm. 127. 1.
but unless the Lord build the house, the builders build in vain.

Therefore when he says, By the might of my power, he should have said, by
the might of Gods power.

But by this you may plainly discern how hard and difficult a thing it is
for him to hitte upon a right word, or a good work which has not a good
thought to bring it forth. Therefore make the root sweet, Mat. 12. 33
or the fruit will be sower, counterfaite as cunningly as he can.

Lastly, where he puts in for the honor of my majesty: he shows that he
was of Absolons honor, though he had deserved shame, yet he would have fame:
because he had no children to keep his name in remembrance, 2. Sam. 18. 18.
therefore he erected a pillar, which he called Absolons place: so stately
houses in England, bear the names of the Lords that owe them, for the same
vanity.

Here Absolon thought to be buried, 2. Sam. 18* 17.
as Nabuchadneezer thought to dwell in his palace, but he was cast into a
pit, as Nabuchadnezzer was turned into the wilderness: Esaias. 22. 16* 18
so Shebna made his sepulcher in one cuntry, and was buried in another. For why
should pride have the reward of humility. Honor (says Solomon) goes before
humility, Prou. 18* 12
that is, honor is the reward of humility: and yet Nabuchadnezzer would be
honored for his pride. What has he done, or Sheba, or Absolon, that they
should erect such monumentes, to be praised after death, which were not worthy
to be praised in their life? Before the building of Babel, he had done
nothing worth the speaking, for because he lived always like a beast, therefore
God punished him like a beast.

And does he deserve now to be spoken of in all ages, for heaping stones
together? Hereby we may see a small matter makes great men proud, and they
would be praised for every thing they do.

But look how God ouerthwarteth them: for in that wherein they look to make
their greatest glory, they shame themselves the most of all: and that which
they practice to exalt them, does disgrace and overthrow them, gets them
hatred of such, which otherwise would not meddle with them: sin so deceives
them, like the blind Ammorites, that they take a clean contrary way unto
their desires, as we mae see in the second chapter of the book of Genesis,
they which built Babel, said, Genesis 11. 4.
that they would build it to get unto themselves a name: but they get to
themselves shame: for they could not finish it, when they had begun it, but
were confounded in such a wonderful sort, to their seeming, that they knew not
what they did: so suddenly likewise they understood not a word that one
another spoke. So when Nabuchadnezzer came unto himself again, he shows,
that when he sought his own honor and glory, honor and glory both departed
from him, and he was made like a beast: but when he sought the honor and
glory of GOD, his honor came again, and he was made a king.

This would pull away many toies from women's backs, if they did well weigh
and consider with themselves, how God makes them ridiculous by that, which they
do wear to make themselves amiable. If they did think that the supersluitie
of apparel, which they clogge on to please the world, by the secret judgment
of GOD, did not please but displease, they would be as much ashamed of their
attire, as Eve was of her nakedness. Would they wear such gardes like a
Pedlers shop upon their backs, but to please. See now how GOD does mock
them: for they are not liked, but disliked, and worse thought of for it, then
they that go in Russet, and seek no praise at all. They think, am I not
brave: others think, is she not proud: they think, am I not sweet: others
think, is she not light: yet they dream that every one prayseth them: as
Nabuchadnezzer thought that every one would honor him for his palace.

If their gorgeous buildings and bravery condemn them before men, how will it
condemn them before God? Therefore when Nabuchadnezzar says, for the honor of
his majesty, he should have said for the honor of Gods majesty, and then
this had been recorded for his honor indeed, and his house had been the
house of God, for as we should speak, and study, and labor to Gods glory, so
we should build also to Gods glory, that our houses may be like Temples, as
Obadias was: but few seek glory that way, they had rather pull down then
build in such sort. Thus you have heard what Nabuchadnezzer spoke, as though
GOD would destroy the thoughts and pride of such builders. These are the
thoughts and meditations of princes and nobles, when they behold their
buildinges, and open their coffers, and look upon their train swinging after
them, they think as Nabuchadnezzer thought, Is not this great Babel? Is not
this great glory? Are not these the treasures that shall make my children
rich? Is not this the train that makes me reverenced in the streets? Is not
this the house that shall keep my name, and cause me to be remembered, and
make them that are children now to speak of me hereafter, when they shall go
by and look up, and see these antikes and knackes over their heads, they
will say, Oh he that builte this was a great man, he did bear a great
swaie in Court and Country, who but he while he lived: although though this
King be dead and buried, yet his pride escaped and came to us. Nabuchadnezzer
has children yet alive, which build as high as he, go as brave as he,
spend as vainly as he, and are as proud and insolent as he, although they
be not Kings nor Dukes, nor Knights, nor yet good Squires. Look upon their
palaces, and then consider with thy self, and think whether they be of
Nabuchadnezzers brood, Is not this great Babel? and is not Nabuchadnezzer
Lord of it? Oh if they might live to walk in their galleries still, they
would never desire any other heaven.

But Nabuchadnezzer has showed the way before them, and they must all dance
after him, though they were as mighty, though they were mightier then he, death
will not take his kingdom for a ransom. Now what is Babel and what is
Nabuchadnezzer the king thereof. Now Babel is destroyed, and the king which
built it is laid in dust: had it not been better to have built an house in
heaven, which might have received him when he was dead. The name of these
palaces may well be Babel, that is, confusion, because they prophecy
confusion to the^ which build, them: for their foundation is pride, their walls
extortion, their roof ambition, and all the stuffings within them is usury,
briberie, cruelty. Now if this be the best which Nabuchadnezzer has to vant
of, what is the worst which he may be ashamed of? When I see how earnest he
was about his dream, and how loose he sat after in his palace. Me thinks I
see the image of the world in one man: how lively does Nabuchadnezzer resemble
the dreamers of our time? such inquiry, such diligence to know Gods will, that
a man would have sworn, if the king met with a prophet from heaven that can
tell him the truth and instruct him from God, that his dream warned him to
amend his life, he will reclaim himself, and reform his realm, and become
such a king as was never in this land before. But behold no sooner resolved of
his dream, but he was ready to be warned again, and was not so attentive to
the Prophet as he was to his dream, though he cared for neither, for when he
understood that his dream went about to change the course of his life, 2. Kin
5. 11.
he went away like Naaman in a chafe, and cared no more for his dream after.
Before the dream came, all would have said that such a dream would have
humbled his heart for ever. Before the Prophet came, all would have said, that
such a Prophet would have converted the^ with a word, but Nabuchadnezzer is
Nabuchadnezzer, and if any other dream come more fearful then this, yet
Nabuchadnezzer will be Nabuchadnezzer, and love his palace better than
paradise: so we think if God would send a famine upon this land, that would
make us fear him, but God has senta famine and yet we do not fear him. If
God would send an Earthquake upon this land that would make us fear him: but
God has sent an Earthquake upon this land, and yet we do not fear him: If
God would send a pestilence upon this land, that would make us fear him: but
God has sent a pestilence, and yet we do not fear him. If God would send
war upon this land, that would make us fear him: but God has sent war,
and yet we do not fear him: therefore what will make us fear him? There be
many that dream upon Religion, as Nabuchadnezzer dreamed upon his dream.
But he desired only to know what it meant: so do they desire only to know.
Mar. 10. 17.
Master what shall I do to come to heaven, says the young man to Christ: he
would feign know the way to heaven, but when Christ showed him the way he would
not take it: so they that go from preacher to preacher, as Nabuchadnezer sent
from one wise man to another, to be resolved in points of Religion, have such
a scruting, such attention, such heat, as though they would run beyond the
teachers, that a man would think they would do any thing, as the Jews
seemed to Moses, Deuteronomy. 5. 27.
and the young man unto Christ: Exodus 20. 19 and 19. 3.
but when they have heard what they can, they do like Nabuchadnezzer, as they
did before. Now they say it was but a dream, because the meaning does not
answer to his will: 1. King. 2. 2
So Achab inquired of the prophet, to see what he would say, but it appears
that he never meant to follow him, unless he would answer as he would have
him.

When it comes to the act, which is every man's trial: then ye shall see,
who are like Nabuchadnezzer, which affect only to know: and who are like
Zacheus, Luke 19* 8.
that is, which practice as they know. For as the truth is revealed, so it must
be witnessed, or else the fall of Nabuchadnezzer shows what will fall upon
it: because he would not do as the dream warned him, and as the Prophet
counseled him, therefore GOD forsook him, and his kingdom departed from him,
and he was thrust out of his palace, and turned like an ox into the
wilderness, where he lived in all points like a beast, until the time of
seven years were ended.

A warning unto all to take heed of the world: for it is the gentle warner,
the next is rougher, the third and the fourth harder then it: like the nine
plagues of Egypt, which did exceed one an other. Who can weigh the wrath of
God, Exodus 8.
or the greeuousnes of sin? Some would think that Nabuchadnezzer might have
spoken all this, without such offense: for he did but say that it was a fair
house, and that he builded and erected it for his honor. Many under Princes
delight in worse vanities then building, and speak vainer oftener in a week.
Therefore when you see how it displeases God to vant of these earthly things,
or to impute any thing unto our selves, think what shall be the doom of
greater sins. If Nabuchadnezzer became like a beast, and lodged in the
wilderness for his pride, they which bear pride, and covetousness, and lust, and
wrath, and malice, and all the legion of sins in one breast, shall lodge in
hell, and become like Devils, because they are like beasts already. Therefore
let this be in stead of Daniels warning. If God did take such account of
Nabuchadnezzer for his dream, what he had profited by it, what account will he
take of us, what profit we have made of Nabuchadnezzers fall and punishment.

Thus have you heard what the voice spoke from earth: now you should hear what
the voice spoke from heaven, but the time will not permit, therefore here I
end.

FINIS.

