THE CHRIstians Sacrifice. Scene, and allowed.

LONDON. Printed by Thomas Orwin, for Thomas Man, 1589.

TO MY LATE AVDItors, the congregation of Clement Danes, all the good will which
I can shevve.
Beloved in Jesus Christ, my first fruits, I have nothing but this myte to
leave with you, which is the sum of al my sermons, ye have heard it already,
and as the apostle calls the Corinthians his epistle, so ye should be my sermon;
2, Cor. ^^
that is, my sermon should be printed in your hearts, as this is printed in
paper. If ye have not given your h^r^s yet to him which sent for them, now
think that god has sent for them again, and hear me writing, whom ye cannot
hear speaking. Take not custom for religion shun occasion as well as sin se^k
the use of every thing, desire not to have your Kingdom here. And so I leave
you all with Christ, whom I have preached, to bring forth the fruit of that
seed which is sown, beseeching you for all the love that you have of heaven,
that ye would not count any thing in this world worthy to keep your hearts from
God, but think of the day when you shall give account of every lesson which ye
have heard, and he which has called you in this prison, will glorify you in
his palace, where ye shall see him to whom ye have given your hearts, and
enjoy that blessing of blessings, which makes all the world to worship him.
The father of our lord Jesus Christ, which has begun to draw you to his
Kingdom, never leave you until you come unto it, Amen.

Your late unworthy servant for the Lord, Henry Smith.

THE CHRISTIANS SACRIFICE.
My son, give me thy heart. Pro 23.2^

TO bind all the Lessons together, which ye have learned since I came, this
Setence did come to my mind, My son, give me thy heart, which is the sum
of all that ye have heard, Job, 22, 22. Luke 2, 19 Psalm. 17.3^ Dan, 7, 28
and shows in what chest you should lay up these treasures in your heart, and
then give that heart unto God, and he vvil keep all safe.

A supplication is come as it were from God to man, that man would send God
his heart, Pro. 9, 1.
penned by Solomon, under the name of Wisdom, and directed to her sons,
vvisdome entreats her sons that they would give her their hearts, this wisdom
is god, Rom, 8.15 Gal, 4, 24. John 4.14.
we by adoption are his sons, and our heart is that which christ calls spirit
and truth, without hypocrisy: Give me that heart, says God. He which
geues any thing to another, co^siders before what he loves, and gives that
which he thinks will be accepted, that he may be loved for his gift: therefore
David, as though he were at a stand, and sorrowed that he could not do
enough for God, break^ forth to himself, What shall I give unto the Lord for all
that he has given me? The Lord hearing as it were, these sighs of his
servant, which care and study what they may do to please him, comes in their
suspense, and like a friend which desires nothing but good will answers from
heaven, My son, give me thy heart. Under which suite he taxes them beside
which are suitors alvvaies to him, and look still to receive like the
Publicanes, but never cast in their minds what they should give, threfore
their tribute is set down by equal measure under the kings seal, every man
must homage his heart. He which alvvaies gave, now craves: and he which
craved alvvaies, now geues: Christ stands at the door like a poor man, and
asks not bread, nor clothes, nor lodging, which we should give to his
members, but our heart: that is, even the continent of all, and gouerner of
man's house, which sittes on the bench like the Judge, to give the charge, and
teach the tongue to speak, the hand to work, the foot to walk, the ear
to attend, the eye to observe, the mind to choose, and the flesh to obey. Leu,
1, 9. and 13
That we must present to GOD like a burnt sacrifice, wherein all is offered
together, a wise tongue, a diligente hand, a wary foot, a vvatchefull eye,
an attentive ear, an humble mind, an obediente flesh, put all together, and
it is but the heart. My son (says God) give me this heart. Here thou art
the geuer, God the petitioner, thy heart the gift, which he claymeth by the
name of a son. Should GOD be a suppliaunt unto thee and me, but that our
unthankfulness condemns us, that for all the things which he has given
us, we never considered as yet what we should give unto him before he asks:
he is feign to put in his petition like a suter, and say, give me thy heart:
Mark what God has chosen for himself, not that which any other shall loose
by, like the demaundes of them which care for none but themselves, but that,
which being given to God, mooues us to give unto every man his due, Luke 19, 8.
as Zacheus when he gave his heart to Christ, parted his goods to the poor,
and restored to al, that which he had got by vvrong. Once God required
offeringes and sacrifices, Mal, 1.13, and, 3, 18.
which men were unwilling to give, because it was a deer service of God,
but now he says, that the heart is more then all burnte offerings and
sacrifices, Mar. 12,. Genesis 23.
Jacob loved Joseph more then al his brethren, so God loves the heart more
then all her follows, this myte God will have for all his benefits which
we may best affoorde him, thy alms to the poor, thy counsel to the simple,
thine inheritance to thy children; thy tribute to Caesar, John, 4, 24.
but thy heart to God: he which is a spirit; requires the spirit, and
delights, to dwell in the hearts of men. Here God plants himself as in a
castle, which is alvvaies besieged with the world, the flesh, and the devil
If the enemy get a thought, or a word, or a work, yet he has but rased the
wales, but if he take the heart, then the fortress is lost. From that time,
al our thoghts, and words and works, are captive unto him, he bids them go,
and they go, do, and they do it. That man is like Esau, gen, 25, 33
which had an inheritance, which had a heart; but now he has not possession
of his own, therefore give God thy heart, that he may keep it, not a piece of
thy heart, not a rovvme in thy heart, but thy heart. The heart divided, dies:
God is not like the mother which would have the child divided, but like the
natural Mother, 1, Kings 3, 26
which said rather then it should be divided, Let her take all. Let the devil
have all, if he which gave it, be not vvorthie of it, God has no copesmate,
therefore he vvil have no parting offtakes, but all, or none: and therefore he
which asks here thy heart, in the 6. of Deuteronomy. and the 5. asks all thy heart,
all thy soul, all thy strength: thrice he requires all, least we should
keep a thought behind: yet it is thy heart, that is, a vain heart, a barren
heart, Esai 47, 1^ Eccle. ^, 9
a sinful heart, until thou give it unto GOD, and then it is the spouse of
Christ, 1. Cor, ^, ^6 11 Cor, 6, 19
the Temple of the Holy Ghost, and the image of God, so changed, and formed,
and refined, that God calls it a new heart, Ezekiel. 36.26. Some have a double
heart, Eze, 36, 26
as it is in the 12. Psalm: but God acknowledges but one heart, saying,
Psalm, 12, 2
give me thy heart, not give me thy hearts: declaring that a single heart is
pleasing unto him, and that they which have a double heart, a heart and a
heart, have never a good heart. God does not require the heart, as though he
required no more then the heart, like the Pope, which says, give me thy heart,
and it suffices. To maintain his Papists pendant and crouchant, which live
amongst Christians, he requires nothing of such but their heart, they may
worship god with their lips, and dissemble their religion, and forsvveare
their opinions, and come to sermons, and subscribe to other laws, and seem
protestants, as the devil licenceth witches to seem christians, so they give
him their heart, he dispenses with the^ to dissemble, and give the rest as
they list, but God requires the heart because we should not dissemble, for in
the 12. to the Romans he commands the body too, Rom, 12, i,
Offer up your bodies a lively sacrifice. Which we cannot do, unless we give
heart, and hand, and tongue, and eyes, and ears, and all, for the body is all:
but the heart is chief in request, because if there be any goodness, it lies in
the heart, and because he which gives the heart geues al, Luc, 6.45,
for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, the hand works,
the eye looks, the ear listneth, the foot walks to good or evil:
therefore, there is such strife for the heart, as there was for M^ses body:
Iud, 9,
give it me says the Lord, give it me says the tempter, give it me says the
Pope, give it me says riches, give it me says pleasure, as though thou must
needs give it: now here is thy choice, whether thou vvilt give it to God or
the devil, Gods heart or the devils heart whose vvilt thou be? Man hangs in a
balance like a young virgin which has many suitors: some she favors for
parentage, some for personage, some for friends, some for wealth, some for
wit, some for virtue: and after all, chooses the vvorst of all: so the heart
has so many suitors besides God, that sometime she marries with one,
sometimes with another, the world keeps her, the flesh keeps her, the
devil keeps her, Mat, 14, ^
which have no more interest in her, the^ Herod to his sister, but seek her
spoil, like them which marry, for riches, are glad when one dies, that
another may come. These suitors are like Absalom, ^, Sam, 5.
which did not seek the hearts of the people like David, but steal them with
slatterie and lies, but god vvoulde have thee give thy heart. As a man
considers what he does when he geues, so god licenceth us to consider of that
which we do for him, whether he deserves it, whether we owe it,
whether he can require it, ^^^st it should come against our vvil: therefore
give me says God, as though he would not strain upon us, or take from us,
but if thou vvilt give him thy heart, then he accepts it, it must come freely
like a gift, as his blessings come to us, and then his demand ^s granted.
Here is no respect of time, how long thou may st^y it, or how long he
will keep it, but give it, is the present time, as though he would have it
out of hand, while he asks before ye go out of the church: for what can we
ask of him, while we deny him but one thing which he asks of us:
therefore consider who is a suitor to you, Now I am a collector for God, to
gather hearts, either you must grant him, or deny him, think who shall lose
by it, if thou vvilt not pay thy landlord his rent. How many subjects would
rejoice, if they had any thing to give to the Prince, and pray her to accept
it, that they might but say; I have given a present to the Queen? Mar, 14, 3
So Mary reioiced that she had a little oil to sprinkle upon Christ, that
she would take no money for it: 1, King, 17, 13
yea the vviddovv of Zarephath was so joyful that she had a little food for
the Prophet, that she spared it from her children, and her self, to serve him
first, so they which love the Lord like his Disciples, which left al to
follow him, ^uc, 5 11,
had rather that he should have their riches, their honors, their hearts, and
their lives, then they themselves. Why is David called a man after gods own
heart, Sam, 13, 14
but because when god said, give me thy heart, his spirit ansvvered like to an
Echo, I give thee my heart? is God so desirous of my heart? what good can my
heart do to God? It is not worthy to come under his roof: I would I had a
better gift to send unto my Lord: go my heart to thy maker, the Bridegroom
has sent for thee, put on thy Wedding garment, for the King him self will
marry thee. Who is not sorry now, that he did not give his heart before? Is
he not vvorthie to die, that will take his heart from him that made it, from
him which redeemed it, from him which preserues it, from him which vvil
glorify it: to give it unto him which vvil infect it, torment it, condemn
it? Will a servant reach the cup to a stranger, when his master calls for it?
Or will a man sell his coat if he have no mo? What have thou reserved for God
when thou have given Satan thy heart? Christ has promised to come and dwell
with thee, where shall he stay, Reave, 3, 2^
where shall he dine, if the chamber be taken up, and thy heart let forth to
another? Thou art but a tenant, and yet thou take his house over his head,
and placest in it whom thou will, as if thou were Landlord. Can thou
possess another man's goods, but he will molest thee, and trouble thee until
he have his own? And do thou think to keep that which is Gods, and hold
it in peace? No, he vvil never suffer thee to rest, 1, Sam, 38 Exodus 8, 13 and
9:28 Acts 16, 14 Exo, 8 and 9 and ^
but cry upon thee day and night as Moses vexed Pharaoh until he let the
people go, so thou shall be distracted with fears and thoughts, as one
plague followed an other until thou let thy heart go, that it may serve God,
as if a man should pull out thy heart, and take it from thee, so grievous it
is unto God to keep thy heart from him. Therefore, let all suitors have their
aunsvvere that thy heart is married already, as Isaac answered Esau, Jacob
have I blessed, Gen, 27
and he shall be blessed: So thou may say, God has my heart, and he shall
have it, and them that crave it hereafter, send them to Christ for it, for it
is not thine to give, if thou have given it to God already. But take heed thy
heart do not lie to thy self, and say it is Gods, when it is the worlds,
1, King, 24, 6
like Ieroboams wife, which would not seem Ieroboams wife. By this thou
shall know whether thou haste given it to him or no, If thy heart be gone,
all will follow, as the Sun rises first, and then the Beasts arise from
their dens, the Fowls from their neastes, and men from their Beds: so
when the heart settes forvvard to God, all the members will march after it,
the tongue vvil praise him, the foot vvil follovv him, the ear will attend
him, the eye vvil watch him, the hand vvil serve him, nothing will stay after
the heart, Psalm, 123, 2 Mat, 23.26
but every one goes like handemaydes after their mistress: this Christ
verifieth, saying, Make clean within, and all will be clean: that is, the
eye, and the ear, and the tongue, and the hand, and all: as the Father gave
us all, Rom, 8, 32
when he gave his Son, so we give him all, when we give our hearts.
This is the melody which Paul speaks of, Ephe. 5.19. Make melody to the
Lord in your hearts, shevving that there is a consort of all the members, when
the heart is in tune, that it soundes like a melody in the ears of God, and
makes us rejoice while we serve him, we have example hereof in Christ,
which said that it was meat and drink unto him to do his Fathers vvil: and
David which danced to see the Arc, John 4, 34 2, Sam, 6, 14 1, Chro, 29 9
and the Israelites of whom it is said that they reioised, when they
offered from their heart unto the Lord. Therefore Solomon pricking out the heart
for God, speaks as though he would set us the pleasantest, and fairest, and
easiest way to serve him without any grudging, or toil, or vvearines: touch
but the first link and all the rest vvil follovv; so set the heart a going, and
it is like the poize of a clock, which turns all the wheels one way; such
an oil is about the heart, which makes all nimble and current about it:
therefore it is almost as easy to speak well* and do well, Psalm 45, 1
as to think well. If the heart indite a good matter, no marvel though the
tongue be the pen of a ready writer, but if the heart be dull, al is like a
left hand, so unapt and vntovvard that it cannot turn itself to any good.
Therefore Gods suites have so hard passage in our counsels, judgments, and
parliamentes, because men do not give him their hearts, which should be the
first offering of all: if they did give him their hearts before they sit
down to hear his cause, they could not deny him any thing that is for his
honor, though it were against their profit, but as Christ says, not my will,
but thy will, Mar, 26, 39
so they would say, it is not our kingdom but thy kingdom, it is not our
Church but thy church, therefore not our will but thy vvil, not our law but
thy law, not our discipline but thy discipline reign in it: and all that give
their hearts subscribe to this, the rest say, not thy will but our will, not thy
law but our law, not thy discipline but our discipline, because as the
Apostle says, they seek their own glory, and not Christ's, Phil. 2.21. ^at, 2, 3
This has bin the rub ever since reformation began, Herod cannot see how he
should be King, ^cts 19, 23
if Christ should reign: therefore as the imagemakers cried and stormed when
images should go down, alleging that they lived by this craft: so, if ye
mark what kind of men they be which preach, and write, and labor so hotly
against the discipline, it is they that are like to lose some of their
dignities, or their commodities by it, ^^h, 11, 48 ^ar, 23, 7 ^ar, 10, 21.
if the government should change: the Scribes and Pharisees resisted Christ
more then the people, because he denounced woe to them, and misliked that they
should be called Rabbi: how hard it is to follovv Christ, when he says,
leave all; nay if he bid us to leave any thing for him, though we should
leave our very selves. Mat. 16.24. The tongue will not praise, because the
heart does not love; the ear will not hear, because the heart does not
mind, the hand will not give, because the heart does not pity, the foot vvil
not go, because the heart does not stir: al stay upon the heart, like the
Captain that should give the onset.

Secondly, God requiring the heart, shows that all the things of this world
are not worthy of it, nor a piece of it, nor a thought, Eccle, 1.13 and 14
unless it be to contemn them, as Solomon thought of vanity.

Thirdly, that all should consent so with the heart, that we should speak as
if the heart did speak, pray as if our heart did pray, hear as if our heart
did hear, give as if our heart did give, Psalm, 44, ^ Job, 22, 22
remit as if our heart did remit, and counsel as if our heart did counsel, as
the Apostle says, Do all things heartily: Coloss. 3.23. which if we would
keep, nothing that we do should trouble us, because nothing is troublesome,
but that which goes against the heart.

Fourthlie, that we should serve god for himself and not for our selves, as
he which gives his heart, does all for love: This christ requires when he
castes off that disciple, Mat, 28, 19
which offered to follovv him for advantage, The birds have nests, and the
foxes have holes, (says christ) but the son of man has not a place to hide
his head: shevving this disciple, if he will follow him, he must not look
for a place to hide his head: we must leave all to follovv christ, Mat, 4, 20
^ohn 9, 26
as Peter did, and not seek al by follovving him, as they that went after him
for bread.

Fifthly, that we should not serve god by fits, as we use to pray when the
night comes, to hear when the Saboth comes, to fast when Lent comes; to
repent when death comes, but the service of the heart is continual service, 1,
These, 5, 16
like in that 1. These. 5 Rejoice evermore, pray continually in all things
give thanks. Who is this which reioiceth, and prays. and thanketh
continually? The tongue prays but sometime, the ear atte^deth but sometime,
the hand gives but sometime, but the heart prays, and praises, and
vvorshippeth alvvaies: a man may serve God alvvaies with his heart, and never
be vvearie, because the heart cannot serve him unless it rejoice in his
service: and therefore they praised God with music, which did not delight
god, but shevved that they delighted in his service, as they did in music, 1.
Chron. 15, 16
1. Chr. 15.16. but if the tongue, or the hand, or the ear, think to serve
God without the heart, it is the yrksomst occupation in the world, the hour
of tediousness, like a long sickness, he is tired before he begin, and
thinks himself in the stocks, till the sermon be ended, till his prayer be
done, that he may be at liberty, and turn to his byas again.

Lastly, this shows how God mislikes our coldness in hearing or praying, if
we cannot say with the Virgin, Luke 1.46
My heart does magnifye the Lord. All that comes short of this, is hipocrisye,
and pleases GOD like the offering of Cayne Genesis 4.5. As Joseph charged his
brethren, Genesis 42.15. that they should not come to him for corn, unless
they brought Beniamim unto him whom they left at home: Mat, 15.8
so GOD will not have us speak to him, nor come unto him for any thing,
unless we bring our heart unto him, which we leave behind. The tongue
without the heart is a flattering tongue, the eye without the heart is a
wicked eye, the ear without the heart is a vain ear, the hand without
the heart is a false hand. Do thou think that God vvil accept a flattering
tongue, a wicked eye, a vain ear, a false hand, which rejects a sacrifice if
it be but lean, or bruised? No, says Paul, Leuit, 22, 21, 22, 42
If I give all that I have, and have not love; that is, give not my heart, it
auailes me nothing, he says not, that they which give not their hearts give
nothing, but that they shall have nothing for such offerings: mar, 12, 42
he which brings but a mite, and bringes his heart, brings more then he which
offers a talent, mat, 19, 20 Gal. 6, 7
and he shall go away more justified, then he which said, All these have I
kept from my youth upward, for God is not mocked, Act, 5.3
but knows how much is behind, though Ananias seem to bring al. He marks how I
speak, and how you hear, and how we pray in this place, and if it come not
from the heart, he repels it as fast as it grows up, like the smoke which
chmes toward heaven, but never comes there, man thinks when he has the
gift that he has the heart to, but god when he has the gift calls for the
heart still the Pharisees prayer, the harlots vow, the traitors kiss, the
sacrifice of Caine, the fast of Iezabelle, the tears of Esau, the oblation of
Ananias are nothing to him, but still he cries, Psalm 73, 1
bring thy heart or bring no thing: like a jealous husband when he has a
wife, yet he is jealous whether he has her hurt, so vvharsoeuer thou do, yet
god is jealous still, and respects not what thou do, but whether thou do it
from thy heart, Mat, 27, 24
of mere love tovvard him. If Pilat had vvashed his heart when he vvashed his
hands, 2. Kin, 5, 14 Ge, 34, 22
he had bin cleaner than Naama^ when he came out of Iorda^ if the Sichemites
had circumcised their hearts, when they circumcised their flesh, they had saved
their souls, when they lost their lives, if (...) 4, 2
Cain had offered his heart when he offered of the fruits, his offering had
bin as acceptable as Abels: but as svvins flesh was like shepes flesh,
Leuiticus 10, 7
yet was not accepted because it ca^e from an unclean beast: so Caines
offering, Pilats washing, the Sichemits circumcision, the pharisces prayer,
and fasts, and alms, were as fair as the apostles, yet they had no revvard, but
woe to you hypocrites, Mat, 23
because they vva^ted the heart, 1, Kin, 18, 24
which is like the fire that kindles the sacrifice. but vvil he requit our
prayers, and fasts, and alms, as he did theirs? yea (says Christ) except your
righteousness exceed the pharisees, that is, Mat, 5.20
except we give our hearts besides our lips, and our ears, and our alms,
which they gave more than we, we shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven,
because our righteousness does not exceed the righteousness of the pharisees, but
their righteousness exceeds our. Christ does not bid them woe, because they
were Pharisees as we are not, but because they were hypocrites as we are. God
delights him self in giving, and therefore loves a cheerful giver: Mic^, 7, ^8
1. Cor, 9, 7
but he cannot give cheerfully which gives not his heart. Therefore Judas
thought the oil spent which was powered upon Christ and wished the price of it
in his purse: so they grudge and grieve when theie should do good, and think,
shall I give it? Can I spare it? what will it bring? So the good work dies in
birth, like a Bride which drowpeth in the hand, whiles the head considers
whether he shall let her go, or hold her still: as easy to wring Hercules
club out of his fists as to wring a penitent tear from their eyes, or a
faithful prayer from their lips, or a good thought from their heart, which
cannot afford the heart it self: every thing is too much which they do, and
they think God more beholding to them for blurting out a Pater nosler, or
staying a sermon, or fasting a fridaie, than they to him for all his benefits:
Mat, 23
and when they have done what is their reward? woe be unto you Scribes and
pharisees, hipocrites, because you gave not your hearts: therefore we do but
vex our selves, Mat, 15, 8
and loose our labor, thinking to make God believe that we pray, when indeed
our lips do but pray: whereby it comes to pass, as we serve him, so he
serves us; our peace is not in deed, but in word, our joy is not in heart,
but in countenance, a false comfort, like our false worship; for he which
gives God his lips in stead of his heart, teaches god to give him stones in
stead of bread: that is, a shadovv of comfort, for comfort it self.

Now when we have given god fair words and long prayers, and solemn
fastes, and mourning countenances, he puts in but a word more to fill up the
sacrifice, Give me thy heart, and it suffiseth. It is like the last suite of
Abraham, when he said to God, I will speak but this once; so if thou will
hear him in this, he will ask no more; therefore now conclude, whether God
shall have thy heart, or nothing: If thou consider what right he has to ask
it, and what cause thou have to give it, thou can not keep it til I end my
sermon. Of all the suitors which come unto you, it seems there is none, which
has any title to claim the heart, but God; which challenges it, Mal. 1, 6
by the name of a son: as if he should say, thou shall give it to thy
father, which gave it to thee: art thou my son? my sons give me their hearts,
and by this they know that I am their father, if I dwell in their hearts: for
the heart is the Temple of God; 1, Cor, 1, 16
therefore if thou be his son, thou will give him thy heart, because thy
father desires it, thy maker desires it, thy redeemer desires it, thy Savior
desires it, Romans 8.3^
thy Lord and thy King and thy Master desires it; which has given his Son
for a ransom, his spirit for a pledge, his word for a guide, the world for
a walk, and reserues a kingdom for thine inheritance. Can thou deny him
any thing, which has given the heir for the servant, his beloved for his
enemy, the best for the vvorst? Can thou deny him any thing, whose
goodness created us, whose favor elected us, whose mercy redeemed us,
whose wisdom conuerteth us, whose grace preserves us, whose glory shall
glorify us? Can thou deny him any thing? O if thou knevve, (as Christ
said to the Woman of Samaria, John 4.1^
when she huckte to give him water) if thou knevve who it is which says
unto thee, Give me thy heart; thou would say unto him as Peter did,
when Christ vvoulde wash his feet; Lord, not my feet only, John. 13.9.
but my hands and my head, not my heart only, but all my body, and my
thoughts, and my words, and my works, and my goods, and my life, take all
that thou haste given. For why should not we give him our hearts, as well
as our lips, Genesis 13 89.
unless we mean to deceive him with words for deeds? If Abram gave Lot
leave to choose what part he did like, shall not we give God leave to
choose that which he loves? I he did not love thee, he vvou'de not require
thy heart; for they which love, require the heart. The master requires
labor, the land lord requires service, the captain requires fight; but he
that require^ the heart, requires it for love, for the heart is love. We will
give him little, if we vvil not give him that, which he asks for love
toward our selves: though he say; give it, yet indeed he has bought it,
and that dearly, Psalm. 31.5 1. Pet. 1.18.1^
with the dearest blood that ever was shed. He gave thee his heart, before
he desired thy heart; but heart for heart, a living heart for a heart which
died: thou do not lose thy life as he did for thee, but thou bestowest thy
life to glorify him, thou do not part from thy heart when thou give it,
but he does keep it for thee, least the serpent should steal it from thee,
Genesis 3.8
as he stole paradise from Adam when it was in his own custody: he ca^ keep it
better than we, and he will keep it if we commit it to him, and lay it in a
bed of peace, and lap it vith joy, Psalm. 31.5 John. 10.2^
and none shall take it out of his hands. Therefore, if ye ask me, why you
should give your hearts to god? I do not answer like the Disciples which
went for the ass and the colte, Mat. 28.^
The Lord has need but we have need. For unless we give our souls, how
can he have them? And unless he have them, how can he save them?
Therefore we have need, if ever the saying were true, ( It is more blessed
to give than take:) more blessed are they which give their hearts to GOD,
than they which take possession of the world. Acts 20.45 1. Sam. 25.42
Abigail did not gain so much by her gift to David, as we for our gift to
God; for she was married unto David, but we are married unto Christ; Cant 5
of whom the Church does sing in the 5. of Canticles, that no well beloved is
like her beloved; what heart would not be loved of him, though it do not love
him? Who can assoyle this riddle? we vvoulde have Christ our bridegroom, and
yet we vvil not be his spouse; I would have him take my heart and yet I will not
give it. How should he keep it, or save it or glorifi, it if I hide it away
like the servant that buried his talent in the earth? Mat. 26.24
So much as I keep from God, so much I keep from heaven, and will not suffer
him to glorify it, as I did vvishe one part to be saved, and another damned.
He which would have his heart sanctified, and comforted, and enlightened, and
vvil not give it to God, is like a woman which would have her dough leauened,
and lays her dough in one placee, and the leaven in another, where one
cannot touch the other: then comes the tempter, and takes them asunder, and
seaseth upon the heart, because he finds her alone. This is his seed time,
now he enters into it, and filles it with his poison, till the temple of God
be the sink of sin, and the hearr which should be the seat of holiness,
grace, and wisdom, a heart of pride, a heart of envy, a heart of lust
more like a belly than a heart; how many things lodge in the heart when God
is not there? It is a world to think, how the divine soul, which descended
from heaven to bring forth fruit, is become afit soil for every weed, vvherby
we may see what hearts we have before we give them to GOD Therefore now
ask your hearts whose they are, and how they are moved with these
words? how many here will give to this collection? whose heart is gone up
unto him, since I beeganne to speak? Here one, and there one runs up the
ladder, Genesis 28.12.
like the angels that Jacob savve in his dream, and sing with David, Psalm. 47
47
My heart is prepared, my heart is prepared; and why not thou as well as he?
Does not he send for all alike? vvilt thou be the thorn, or the stone, or
the high way, Mat. 13
where the seed does lose his fruit? why, had thou rather be compelled
then invited, since thou art called to a banquet? Man. 22
How many hearts more might we draw to God, if all that be here would go
to him this day? But thus it stands, Mat. ^^, 33
God has sent unto us for our hearts, and we answer him as the husbands of
the vineyard, when he sent for fruits, or as Nabal answered David, 1, Sam, 25
when he sent for food, who is David? or, who is the Lord? That I should
take my heart from pleasure and sin, and give it unto him? Thus we demurre
upon the cause, when we should give, whether we should give or no, and ask the
flesh, and our lusts, and our pleasures, and if the devil will not give his
assent: the^ we return to an excuse, it is not mine to give: or if thou can
get the devils good will, I will not stand, or let sin and pleasure have it
for a while, and when they have done with it, the^ God shall have it. Thus every
thing which should be thrown out, has a place in our heart; and he which
should be received in, can have no room there, though he would open the
doors of heaven, if we would open the doors of our hearts, that the king of
glory might come in. Psalm. 24.7
What shall become of those hearers, when he which craves them now, shall judge
them hereafter? Then they shall stand like Esau, Genesis 27.36
and see them blessed like Jacob, which gave their hearts; and cry
themselves, as he did to his father Isaac, haste thou not reserved a blessing
for us? What a heavy heart will it be then, when it may not joy any longer
here, and the joys of heaven are shut against it? and he which desired it,
vvil not have it, because it comes like the foolish virgins, Mat. 25.11
when the doors of mercy are shut. Thus ye have heard what God requires for all that he has given you, and how all your services are lost until you
bring it. What shall I vvish you now before my departure? I vvish you would
give al your hearts to God, while I speak, that ye might have a kingdom
for them; send for your hearts where they are wandering, one from the bank,
another from the Tavern, another from the Shop, an other from the Theaters:
Call them home, Luke 15.22
and give them all unto God: and see how he vvil vvelcome them, as the father
embraces his Son. If your hearts were with God, durst the devil fetch
them? durst these sins come at them? Even as Dina was defloured when she
strayed from home: Genesis 34.1
so is the heart when it strayeth from GOD: Therefore call the members
together, and let them fast like a Queste of 12. men, until they consent
upon law, before any more terms pass to give God his right, and let him take
the heart, which he woeth, which he would marry, which he would endow with
all his goods, and make it the heir of the crown. When you pray, let your
heart pray, when you hear, let your heart hear, when ye give, let your heart
give, whatsoever ye do, set the heart to do it: and if it be not so perfect
as it should be, Pro, 3, 1 Dan, 10, 12
yet it shall be accepted for the friend that gives it.

Now if you cannot command your hearts to turn unto God, because the devil
pleades custom, and the flesh will not agree to leave her possession, Mat, 6, 2
then remember what Christ says, When ye give your alms the left hand must
not know what the right hand does: so the flesh must not know what the
spirit does. Thou must not make thy lusts of counsel, but as Abraham when
he was bid to offer his son, Gen, 22, 6
rose up betime and left his wife at home, and never made Sara privy least
she should stop him, being more tender over her children, like women, tha^ the
father is; so thou must give the heart to God, before the flesh hear of it:
1, Sam, 25, 18
for if Abigail had consulted with Naball that churl, whether she should
have supplied David with victuals, or no, when he sent, that miser vvoulde
never have given his consent, which scolded so soon as he heard of it,
therefore she went alone and gave that which he asked, and never told her
husband what she would do, least he should hinder her, which sought her
welfare and his too; so we should steal our hearts from the world, as the
world stole them from us.

I have but one day more to teach you all that you must learn of me, therefore
I vvoulde hold you here until you assent to geeue all your hearts to God. If
ye give them not now, where have I cast the seed, and how have ye heard all this year? If ye vvil give them now, ye shall be adopted this day the sons
of God, and I shall leave you in the bosom of Christ, which vvil give you
heaven for your hearts. 1. Cor. 2.16
The Lord Jesus grant that my words be not the savor of death unto any soul
here; but that you may go in strength thereof, through prosperity and
adversity, Mat. 25.34
til you hear that comfort from heaven: Come ye blessed, and receive the
inheritance. Amen.

FINIS.

