JONAH THE MESSENGER OF NINEVEHS Repentance. Set forth in his Calling,
Rebellion, and Punishment.

By H. S.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for G E. and are to be sold at the Greyhound in
Paul's Churchyard. 1637.

GOD sends the Prophet Jonah to proclaim
His wrath, against the proud Affirian Dame,
Armed him with thundering threats: the trembler sails
Soon toward Tharsis, but the storm prevails
And wrests the bark, whilst sleepy Jonah lies
Secure: the jarring Saylors do advise
Who caused the tempest: 'twas for Ionahs sin,
They cast him over: the seas grow calm agin;
(When we cast off our sins how soon our God
Will calm our ways and burn his angry rod)
The Whale received him (thus did God contrive)
Then spu'd the three-daies prisoner our alive,
(O Lord if by thy Spirit thou will dwell
With us, we shall be safe although in Hell)
Now to the great Metropolis he goes,
Proclaims his message, vents the dismal woes
That should befall within twice twenty days,
Yet all repent, and so the judgment stays
(True contrite prayers, and such hea'nly charms
Are ropes so strong to tie the Almighties arms)
Now peevish Jonah frets, and needs would die
As if God sent him for to vent a lie.
His pettish tricks are chek'd: and then the Lord
Convinces him of folly by his Gourd.
THE CALLING OF JONAH.
JONAH 1. 1, 2. The word of the Lord came unto Jonah the Son of Amittai,
saying,

Arise, go to Nineveh that great City, and cry against it: for their
wickedness is come up before me.


I Shall not need to show the authority of Prophets, but concerning their
differences they were of three sorts. 1. Such as prayed for the people and
received an answer, these were called Seers. Such was Samuel, 1 Samuel 10. 9. 2.
Such as expounded the Law, as Isaiah, Jeremy and the rest. 3. Such as were
since Christ's time, as Agabus, Acts 11. 28. Jonah was of the second sort.

I might well choose this Story, for (besides the compendiousnesse and
perspicuity) it best suites the state of this sinful age.

Jonah lived in the time of wicked Jeroboam the Son of Ioash, 2 King. 14. 24.
Yet kept his integrity.

His name Jonah, a Dove, teaches Innocence, and his Fathers name Amittai,
truth, that truth should be every Preachers Father.

This History contains, First, Gods great mercy.

1. To the Ninevites in sending a Prophet to convert them that they might be
spared.

2. To Jonah in preserving him notwithstanding his disobedience.

3. To the Mariners, in preserving them that they were then and for ever saved.

Secondly, Ionahs fall and rising again.

In his fall observe 1. His sin. 2. His punishment.


1. His sin, in
Flying from God Murmuring. Justifying himself.
2. His Punishment
Manifold fears Casting into the Sea. Swallowed of a Whale. Reproof and
conviction.
In his rising consider, 1. His Repentance. 2. His Preservation. 3. His
Faithful discharge of his duty.


The word of the Lord came, etc. Jonah went not without a special call and
Commission. Obs.
None should go before they are sent, they must have their warrant as Aaron
had, Heb. 5. 4. None may ascend to Moses chair that have not Moses rod and
Moses spirit.

Came. The Prophets had not always the Word with them, Obs.
as Nathan spoke of himself, 2 Samuel 7. 1 Chronicles. 17. and Elishaes ignorance of
the Shunamites grief, 2 King. 4. and Dan. 2. 30.

Arise God finds us all sleeping, Obs.
we had need be wakened. Obs.
They that call on others should first arise themselves, Luke 22. 30. Not like
Tailors that deck others and go bare themselves, but they must say follow me.

Go. God would not have any people untaught, Obs.
Psalm. 19. 1, 2, 3. Romans 1. 19. Therefore he sent Noah to the old world, Lot to
Sodom, Moses to Israel, and here Jonah to Nineveh.

To Nineveh. They that greive the Spirit quench the Spirit. Obs;.
The Word was in Samaria, they refusing it, it went to Nineveh. The Gospel was
at Ephesus, it is now come to England and it may depart from England, 1 Cor.
10. 12. The Prophets thus departing from Samaria to Nineveh, was 1 To shake off
the dust of his feet against them for their obstinacy. 2 To show them that
Gentiles were more righteous then they; for they repented at the voice of, 1
Prophet and 1 Sermon. 3 To prefigure their rejection and the Gentiles calling.

Great City. Nineveh had 1500. towers and 120000. little children in it, Jonah
4. 1
as is noted in the end of this Story; but the greater the more ungodly.
Multitude being oftentimes a means of seducing one another.

And cry against it. Every Prophet is a Crier, Obs.
as the Lord bids Isaiah, Isa. 48. 1. Lift up his voice. They must be plain
and bold as if they sat in judgment. John Baptist was not only a voice but
the voice of a Crier, Luke 3. therefore Acts 2. the Holy Ghost came down in
fiery tongues, but this fire is now quenched and these tongues tied up, but men
though they cannot speak, can see a benefice when it falls though it be an
100. miles off; and Pharaoh had more care of his sheep, then they of souls.

If people were not deaf and dull of hearing Ministers need not cry, but are
not ye commanded to hear as well as we to cry. The Cock crows when men are
asleep. Yea the Cock crows and Peter still denies his Master, Mat. 26. 70,
72, 74.

It is sin and sin only that provokes God to cry against us. Our sins
do buffet God on every side as the Jews did Christ, therefore he will not
leave till he have by crying slain either you or your sins. When God
therefore cries we should weep, considering wherefore he cries.

Reproof is the necessariest office yet most abhorred, as if he hated us that
reproves us. Yet God says, Lev. 19. 7. Thou shall not hate thy brother but
reprove him. So that to flatter any in sin is a manifest sign of hatred,
what love soever we pretend, since it tends to the hurt of their souls and
offense of God. Yea if a Preacher reproove sin he is thought to do it of
hatred or some particular grudge, expecting he should preach the Gospel, and
bid him keep his Text, as if no Text in Scripture did reprove sin: but let
him preach dark mysteries, odd conceits, or brainesicke dreams he is well
come. Balaams ass never spoke but once and then he reprooved, then if Balaams
ass reproved Balaam, how much more ought Balaam to reproove asses. But
persuade your selves though we seem angry, we preach the Law to bring you to
the Gospel, we preach Judgment that ye may find Mercy, we preach Hell to
bring you to Heaven.

Thus we have heard Ionahs charge to cry, But what should he cry? The Papists
say it was for their neglect of traditions, which they gather out of the New
Testament, Ioh. 16. 12. Ioh. 21. 25. Acts 1. 3. 1 Timothy 6. 20. 2 Timothy 1. 13. and
22. But his charge is expressed, Chap. 3. 2. O that none would cry but what God
had commanded.

But what did God command him to cry? even this, Yet forty days and Nineveh
shall be destroyed, yea ancient Nineveh, fair Nineveh, proud Nineveh must be
destroyed.

No man sits so high but destruction sits above him. Justice would have come
without crying; but the merciful God cries to them, that they hearing his cry,
might cry themselves and God hearing their cry again took pity on them.
Isaiah was commanded to cry. Isa. 40. 6, 7. And John was commanded in the
spirit of Mat. 7 3.
Eliah to cry; and Jonah was commanded to cry, and he cried. And all Preachers
are commanded to cry aloud and not to spare, and to be faithful in their
message, 1 Cor. 4. 4. and woe to them that love the pleasures of sin more
then the glory of God.

For their wickedness is come up. We have heard the charge given, heavy
news. Now the cause is, Nineveh has followed her lusts, satisfied her
desires, forgotten Gods laws, let her therefore prepare for destruction.

When God sends cries unto a people it is a manifest sign their wickedness is
come up before him. Obs.
And then if they will not repent while God continues crying amongst them, the
Lord of Hosts will rise up in arms against them.

Nineveh was as full of sin as people, prosperity, and security kissed each
other, Nah. 2. 8.

Is come up. Sin mounts up on high and carries us up as the Tempter did
Christ to the top of a pinnacle to behold all the pleasures of the world at
once: Obs.
but a grievous thing it is to consider, what a man is doing while he sins,
and what sin is doing at the bar of Gods just judgment, for nothing can
stay sin once committed from ascending up before the face of the Eternal
God. An arrow is swift, the Sun is swifter, but sin is swiftest of all, for
in a moment it is committed on earth, comes before God and is condemned to
hell. For though Nimrod could not climb to Heaven, yet his sins flew up.
When we sin we are like the shellfish which the Eagle carries into the
air, lets fall upon the rocks, dasheth in pieces and so devours it. So the
wrath of God throws us low upon the rocks of shame and contempt and terror of
conscience, and then the grave and hell that double death devoures us.

Is come before me. By sins coming before God is meant Gods beholding and
seeing it. We fast as before him, we pray as before him, and do every good
duty as before him, because we do it freely not caring who looks upon us,
but we sin as behind him, as loath to be seen, and we suppose we sin
behind him, as if he saw us not, saying as Eliphaz accused Job to have said Job
2. 12, 13, 14. Is not God in the height of the heavens, and see the highness
of the Stars how high they are, therefore how could God know it, etc. but
then chiefly we think

God beholds us not when men cannot see us, but be not deceived, God sees not
as man sees. Man sees only the outward act, but God sees the secretest
imaginations of the heart. Again, Man sees but one thing at once, and cannot
see before and behind him with one look, but God sees all things at all
times: for when we speak evil he is all ears to hear us, when we do
evil he is all eyes to see us. Ananias might have gained by his craft if God
had not seen his heart, Acts 5. Gehezi might have profited by his lie, and
gained a bribe for his labor if God had not seen his fetches and turned his
bribe into a Leprosy, 2 King. 5. The man that bad his soul be merry, might
have enjoyed his pleasure many years had not God espied his security, Luke 12.
Achan might have kept his gold had not God seen him. Achan would never have
stolen, nor Gehezi taken bribes had they thought God beheld them; will any
steal the owner looking on, will any speak treason the King hearing it:
Therefore mark but this part of my Sermon. Say when thy hand is at a sin, I
will not do it because the Lord sees me. And as he is all eyes to see sin,
and all hands to punish it, so if we repent, he is all mercy to forgive it.
Now therefore repent of thy sin, hye thee fast to the throne of Grace, and
try if thy repentance will not as powerfully cry for pardon, as thy sins did
vehemently cry for punishment. The Angel cried not so loud Babylon is fallen,
Revel. 18. 2. as the Spirit of truth shall assure thee thy sins are forgiven
thee, Romans 6. 14. Psalm. 91. 10. 34. 10. 84. 11. Romans 8. 28. Repent therefore
and truly repent by flying all sin with the occasion and appearances, and
love the truth, and as much as is in you, have peace with all men, that the God
of peace may give you peace in Christ. All this is grounded on this that God
sees whatsoever we do. So Rev. 2. 2-9-13. and 3-1-8. I know thy works, is
spoken to encourage the Sardians and Laod ceans to repentance knowing that God
is a liberal rewarder of them that seek him, Heb. 11. 6.

Is come before me. Sin once committed comes presently before God: but the
carnal hearted man like the faint Spies of Canaan, thinks the way to Heaven
hard and the journey further then he is able to go all his life: but when you
send Faith, Hope and Love, those messengers of truth and peace, they will tell
you that your fashions, pride, love of the world and other sins must be put
off, as unbeseeming the fashion of that country, so that ere we come thither
we must leave them, like the shadow when we go into the door, we must shake
hands with them and bid them farrewell.

THE REBELLION OF JONAH.
VER. 3. But Jonah rose up to flee unto Tarshish, from the presence of the
Lord, and went down to Joppa, and he found a ship going to Tarshish: So he
paid the fare thereof, and went down into it, to go with them unto Tarshish
from the presence of the Lord.
IT follows now to show how Jonah discharged the charge given unto him. First,
he neglected it, afterward being chastised and so repenting he faithfully
discharged it.

First, of his Rebellion.

First, Jonah was sent to Nineveh to preach against their ungodliness, to
reclaim them that they might repent, and so the wrath of God be turned away,
how happy a message should this have been that brought such blessed effects,
but still one fly or other spoils the box of ointment, Eccles. 10. 1. Satan
stands up and sends him instead of Nineveh to Tarshish; meaning thereby,

First, to put him out of Gods favor, to bring upon him torment of conscience,
decay of gifts and disreputation among the people.

Secondly, to harden the people in their sins and against Gods Prophets.

Thirdly, that the most populous and wealthy City in Assyria might be
destroyed all dying unrepentant in their sins, that the very Angels in Heaven
should mourn at it. So by urging the unkindnesse to his own Nation and blood
in leaving them to preach to strangers, as also the difficulty of doing good
among such notorious sinners, and the danger of his own person in bringing so
unwellcome a message he gets him to desist.

Thus Satan is ever crossing and tempting us when we address our selves to
the will of God. So was Moses, Jeremy, Ezekiel, Nehemiah and Christ himself
tempted being about most notable works, Exodus 3. 11. 4. 10. Ier. 1. 6. Ezekiel.
3. 14. Neh. 2. 19. Luke 22. 31. And Christ tells Peter, Satan desired to winnow
him, Mat. 4. 1. Luke 4. 2. 4. 13. 1 Pet. 5. 8. So even Peter, James and John.
Therefore never dream of a truce with Satan, for he is perpetually seeking
whom he may devour, either tempting us by flattery or terrible threatening:
for whatsoever we do comes either from the spirit of Satan, of God or our
own spirit. Now our own spirit is occupied about the pleasures of this world.
The Spirit of God is gentle and meek, not forcing, not threatening, as Luke 19.
23. If any one will follow me, not you shall follow me. So Cant, 5. 2, 3. Open
unto me -- Now Satan takes another course, if he cannot allure to sin he
threatens loss of pleasure, friends, goods, and by his Imps torments and
death. Christ says if you will follow me, but he says I will make you follow
me or you shall have fire and faggot, so says his eldest Son Antichrist. His
order of tempting is first to make us doubt of the truth of Gods Word.
Secondly, he falls to flat denying of it. Thirdly, he comes in with his own
countermards and contrary assertions. Thus he says advance your selves. God
says Love thy neighbor as thy self, Mat. 22. 39. he says, First, love
little and outwardly. Secondly, love none but thy self. Thirdly, hate thine
enemies, envy thy betters, disdain thine equals, despise thine inferiors.

Now the means the devil tempts with are arguments drawn from man's own wit
and reason, and so Jonah argues here, if the Jews will not hear me, it is in
vain to preach to these Gentiles. Thus flesh and blood stands staggering,
misdoubting troubles when it should do any good, but in sin never
considers the following woe. Yet this I confess was a sore temptation for
Jonah to preach to a heathen people this doctrine, that there is but only one
true God to them who have served a thousand, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. as if a Preacher were
commanded to go to Rome gates and preach against Antichrists jurisdiction, I
fear he would hardly do it. Thus we regard rather to enter no great action
for Gods glory and his Churches good, then to receive any opposition in our
doings, Satan knows from labor we are easily brought to loyter, and from
fear and pain to security and pleasure. Thus he tempted our Savior with the
pleasures of the world, All this will I give thee. This gain, this ease, this
profit shall thou have to leave the society of godly men and serve me, not
being scrupulous to swear for your gain, to lie for your pleasure, to cozen
for riches, and so be free from the reproaches and contempt wherewith
professors are overwhelmed, but be rich and live in ease and estimation.

Thus Jonah is tempted to sin but not constrained, urged, but not compelled,
the devil can entice mightily, but not enforce violently. This is our comfot,
our enemies power is in our Fathers hand, 1 Cor. 10. 11. Romans 8. 35. Luke 22.
32. This may encourage us to Resist the devil and he shall fly from us,
James 4. 7. God has made no such promise to the devil, that if he tempt he
shall prevail, what a shame is it then that Satan is bolder in tempting then
we are in resisting. O that we were as wise, as watchful to withstand as
Satan is diligent to assault. But does Jonah now resist as manfully as Satan
sets on him cunningly. Alas no, he as soon resolved as enticed, Genesis 1. It is
said, God spoke and it was done. Surely the devil but speaks and it is done,
he is such an Orator as no man can deny him: for he pretends to counsel as a
most special friend, as an holy Angel jealous of Gods honor, therefore he
made not only Gehezi to take a bribe, 2 King. 5. 22. Demas to embrace the
world, 2 Timothy 4. 10. Judas to betray his Master, Mat. 26. 48. and Caine to kill
his brother, Genesis 4. 8. but Rebecca also to persuade Jacob and Jacob to be bold
by lying to seek for the blessing, Genesis 27. 13. yea the Father of the
faithful to commit folly with Hagar, Genesis 16. 43. and here Jonah not to go to
Nineveh lest forsooth God should not be true of his words.

We have seen Satan's malice and wiliness in tempting, we have sufficient
armor to resist him, Ephesians. 6. 11. and promise to prevail, James 5. 7.
Therefore we forget our enemy, neglect the promise, or take not the armor, or
like not that arrow-bearer humility, submit your selves to God, and then resist
the devil: but are ready, so foolish are we, to join with our enemy as
Balaam, Number. 22. 8. But would you, however Satan tempts. not be foiled, then
consider how shameful it is having such encouragements to fight, to show our
selves cowards under our Captain Christ, to yield to his enemy, how dangerous
to be under so cruel a tyrant, that takes pleasure in our most bitter torments.

Object. But he comes often as a friend, as an Angel of light, how shall I
descry him?

Answ. It is hard indeed: but anoint thine eyes with eye salve, Rev. 3. 18.
thou must be filled with knowledge, Col. 1. 9. and watch and be sober, 1 Pet.
5. 8. and lastly, consider how thy spirit is moved: for the Spirit of God is
soft and slow; but Satan's is boisterous and stout; besides, consider if the
thing tempted to, be good or ill, for be sure Gods Spirit prompts to no
evil. Therefore get the Spiritual Sword, The Word of God (Ephesians. 6. 17.) to
dwell plenteously in us, Col. 3. 17. and cry still to God to open thine eyes,
Psalm. 119. 18.

But Jonah arose up to fly unto Tarshish. Thus Jonah tempted repents not, but
makes himself a runaway, leaves Nineveh still on the score. So Nineveh is
still Nineveh, but Jonah is not like Jonah, for the Prophet is flying, and
sin is crying, and so all falls to confusion.

He first flies to Tarshish before he went to Nineveh. Sin is borne first.
Esau before Jacob, Genesis 15. 26, 27. Evil may be said to be ancienter, resist
sin at the first, nip it in the head, that the unclean spirit may say here
is no abiding for me, let us go into yonder herd of Swine, Mat. 8. 31.

Jonah was sent to Nineveh, but he went toward Tarshish. And so it is always
with us, we are ever doing that we should not do. For either we do
nothing, or that which we are not commanded, or else otherwise then we are
commanded. Sometime most rebelliously we do that which we know the Lord
straightly forbids. And as Jonah took Tarshish for Nineveh, so we take the
devil for an Angel, light for darkness, etc.

But no marvel though Jonah fled to Tarshish when he should go to Nineveh,
for his vocation is rejected by the children of this world, and every where
kicked against: so that if you would ask for a painful vocation, this is it;
if for a thanklesse vocation, this is it; if for a contemptible vocation, this
is it: for reprooving we are reprooved, blessing, we are cursed: preaching
peace we make war; proclaiming liberty, we are imprisoned; do what we can,
we are persecuted: and for our work worthy of love, we receive of most
hatred: of few, yea very few, not any more then a cold affection. Hereof it
has come to pass, that Moses and Jeremy called, excused themselves; Ezekiel,
having received his charge, went in bitterness and indignation of his spirit,
and seven days neglected his charge as Jonah here does his: and Moses, Eliah,
and Jeremiah, at length complained; and (which to the best men is the greatest
grief) it is as easy almost to wash a blackemoore white, as to convert a
sinner, because Satan is ever crossing men doing Gods will, but specially
hindering the course of right preaching. For the Lord was not so earnest to stop
the way of Balaam, lest he should commit wickedness, as the devil is earnest
to stop the way of every Jonah, lest he fulfill righteousness, that is, cry
against Nineveh, longing and earnestly laboring to convert it.

But who would have thought that such a Prophet should fly from the Lord, yea
and then when he should do him most service? A fearful example: therefore
let him that stands take heed lest he fall: for the way is slippery wherein
we are to walk. When thou remembrest the fall of the Prophet, then consider
that thou art much weaker then a Prophet, and therefore the easier to be
encountered and overthrown, and the likelier to have a most grievous fall,
except the Lord do mightily uphold thee. Secondly, if thou see Jonah fly,
Moses murmur, David fall to adultery, Solomon to idolatry, and Peter to
forswear his Master, then learn thou not to trust to thy own strength, for
it is weakness, nor to thy own wisdom, for it is sinful; but seek help
and crave strength at the hand of Almighty God, who gives indifferently to
every one that asks; which does not bruise the broken reed, nor quench the
smoking flax, but does rather increase our zeal then diminish it.

And judge favorably of such as fall, for though Jonah fled, yet he returned
again; and though David joined murder with adultery, yet he repented.

And he found a ship going to Tarshish. As soon as he set forward to fly
from God, Satan seconds his temptation with opportunity, he finds a ship
ready, he fits Judas with money and Jonah with a ship, if thou will fly from
God, the devil will lend thee both spurs and a horse, yea a post-horse to
carry thee hastily and swiftly to all ungodly lusts.

And he paid the fare. This money was cast into the sea, many wast their money
upon dice and unlawful games, it were good for them if they had not a penny to
loose, and so men care not what they pay for vanities and braveries, this also
is cast into the sea, but they will give little or nothing to do good withal,
So Lazarus can get nothing, and David can get no meat, shall I give my bread
and wine to one I know not? says churlish Naball. We can be content to give
and do any thing to win the world, but we will give nothing, nor do nothing,
whereby to win the kingdom of God.

Jonah is entered into the ship and sleeps, sleeps soundly, and being wakened
confessed not his sin until he was forced to it by discovery of casting
lots. Thus God sets out the stubbornenesse and disobedience of Jonah, in that
this thing was not done upon a sudden, but upon deliberation and continuance,
he had space and ley sure enough to have repented, but did not. Jonah first
liftned to Satan's assaults, liked them, consented to obey them, put them in
practice, fled to Ioppa, hired the ship, hoysed up sails and went to sleep,
to show that sin runs on wheels and posts down hill, and never stays till
it arrive even in Hell. So sins follow one another like linkes of a chain,
till the tempest of destruction break it in sunder: but if Jonah had
considered the all-seeing eye of Almighty God, he would have leaped out of the
ship that carried him at once from God and from his duty, since the creature
cannot hide it self from the Creator. All those that pity Jonah let them
pity themselves, our sins are as many as his were, he confessed freely and
fully, so let us; for this was written to admonish us that we may stand where
he fell; and when we fall to confess freely and fully to God always, and to
man also when wisdom commands.

FINIS.
THE PUNISHMENT OF JONAH.
JONAH 1. 4, 5, 6. But the Lord sent out a great wind into the Sea, and there
was a mighty tempest in the Sea, so that the ship was like to be broken, etc.
THe sin being past the punishment follows. Wrath being ever the heavy
companion of disobedience.

He says not a wind arose, but the Lord sent a great wind, The winds obey
GOD, though man will not obey him.

The Lord sent it. Then it was not by chance, or witchcraft, for the Mariners
though Infidels, thought it to be sent by some revenging power for some
particular heinous fact and person, else why did they cast lots to find out him
that had sinned, Psalm. 10. 7-25. to 31.

The Lord sent it. So the Lord sends winds to bring ships to land in safety,
and the same Lord sends winds to drown and sink other ships, therefore Job
acknowledges both, Job 1. 21. if some had so much loss by tempest as Job,
they would surely say with Job, Blessed be the name of the Lord: but more (it
is to be feared) would say with Jobs wife, Curse God and die, Job 2. 6.

And there was a tempest in the Sea. God first spoke gently to him, Arise
Jonah, go to Nineveh, then he would not go: but now he sends a strong
tempest, to compel him to come in, that his headstrong sin might have the
foil and God the victory.

He that sails to Tarshish would have as good wind as he that sails to
Nineveh; but he that does one thing for another, shall receive one thing for
another, as Ahab hoped to go up and prosper, but he went up and perished. So
the Spaniards thought to arrive in England, but their invincible power was
soon destroyed.

And there was a great tempest in the Sea. The ship went on roundly for a time,
the Prophet sleeping, the Mariners sporting, their sails flaunting, the
waters calming. So merrily sin goes on before the tempest comes: but suddenly
the tempest rushes upon them and tumbles them up and down. He thought to fly
from God, but now it appears he fled not from God but to him. Therefore David
says, If I take the morning wings and fly aloft, etc. Whithersoever a
rebellious sinner does run, the hand of God will meet him to cross him, and
hinder his hoped for good success.

What had he offended the winds and waters that they bare him such enmity?
Surely they took Gods part against Jonah. So though man at first had power
over the creatures, yet when man sins God gives them strength to bridle him.

If Jonah had foreseen this tempest, he durst not have been so bold. Sin
has no eyes, The fool says it is fair weather, while he is going to the
stocks.

We have heard the cause of this tempest, The effects follow.

First, in the ship, which was so fair and goodly as might have endured many
voyages, yet one tempest shivers it in pieces, and all because Jonah was in it.
Such strife is always betwixt Gods wrath and man's disobedience.

Secondly, in the Mariners
1. They were afraid. 2. They used means to appease this tempest.


Then the Mariners were afraid, Mariners are commonly men void of fear,
venterous and contemners of dangers, yet these nought-fearing fellows, being
persuaded this was no ordinary storm, but a revenging tempest, do quake like
a young soldier that starts at the sound of a gun.

And cried every man to his god and cast forth their wares into the Sea. This
one means to save themselves, shows that the Heathen acknowledge there is a
divine power governing the world: for they would not have prayed, but that they
knew there was a God that could in extremest danger deliver them. This man may
by the light of nature, and by the multitude and excellency of creatures
discern. The wicked learn it by the disappointment of their enterprises, and
are compelled to kneel to that God by fained shows of humiliation in hope of
help, whom otherwise they would never acknowledge.

Every one unto his god. Among the Gentiles every nation had a several god.
Chamos of the Moabites, Baalzebub of the Eckronites, Diana of the Ephesians, 1 Samuel 5. 5. Acts 19. 35. and every one of us in our necessity have our several
gods. Some run to their coffers, others to their delights and wanton sports,
supposing no trouble so great that they will not cause them to forget it,
others to their glorious attires and costly jewels, some to their dainty meats
and soft beds. In sickness we cry come Physician, in heaviness come music,
ever leaving the Creator which is all goodness and power, and fly to the
creature which have neither. Thus they did well that they prayed, but they
prayed not well, for they prayed to fained gods, while none could help but
one, they cried to many, thus stirred they the tempest more, like Papists, from
one Saint to another, thinking if one Saint do not help, another will.

They cried. But this cry is often without faith, and let not the wavering
minded man think to receive any good of the Lord, James 2. 7.

And they cast their wares into the Sea. The Mariners are content to cast
their wares into the Sea, in hope of some furtherance to save their lives
thereby: for though many venture their lives for riches, yet they will rather
part with all their riches, then with their lives. But the ship though it be
lighter is not the safer; for it was sin that procured the danger, which
being cast away, would have saved all, but being retained, the tempest is not
abated. If I regard wickedness in my heart, (says David) Psalm. 66. 18. the
Lord will not hear me. And Paul says, 1 Cor. 13. 3. Though I cast my life
into the fire, If I have no charity, if I retain malice in my heart, it
profits me nothing. If I cast not away sin, I cast away all. Some will give
to the poor, and yet use extortion and usury to get money by: but God says to
such, that if they regard wickedness in their hearts, it profits nothing;
though they part with all that they have, and bestow it upon never so good
uses, they do but as the Mariners did, cast all away their desire nothing
satisfied: though they think themselves beneficial to the poor thereby, and
hope for a reward, yet God will accept of them but as Hypocrites, he will none
of their oblations, he abhors their very prayers, Pro. 15. 8.

And they cast, etc. Observe here, that oftentimes many are punished for one
man's sin, as all the host of Israel were punished for the sin of Achan,
and here all the Mariners and owners of ship or wares for Ionahs sin, etc.
to the end that men may learn thereby to admonish one another with love when
they see them do amiss, and not say with Caine, Am I the keeper of my
brother? for he that is not careful to keep his brother from sin, is not
careful to keep himself either from sin or from sorrow, therefore let us
take heed that a wicked one be not found amongst us unadmonished.

Further we may note that extremity is Gods opportunity: for when the wind had
almost overturned all, and the waters had almost drowned all, then, and not
before, was Gods opportunity to set sorth his glory.

First, they used prayer unto the divine powers for assistance: then they used
such ordinary means as they knew best in such a time; which order is necessary
to be used of all Christians in their necessity. First, to seek for aid and
assistance from God, and then to use all such good means to help themselves,
as God shall enable them too; trusting that of his goodness he will bless
their endeavors. God indeed is the last refuge, but he is also the first
refuge which is to be sought unto: for he will have us to acknowledge that
man lives not by bread only, and an horse is but a vain thing to save a man,
and except the Lord keep the City, the Watchman waketh but in vain; no
means can help without his blessing. But then, he will not have us negligent
in using of lawful means: for he never or very seldom works without means,
when the means may be used. Danger then we have seen made them to fear,
but fear astonished them not, but gathered their wits together, for they used
means with wisdom to save themselves. But when the Lord sends calamity upon
many of the ungodly, they have so guilty a conscience, that whilst they feel
the great hand of God, they are even distraught of their wits, and made as it
were senseless, that they know not what they do: yea when troubles come, it
makes them like a headless Be, which buzzeth about she knows not whither,
or like the Swallow, which by compulsion of the wind, flies backward and
forward till it fall into the Sea: or like Caine, whose head was fraught with
fears, so that he knew not whither to go, doubting to be slain of every
one whom he saw. But whatsoever befalls the child of God, he has ever
matter of consolation and some moderation of mind to bear it withal,
expecting a joyful issue of all. Therefore blessed is he that has the Lord
for his God.

But Jonah was gone down into the sides of the ship, etc. Jonah was fast
asleep when he should be better occupied, to note our drowsinesse in
hearing, and our security in sin, that though the very senseless ship seemed
by rolling and cracking to cry to Jonah, yet was not he once moved, but like
one sick of a Lethargy, deaf to all wakenings.

Jonah signifies a Dove. He was like Noah's Dove, that out of the Arc could
find no rest; so Jonah could not sleep being fled from God, but the Tempest
will awake him.

And he was fast asleep. See how little Jonah is ashamed of his sin. Though
all smarted for it yet he sleeps; neither winds blowing, waters roaring,
ships reeling, nor Mariners crying could wake him. Thus we sleep more deadly
then Jonah, we look not back on our sins and examine our selves thoroughly,
that we might find release of our miseries.

If Jonah a Prophet, and such a Prophet as was the figure of Christ, could not
withstand this one temptation, what cause have we to watch against sin, to
pray that we be not led into temptation.

In Ionahs sleeping observe two things.

First, when we think our selves most at rest, then are we in greatest
danger, as Jonah asleep near his shipwreck. When Herod is vaunting then is
he stricken, Acts 12. 21. When Nebuchadnezzar is in his greatest pride then is
he turned out, Dan. 4. 27. When Belshazzar is banqueting, the hand writ his
condemnation, Dan. 5. 4. When the rich man says unto his soul, thou have
enough, Luke 12. 19. then his soul is taken from him.

Secondly, note here the nature of sin, while it is in doing, like a Harlot,
shows nothing but her bravery, Witness Adams fruit, Noah's wine, David's
adultery, till Gods judgments overtake them, as the whirlewinde suddenly,
unresistably. So though sin be sweet in the mouth it is bitter in the belly.

Then the ship-master came unto him, etc. Here Jonah is taken napping, the
Mariners may do him more good then the tempest, whom sin should waken
peril cannot.

Jonah is asleep and the Mariners wake him, an Israelite wakened by an
Infidel. Thus the Lord shames his servants, as he reproved Abraham by
Abimelech, Genesis 20. 9. Balaam, by an Ass, Numb. 22. 28.

This story Jonah writes of himself, that we might be warned by him to
suppress all evil motions that they take not effect.

What meanest thou, O sleeper. Jonah being thus warned did not snap at him that
wakened him, nor yet basely sit still but arises.

Many of you come to hear the Word, and here you fall asleep, when you have
most need to be waking, but I am glad, I have now gotten a Text to waken you,
for now I cannot read my Text, but I must say, What meanest thou, O sleeper,
Arise. If you mark not what is said unto you, you are asleep, though your
eyes be open: but if you were as wise as Jonah, you would not sleep here in
the sight of all the people, but would rather get you to sleep in some corner,
for Jonah went under the hatches to sleep, and would not sleep in the sight
of the Mariners. If you were as wise as Jonah, you would thank him that
wakened you, as no doubt Jonah did; Solomon says, Pro. 28. 23. that he which
reproves, shall have more favor of a wise man, than he which flattereth. The
Lord Jesus says, Woe be unto that servant, that when his Master comes he
shall find sleeping, Can thou not watch one hour, says he to Peter? Can
you not wake while I speak to you? You would all be found in the Church when
the Lord comes, but you would not be found sleeping in the Church. You are
watched, and none of you can steal a nap and not be espied, but when your
eyes be most shut, and see least, then most eyes be upon you. I marvel how
you can sleep having so many eyes upon you, so many clamours in your ears,
and God himself speaking unto you. If you should see a traitor sleep on the
hurdle, or men sleep with meat in their mouths, would you not marvel? Yet
even so do you, while I denounce the great judgments of God against you, and
while I am feeding some of you, you fall asleep, and so I preach in vain.
There is a Country whereof it is said, that it is night with them, when it is
day with us. I think that Country is here, for how many are here which have
lost their eyes and their ears since they came hither? If all of you, were as
many of you are (I mean asleep) the strangers that come hither to hear,
would think that you were all dead, and that I preached your funeral Sermon,
therefore for shame leave your sleeping.

Arise and call upon thy God, if so be he will think upon us, etc. This is
another means which they use, Jonah being wakened, to appease the tempest, now
that they see they cannot themselves allay the winds, nor assuage the waters,
they desire, they exhort Jonah, to try what he can do by calling upon his God.

Arise call upon thy God, etc. After that the Shipmaster had wakened Jonah, he
bids him call upon his God, as if he had said, Watch and pray: he speaks like
a Saint, yet he is an Infidel; he said not, call upon gods: but call upon thy
God. The ship-master, would not call upon his God: but (says he) call upon
thy God, and it may be he will help us: if he had said call upon our god,
when he said, call upon thy God: and if he had said, He will help us, when
he said, if so be he will help us, then he had showed some spark of
faith. Because he wanted help and comfort, he bids him arise, and because he
was fearful, he bids him pray. It may be (says he) he will think upon us,
that we perish not. As if he had said, Jonah, we know that thou have a God as
well as we, and therefore we say, Call upon thy God, for now every god is to
betried, therefore if ever thou did pray in thy life fall to it now. Thus
Satan leads men a blind way with zeal, in hope of some relief being in
trouble. They called upon them for help, which were neither willing to assist
them, nor able to hear them, and when they perceived by woeful experience,
that there was no kind of succor to be had that way, they fly to God, and
then Satan labors to undermine the confidence and expectation of help, and
to place in stead thereof doubtfullnesse and infidelity. Thus Satan will be
sure to lose nothing by this bargain any way. Jonah (say they) call upon thy
God, for if he cannot help us, we are all undone and lost, for we have
called upon our gods, we have labored hard to amend our state, we have cast
away our goods to lighten the ship, but all in vain, for we are no whit the
better, like the woman which had spent all her substance about Physic, yet
all could not help her till Christ came, Luke 8. 43. So the Papists while they
are well, they pray unto every Saint and Angel for succor against the
troublesome times, but in extremity, or at the point of death, none of them can
help, so that then they are feign to fly unto God or be destitute, as like
Idolaters, as one fly is like another: they are like the Heathen, which
worship Juno, Venus, Neptune, Pallas, Jupiter, and the rest: some hold on the
one, and some on the other. Some say, if Ioon be with me, I care not for all
the petty gods, because I hold him chief: so another says, if Saint Gabriel
be with me, I care not for the rest: and some raise great disputations,
whether this Saint or that Saint, this Angel or that Angel be better:
whether our Lady of Bullen, or our Lady of Rome be surest: whether Saint James
of Callis, or Saint James of Compostella be strongest: and so like beggars
which run from door to door, they run from one Saint to another. If one god
will not help, another will, think these, as though the gods were contrary
one to another, and where the one bids, the other forbids. So some thought that
Venus was a friend to the Trojanes, and Pallas was not their friend; as fools
think of Witches, one strikes, another heales.

Call upon thy God. They bid him call upon his God, before they knew him, but
the faithful would not worship a false god, though they may be helped by him.
By the example of these Mariners, if they thought that their god was the true
God (and why else did they worship him:) we may learn the substance of every
temptation that does undermine us, namely, that it will bid us do this evil,
that good may come of it: Mark whenever thou art motioned to evil, if it
do not promise thee some goodness to come of it. But the servants of God
ought not to do that which is evil, though they were sure to gain all things
that can be wished by so doing: for they have learned their lesson, and how to
answer Satan at such times: Why temptest thou me Satan? for it is written, Thou
must not do evil that good may come of it, Romans 3. 8. and this is the armor
called Scriptum est, wherewith the Lord overcame the devil in the wilderness.

Here also we may see the difference between the faithful and Infidels: for
Call upon thy God, says the shipmaster and the rest.

The Mariners bid Jonah pray to his God in their behalf: but Jonah says not
to the Mariners, pray to your gods in my behalf. And this is also manifest,
that a Papist will say unto a Protestant, and one that lives well, Pray for me:
but a Protestant if he be any thing zealous, will not say unto a Papist, Pray
thou for me: knowing that when a Papist does pray, he does it to Idols, Saints
or Angels, or at least without faith, and therefore their prayers are
abominable in the sight of God, and therefore they will not bid them do it
because they will not do evil, to the intent that good may come of it:
whereby it is manifest, that our Religion is the true Religion, our Adversaries
themselves being judges. And so Pharaoh, said to Moses pray for me: but Moses
said not to Pharaoh, pray for me, Exodus 18. 27. etc. Saul said to Samuel, pray
thou for me: but Samuel said not to Saul, pray thou for me, 1 Samuel 15. 25.
therefore the Mariners had need of Jonah to pray for them: but Jonah had no
need of ignorant Idolaters to pray for him. And why should not all pray to
Ionahs God, and Pharaoh pray to Moses God, seeing God has said, Call upon me
in trouble and I will hear thee? Call upon thy God (say they) when they cried
and saw no help, they distrust their gods, they thought they would not help:
indeed they could not: therefore they ran to another whom they knew not, hoping
to be helped by him, because they thought some god there was that could do
it. So the Papists run from one god to another, from S. Dominick to S. Francis,
and why should they run from S. Dominick to S. Francis, but that they
mistrusted Dominick? they think he will not hear them, and so they go
forward: but in the end the unknown God is thought to be the best: yet the
Lord taught not Peter one prayer, and John another, but taught them all one
prayer unto one only God, and to wait still upon him, praying still, with
assurance he will be a help in due time.

If peradventure he will think upon us that we perish not. This if, perhaps,
and peradventure, cost Adam Paradise, God said to Adam, If thou do eat of
this tree, thou shall surely die. Then Evah reported these words, thus: least
peradventure we die. The Serpent seeing her in such a mind, so careless or
forgetful of the commandment, he came and quite changed the matter, and
said; You shall not die. Thus sin creepes upon us, while doubtfullnesse
remains in us: so God says, You shall be saved: the trembling flesh says,
peradventure I shall, etc. then comes Satan, and he says, Thou shall die:
so that if you will ask what is the faith of sinners, or if you would have it
defined, it is this: peradventure yea, peradventure no: if you will ask me
whereupon this faith is grounded: it is upon ifs and ands: this is the faith of
the ungodly, to say, If so be God will help us: for they cannot assure
themselves of any help. But we may not doubt of our God, and say, It may be,
or, If peradventure: for we may freely pray to our God with confidence: and may
say, our God, and the God of Jonah will surely help us, and has helped us.
But yet let us know that we have sinned like infidels, and do deserve to be
punished like the Egyptians.

If so be he will, etc. Thus it comes in like a little leaven, which sowreth
the whole lump of dow, and like the moth, which eats the whole wedding
garment, and this same little thief has stolen away all the Papists faith:
Therefore with them wickedness lies sick in bed, and calls to every one
that comes by, Call upon God, and pray for me, if so be he will look upon
us and help us: and so their hope when the tempest comes, is either an
easelesse horror, or a comfortless doubting.

If so he will think upon us. Our God thought upon us in the time of trouble:
he thought upon us, and laid the tempest when our enemies called upon their
gods, Saints and Angels. But what do we mean, beloved, when mercy is come to
send for judgment? for though we be saved with Israel, we deserve to be
plagued with Pharaoh, because we are not thankful for this, namely that the
Lord has thought upon us in our distress; for he travelleth with mercy, and
labors till he be delivered, he goes laded like a Be, but wants a hive.
There are two hands, a hand to give, and a hand to receive: Gods hand to give,
and man's hand to receive: the hand of God is a bountiful and a merciful hand,
a hand laden with liberality, full of gracious gifts: therefore let us stretch
forth the good hand to receive it, thankefully to embrace it, cheerfully to
entertain it, and carefully to keep it, let us receive it by the hand of
faith, the hand of love, and the hand of prayer, for who so comes with his
hand shall be filled, and who so comes without it, shall go empty away,
because they have despised the ways of God: for when I instructed them, they
would not hear, and what I taught them they would not learn, says the Lord,
Pro. 1. 24, 25. Jonah wakened thus, and thus exhorted to call upon his God,
soon no doubt perceived his danger, and partly with the horror of his sin,
partly for fear of the deserved, and thus threatened drowning and other
punishments, without question was grievously vexed. For he could not but see,
that the very dumb creatures were bent against him for his disobedience: the
wind blows, as though it would overturne all, the waters roar, as though
they would drown all, the ship tumbles, as though she were weary of all, and
albeit the Mariners had cried, and cast out the wares, as though they would
lose all, yet the tempest rages still, their danger is greater than ever.

Wherefore now one might have said to Satan, Satan thou perswadest him to fly
from his defense for his safety, and made him believe that he should come
safe to Tarshish, and there live at liberty and ease, enjoying all temporal
benefits at his pleasure, but now thou have brought him into the prison of the
ship, and it is tossed thus by this tempest likely to destroy him, thou leavest
him in the greatest danger, and rejoycest that Jonah quaketh at the tempest,
and has his heart aching for fear of the danger thus threatened due to
rebellion: yea, seek also to drown him, and that also in hell, howsoever
thou pretendest a desire to preserve him from troubles, and procure him many
pleasures, with much security: O most wretched and deceitful liar, he that
trusts his enemy, and he that believes thee, shall ever be deceived. And
now might Jonah say, Beware by me, for thus has the tempter deceived me, he
has allured me with flattering fantasies, and persuaded me, that it was but
an easy thing to fly from the presence of the Lord, that sees always all
things, and from whom no man, no nor secret lurking in any man's heart can be
hid, but all are always in his presence. He made me believe that light could
be brought out of darkness, that good may come of evil: for he assures me,
that if I would set forth toward Tarshish, I should not only shun the presence
of the Lord, but should live at ease like one unknown, both for my vocation,
and also for my behavior in the execution thereof, and so I might creep into
a familiarity with these people, and enjoy the benefit of their society.
Otherwise, if I went to Nineveh as the Lord commanded, they would hate and
persecute me, yea, and so I should end my life in misery, both because they
being Gentiles, and I a Jew, they cannot abide me, for the one holds the
other in contempt: and also because of my message, namely, a Prophecy of
destruction, grounded upon a reproof of their vile and sinful pleasures.
Which message, Satan persuaded me would be so hainously taken, that no death,
nor torment, that they could devise for me, would be thought sufficient, and
so I should be sure never to escape their hands alive, if I went: as though
the eternal and most glorious God, which sent me thither, were not able to
defend me from all evil when I came thither, as well as he did Daniel in the
Den of Lions, and Christ in the wilderness among the savage beasts. And when
Satan had thus persuaded me I believed him and so took my journey to fly from
the presence of the Lord, if I could have performed my inte^tion. But the Lord
has beheld the stubbornenesse and disobedience of my heart, and therefore
follows me with great displeasure: he has sent out this tempest upon the
sea, whereby we are like to be overwhelmed, and so near as we are to the
water, so near we are to death by all likelihood.

THE PUNISHMENT OF JONAH.
JONAH 1. 7. Afterward they said every one to his fellow, Come and let us cast
lots, that we may know for whose cause this evil is come upon us, So they
cast lots, and the lot fell upon Jonah.
NOw follows another means which the Mariners use to appease the tempest.

They cast lots. But first, they consult and consent to cast lots. The tempest
was so strong that they concluded with themselves, it was the revenging power
of some angry God, for the sin of some notorious wretch that was amongst them.

Seeing therefore neither they, nor Jonah praying, had appeased the tempest,
but it was rather increased, and no man confessed he was the sinner, they take
counsel, and agree to find him out by lots, wherein let us observe; first,
never a one of them is of David's spirit, who when he saw the people plagued,
said, Lord it is I: Every man excuses himself: for every man would extenuate
his own sin, and diminish it, and every one thinks his sin salved, when he
has excused himself. Let Adam be his own judge, and he will say. The woman
tempted him to sin: and let the woman be her own judge, and she will say,
Yonder Serpent persuaded her to it. Let every one be his own judge, and there
will be such posting off of sin, that never a one will be found guilty. There
is none that will be so impudent, as to say he has no sin at all, yet few that
will freely confess they have grievously sinned. Therefore these here say every
man within himself, though he be a sinner, yet he is no great sinner. None are
accounted sinners, unless they be openly detected of some notable and heinous
crime. If they be dicers, swearers, drunkards, brawlers, pickers, flatterers,
prophaners of the Sabbath, sleepers at Church, and such like, they be not
thought sinners: these actions are counted no sins, but rather recreations. For
the multitude count none sinners, unless they be thieves, traitors, open and
gross Idolaters, and taken with such like capital crimes: no more these
neither, were it not for fear of the law: as none among the Jews, but
Publicans, were counted sinners, all the rest were good fellows, and just men.

The Papists say, some thoughts, affections, words, and outward actions, not
agreeing with the Law of God, are easily washed away with a little holy water,
etc. they are not deadly, they deserve not the wrath of God, they are but
venial. Did you ever read of these venial sins in the Scripture? But think
you they have nothing but Scripture? Yes they have Decrees, they have
decretals, the Ceremonies whereof observed, these venial sins are soon
pardoned, and they have a Pope that can forgive any sins. Thus they lessen
sins, thus they abate the price of sins, and they can buy out sins with
money, or redeem them with Masses, and by a little short penance purchase a
large and long pardon.

And as the Mariners, every man thought he was no great sinner: so Jonah
thought with himself, Though I be a great sinner, yet am I not so grievous a
sinner as these Idolatrous heathens: or if he thoroughly condemned himself, yet
unwilling to be known such a rebel, he thought it may be, it is most likely,
they are many, I but one, peradventure therefore the lot will not fall upon me:
like a thief, which notwithstanding in his own heart he acknowledge himself
guilty of that wherewithal he is charged, yet will not confess, until the
matter be thoroughly sifted, and so clearly proved to his own face, in such
sort, that he cannot for shame (though with shame he confess,) deny it.
Therefore if God had not sifted out this sinner the better, Jonah would not
have been known the man, and the Mariners would still have contended who was
the lesser sinner, therefore they consult to cast lots.

Let us cast lot. They did not use to cast lots, this was no custom among the
Mariners: but the tempest was so wonderful, that it made them seriously to
think of God, and willing to use the means prescribed by God for the ending
of doubtful matters, acknowledging that he orders all, and the lot is the
sentence of God: by the falling of the lot, he reveals the truth.

These like worldlings never confess God, but when he comes in a tempest:
they will not see his mercy, until his justice appear: they will not
acknowledge Gods government, before he bring on them some judgment, like
Pharaohs Sorcerers, who confessed not Gods majesty, while they lived at ease,
but when the Lord plagued them, they cried out, This is the finger of God.

Let us cast lots, that we may know for whose cause this evil is come upon
us. Why? what are they the better when they know him? what would they do with
him on whom the lot should fall? Surely they supposing, or rather clearly
seeing this tempest to be sent from some wrathful power, and that for some one
man's sin amongst them, they determined having found him, to sacrifice him
unto the God that was so offended by him, God turns evil unto good, but the
devil turns good unto evil. The Gentiles had a custom in the time of the
common plague, to sacrifice one for the rest. This custom they took by
imitation of the Jews, in offering beasts, and of Abraham in offering his
son, the devil that father of lies and schoolmaster of all mischief
teaching them. So the devil took advantage to do evil by the service of
God. In moving the Gentiles to work abomination by offering men, imitating the
Jews commanded sacrifices. But if they had rightly known the true God, they
would have taken their sins by the throat, and have sacrificed them.

Come, let us cast lots. The Mariners were not so wise to prevent the tempest
before it came, as they be diligent to allay the tempest when it may not be
laid: we overtaken with Gods just judgments, are very careful always, to use
all means to be rid of them. But who keeps a watch over his own ways, and
diligently labors to keep himself free from that which necessarily draws
on it self Gods judgment? who purges himself of his sins, lest he be
sick? who lets or fetches out his corrupt blood of pride, lust,
covetousness, lest he before? who keeps a good diet, and makes his choice
of holy exercises, godly companions, religious conferences? etc. But know we,
he is not safe that is sound, neither he sound that is intemperate.

So they cast lots. Whether it be lawful to cast lots, it is not evident by
this example, because they were Gentiles, and therefore no president for us:
but so far may we use them, as the Word does lead us, and no further.

There are two Goats brought to Aaron, Levit. 16. that he might cast lots, to
see which Goat should be killed, and which should not, these Goats signify
Christ: for as he died he lived again, and as he was buried, he rose again.
Again the land of Canaan is parted by lots, Numb. 34. to see what part each
Tribe should inhabit. Again, that thief Achan is found out by lots, Josh. 7.
first by his Tribe, then by his Family and lastly, by his particular person.

Again it is said, that Saul was chosen King by lots, 1 Samuel 10. and least any
should have said, that it was his good luck, his good lot or chance to be
King: therefore the Lord appointed that he should be anointed before he was
chosen by lots.

Again, Matthias is chosen by lots to the Apostleship in stead of Judas, Acts
1. so that it is lawful in some causes to cast lots, so that they do
attribute nothing unto them, and acknowledge that the lot is cast into the lap,
but the disposition thereof is from the Lord, Pro. 16. 33. for they must not
say that it is their chance, fortune, or good luck: for so they make an Idol
of it, and rob God of the honor due unto him. For it was not Saul's fortune to
be King, but Gods mercy: it was not Achans chance to be caught, but Gods
judgment. Lots may be used to prevent strife, when all other means have
been used, and sometimes before all other means, when in wisdom it is
thought the best means. Brethren often and godly at first divided their
inheritance by lots, as the Children of Israel divided the land of Canaan.
Therefore in the Church of Geneva there is an order, that in the time of
plague, there should be an house set apart for the sick to lodge in, and least
they should be uncomforted, they choose out a Mininister by lots to do it.

So they cast lots. Now we are come to put up our selves to the Court of
Lawyers, to see if they will do any thing for God, for conscience, or for
love, viz. that they would end men's suits quickly, and let the poor Clients
have equity. Some say that Lawyers be good until they be Counselors, like
Lions, which will be gentle until their tallons grow: be not offended, but
amend, for malice speaks not.

I am persuaded, that if the lots were cast to see who troubles the ship, it
would fall upon the Lawyers: be not offended but amend, for malice speaks
not. A poor Client comes forth accusing one, and going home accuses a
hundred: for so many seek to hinder him, so few seek to further him, and so
many seek to hinder him, that all his gain is but labor and loss.

For a small matter many will come to law, to strive for that, which with
reason might easily be attained without such contention, and others seek to
enrich themselves with contending for a small matter with their neighbors, yet
in the end lose that they sought, and that they had beside: and so they contend
and strive about a thing commonly, till the Lawyer has gained more by them,
than the thing which is in controversy is worth. These are like the Mouse and
the Frog, which strove so long about Marshground, that at length the Kite came
and took them both from it. Others will come up to law about a small matter,
and therein so entangle themselves, that they cannot rid their hands of it,
until it have almost undone them, like a silly sheep that is hunting a fly,
which runs from bush to bush, and every bush catches a lock of him, so
that the poor sheep is threedbare ere he has done, and has not a fleece
left him to cover himself withal. So he runs from Court to Court, to sue,
to complain, to plead, till he have spent his cloak, his coat: were it not
better to have cast lots for the coat at first? For the Law is like a Butlers
box, play still on till all come to the Candlestick. Therefore it is lawful,
to end any controversy in a hard matter, to use this means.

Now whether it be lawful to cast dice, if lots may not be used (as Salomons
words, Prove. 18. 18. The lot causes contention to cease, compared with Heb. 6.
16. prove) but in hard matters and weighty causes, when the thing is doubtful,
and all good means are tried before to avoid strife: that question is decided,
which none but voluptuous men make question of, namely, whether dice-play be a
meet exercise for a Christian soul. Solomon says, the lot causes contention
to cease: therefore, lots are to end strife, but these lots make strife: for
before thou take the Dice, thou know thine own, and no man striveth to
take it from thee: but when thou castest the Dice, thou do (as it were) ask
whether thine own be thine own, and make a strife of no strife. Art thou
not worthy to lose the gifts of God, which venturest to lose them when thou
need not? Do thou not deserve to forgo thine own, which art so greedy
of another, that thou would have his living for nothing, but for turning of
a Die? Esau did not sell his birthright so lightly, but he had somewhat for
it which refreshed his hunger, but God has given thee a living, and thou
spendest it for nothing. The Mariners did cast lots to find out the sinner:
they did not cast Dice to see who should win, as Dicers do: for to whom the
lot falls, he takes all, which deserves to lose all as well as the other, and
has no right unto it by any law: for God has not allowed one man to take
another goods for the tripping of a Die, but either they must be merited, or
they must be given, or they must be bought, or else it is unlawful, ungodly,
unconscionable, to take them: Besides the brawles, the cosenages, the oaths
annexed to this game, which would not agree with it, unless it had been a
meet companion for them. Thou take another man's goods for nothing, whereas
God has appointed thee to get thy living, with the sweat of thy brows, for
thou take away that which others sweat for, and whereas thou should live
by working, thou seek to live by playing, like as the Ape which lives by
toying. Does any Dicer think he does well? Tell me what think thou? for
every sinner does condemn in his prayer to God, that which he excuses before
men: if they which are Gamesters repent it, how can they which are Gamesters
defend it? Thou should do nothing, but that thou would have God find
thee doing if he should come to judgment: would thou have him take thee at
dice? I am sure thou would not have God see thee so vainly occupied:
neither can thou think, that Christ, or his Prophets, or Apostles, or
Evangelists, were Dicers, for no such lots are named in the holy Scripture, and
yet the Lords day is most profaned with this exercise, Cards and Dice, as
though they kept all their vanities to celebrate holy days, what have thou to
allege for Dice, now evidence is given up against them? have thou any patron
to speak for them, but thy vain pleasure and filthy covetousness, which are
condemned already, and therefore have no voice by Law? Take away these, and
take away Dice. The Patron condemns the Clients, when one voice condemns
another: if the exercise were lawful, such Patrons as pleasure and
covetousness would not speak for it. Take thy pleasure therefore in that
which is good, and the Angels will rejoice with thee: if this were good, God
would prosper them better that use it: but neither winners nor loosers are
gainers. I know not how, but there is not so much won as lost, as though the
Devil did part stakes with them, and draw away with a black hand, when no man
sees, for the winner says, he has not won half so much as the looser has
lost. One would think that one of them should flow, when so many ebb: there
is never an ebb without a flowing, never one loses, but another wins, but
at Dice. What a cursed thing is this that turns no man to good, which robs
others, and beggars themselves? The School of deceit, the shop of oaths, and
the field of vanities. Thou do not only hazard thy money (in this game)
but venturest thy salvation, and castest Dice with the devil, who shall have
thy soul. For every thing that comes well to man, he gives thanks, but for
that which comes by Dice, he is ashamed to give thanks; which shows, that
in conscience that gain is evil gotten, and that he sought it without God.
Can this be good when worst men use it most? If it were good, the evil would
like worse of it than the good: but the more a man savoureth of any goodness,
the more he begins to abhor it, and his Conscience does accuse him for it as
for sin. They which doubt whether GOD do allow it, need but look how he
does prosper them that use it: but they trust not in God, (the terms of their
occupation discrie) for they call all their casts, chances, as though they
relied not upon God, but upon chance. Therefore if Dice make strife without
cause, if they take away others goods for nothing, if we may not live by
playing, but by labor, if they which have been Dicers, repent it among their
sins, if the holy men never used this recreation, but the worst most delight
in it, if thou would not have God see thee when thou playest at Dice, nor
take thee at it when he comes to judgment, if nothing but pleasure and
covetousness speak for them, if they do not prosper which take pleasure in
it, if they trust not upon God, but rely upon chance, if thou do not only
venture thy money, but hazard thy soul, then the best cast at Dice is, to
cast them quite away.

And the lot fell upon Jonah. The lot fell upon Jonah, not because he was the
greatest sinner of them all, (for so is the opinion of the common people, to
censure them worst whom they see most afflicted: If any one be seen to bear
his cross, then many will say, This is a wicked man, and so think well of
themselves, supposing that God is not bent against them to punish them as
well,) but because Jonah should feel the hand of the Lord both punishing and
preserving him, and be reformed: for God corrects all, as he did his Son,
to learn them obedience. But if judgment begin with the house of God, what
shall become of the ungodly?

And the lot fell upon Jonah. Now when the sinner that troubled the ship is
taken, now Jonah can hide himself no longer. Now he might also fear to be
sacrificed by the Mariners presently. For the Mariners, partly for the pain
they had endured, partly for the loss they had sustained, partly for the
danger wherein they remained, were no doubt as the she wolves robbed of their
whelps, out of measure furious and fully bent to sacrifice him on whom the lot
fell, to appease the wrathful God. But God stayed, and restrained the rage of
the Mariners, and made them afterward willing to abide the tempest a while,
and put themselves to more pain to save him, endeavoring by rowing to recover
land. For having heard of the true God, and though they lost their goods,
having found who is all good, shall we (say they) destroy him that has saved
us? Shall we give him up to death unnecessarily, that has brought us to life,
and assured us to reign with God in all glory everlasting? Surely the
thanklesse are graceless: especially they that love not, and show not forth
the labor of love for their gracious guide to God: but therefore we may see
that the hearts of men are in the hands of God, and he turns them which way
he list, he fashioneth their hearts every one, yea even Kings hearts, as
rivers of water does he turn, to water and make fruitful his vine: to pity
and to persecute, to honor and to shame, to love and hate his people: to
deliver their power to the beast, Revel. 17. 13. And again to eat the Whores
flesh, and to burn her with fire, Revel. 17. 16, 17. Therefore let us never
fear to perform our duties whatsoever, to whomsoever: for he forms the
hearts of all, who has promised to honor them that honor him but to make
them contemptible that do despise him. Neither let us put confidence in man,
nor in Princes, for their hearts are rivers of water of themselves, fleeting
easily as they be led following: But especially let us not forget chiefly to
make prayers, supplications, intercessions, and to give thanks for all those,
1 Timothy 2. 1. on the godliness or profaneness of whose hearts, the
flourishing or defacing of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, and the chosen of God
does most depend.

And the lot fell upon Jonah. Now Jonah could not deny he was that sinner,
unless he would accuse God of unrighteous judgment: for the lot is cast into
the Lap, but the whole disposition thereof is of the Lord. Now therefore he
must needs confess it. The winds thundering, the waves tumbling, the ship
cracking, the Mariners quaking, upon their gods crying, their wares forth
casting, Ionahs prayers requested, to cast lots consulting, Jonah kept himself
close, he would not be thought that sinner. The wind said, I will overturne
thee; the water said, I will drown thee: the ship said, I cannot hold thee:
the Mariners said, We cannot help thee: his prayers said, We cannot profit
thee: his conscience within bleeding, and God at the door of his heart
knocking, and the lots now ready for casting, said threatningly, For thee the
tempest is come, thou fugitive, and we will discover thee.

Yet Jonah conceales his sin, so much did he abhor the shame of men, of
strange men, a few men, frail men, or the fear of the fury of the flesh.
Therefore after the winds had roared, and also the waves raged, and the ship
reeled, and the Mariners cried, and the lot, his conscience, and God himself
threatened him, the lot also condemned him, and the fear of being sacrificed by
sinners to Satan terrified him, so that he forthwith repented thoroughly, he
declared it openly, and confessed his sin freely. Such a stir has God before
he can come by his own: he must cross us, and set himself and all his
creatures against us, he must strain our bodies, or leave our souls, and
constrain us to it, before we will return from our wicked ways and
thoroughly humble our selves to yield him due obedience, O the goodness of the
great God? O long sufferance and bountifullnes unspeakeable, which not only
leads, but also in the chains of love draws us to true repentance.

It was Gods great goodness to Jonah, that the Mariners sacrificed him not:
greater, that he truly repented: that God continues in his calling, and
blesses his (whose flying from God, deserved flinging to Satan) not so much
solemn Preaching, as sudden confession, and short denuntiation of vengeance,
yea made it so powerful, that it converted Idolatrous Heathens, most hardened
Idolaters: first Mariners, then Ninevites.

For what a blessing felt Jonah, God vouchsafing him of this honor, to offer
them a lively, holy, and acceptable sacrifice to God, by whom he presently
before, greatly feared to have been offered a dead, unholy, and so a
delightful sacrifice to Satan. This fear banished, and that joy possessing
him, what a mercy of the Almighty did Jonah think it: But before he converted
the Ninevites, he was more to be humbled, fuller to be strengthened, better
every way to be prepared. Therefore God would have the sea to wash him, the
Whale to fast him, and yet miraculously safe to preserve him, that being
purified, he might pray fervently: and being delivered, find power, comfort,
and courage abundantly. Therefore when by lot being taken, and by his own
confession found the man that procured the tempest, the Mariners in love and
compassion of him, had assayed by rowing to get to land, but could not, the Sea
raging more and more, and Jonah himself professed he knew the tempest was sent
for his cause, and would be laid, he being cast into the Sea. Jonah at length
was cast out of the ship into the swelling surge of the tempestuous Sea. What
hope of life then left? Is there any? to swallow up all, soon after he is
swallowed whole of a Whale. Here let us mark, that after the tempest had
terrified Jonah, the Mariners reprooved him: when they had reprooved him, his
conscience pricked him, when his conscience had pricked him, the consulting to
cast lots grieved him: after grief for consulting, their concluding to cast
lots vexed him: vexed at the conclusion, the lot condemns him: the lot having
condemned him, in what an agony think we was Jonah? partly, that he should be
held that notorious wretch that had brought this woe? partly, lest they in
their raging grief, for their great trouble of body, loss of goods, and
danger of life, should forthwith kill him for a sacrifice, to appease the
unknown angry God? But after this agony, the terror of drowning followed, and
after that the horror of that huge fish: first, lest it tear him in pieces,
then lest it melt him, afterward, lest it poison him: lastly, three days and
three nights the comfortless horror of darkness, and noisome stink in the
fishes belly tormented him.

First then see, the winds could not further him, the waters could not bear
him, the ship could not hold him, the Mariners could not help him: and being
cast out, lest all for him be cast away, the Whale would not spare him, the
stinch would ill feed him, the darkness would less glad him, and light might
not visit him. Now see then what Jonah got by his journey, notwithstanding all
the promises of which Satan assured him, and all the furtherances which the
Serpent procured him, he lost his labor, lost his money, lost his joy, lost
his credit, lost his quiet, and saw no hope but to lose his life too, finding
plentifully and bitterly feeling dreadful fears. He trusted to the winds,
the winds could not* save him: he trusted to the ship, the ship could not
keep him: he trusted to the Mariners, the Mariners could not hold him: he
trusted to the lot, the lot would not spare him: he trusted to the waters, the
waters could not bear him, neither would the Whale forbear him, neither did
any thing make show of likelihood to save him. Therefore we may see in Jonah,
what it profits a man to fly from God, forsaking his calling, and so
practicing the evil motions of Satan in stead of the known will of God.
Assuredly, if we follow his flatteries as Jonah did, we shall have as he had,
accusing consciences, fearful hearts, and the wrath of God upon our heads.
For he has nothing to give us, although he promise and make us believe he
has Kingdoms. Yes indeed, he has horror of mind for all that obey him, and
hell for the reward of his, which will make all their hearts ache which receive
it.

See secondly in this punishment of Jonah, the justice of God. The Be, when
she has once stung, does leese her sting, so that she can sting no more: So
does not Gods justice punishing sin: for it retains power, it has store of
stings to vex still: when one judgment is executed, he ever has other enough
ready, either of the same kind in another degree more sharp, or of another
sort: for all the creatures with their several powers, are Gods darts to
strike us when he commands. Therefore if we be sick, sickness is not dead
with us: if we be poor, poverty ends not: if we be in danger, danger is not
therefore put down for ever after: and if we be vexed, vexation has not
therefore lost his sting: his darts, his weapons also are as sharp now as they
were at the first, and sharper too, because we are sinfuller. For according to
the sickness is the medicine, and wounds more dangerous, require more
dolourous plasters.

And if thou be disobedient, then he will lead thee through them all, until
he has humbled thee, and made thee to glorify him with obedience, or utterly
destroyed thee.

Thirdly, let us not forget, neither lightly think of this that God knows how
to punish for sin, yea most severely to correct his children, though
repenting. If our Prophet Jonah here may not keep thee some good while in a
due meditation of it, let that man after Gods own heart, the sweet Prophet of
Israel come to thy mind, and in him see, whether God cockereth his entirest
friends, or something sharply, if not bitterly, handles them, settling
themselves in their dregs, or securely serving the Lord, 2 Samuel 18. 6. 10. 27.
2 Samuel 12. 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Chap. Psalm. 30. and 75. Hos. 6. 4.

Lastly, yet consider God is rich in mercy, and full of compassion, loath to
punish unless too far provoked, content to shake his rod over us, to make us
fear only, and keep us free from feeling his strokes, if that may have his
due work in us, that is, recall, reform, and confirm us: for as the winds
could not overthrow Jonah, nor the waters drown him: so neither could the
Whale consume, poison or annoy him, or ought but fear him, though it had
swallowed him: for Jonah remembering God, God showed he forgot not Jonah.
Therefore when and where Jonah thought verily and speedily to have perished,
then and there God caused him to be three days, and as many nights most
safely preserved. O power omnipotent, O goodness all sufficient, in all things,
at all times. God then as well knows to deliver his out of all distress in
due time, as to reserve the wicked to the day of judgment to be punished. And
in what danger shall we despair? In what extremities ought not we to hope in
our most mighty Savior, remembering JONAH in the Whales belly, Jonah 2. 10.
Jeremy in the mire of the deep dungeon, Ier. 38. 13. Daniel among the fierce
Lions, Dan. 6. 24. his three companions in the hot burning Furnace, and 3. 26.
nay, 600000. men of war, and three times as many more, men and women, young
and old in the Wilderness, lacking now drink, then meat, Exodus 17. 6. and
all these delivered out of all danger, these last miraculously satisfied with
drink out of the rock, and with meat abundantly from heaven, Ex. 2. 15. 3.
10.

Secondly, though Jonah be cst into the troublous Sea, and swallowed of a huge
Whale, yet he must preach at Nineveh: though Moses fly out of Egypt, yet he
must be the leader of Gods people thence, Genesis 29. 20. Joseph is in prison, but
he must be the Lord of Egypt, and preserve the Church alive, Genesis 41. 40. 45.
78. Who would have thought that Saul should become Paul, Acts 9. 1, 2. or
forswearing Peter a faithful Preacher, Acts 4. 11, 12. Suspend then thy
judgment and wonder at Gods works, whether of mercy, or justice, and think
not the worse of a man though he were cast out of the Sea, as Jonah, Jonah 2.
10. or basely brought up as Amos, Amos 6. 14. for the deliverer of Israel was
brought out of the flagges, Exodus 2. 3. and the converter of Nineveh out of a
Whale, Jonah 2. 10. and the salvation of the whole world out of a stall, Luke
2. 17.

And the lot fell upon Jonah. The lot fell upon Jonah, that he might be cast
out of the ship, that as the ship was almost broken, but not altogether: so
Jonah might be almost drowned, but not altogether: almost consumed, almost
poisoned in the belly of the Whale, but not altogether: and that being in the
double deep duly humbled, and as gold in a Furnace, fined and fit for Gods
works, he might thence in a miraculous manner come forth like Lazarus in his
winding sheet, that he might glorify God once again, and courageously cry
against Nineveh.

And the lot fell upon Jonah. The lot fallen upon Jonah, the justice of God
(both manifesting the truth incorruptly, and chastising his disobedient servant
severely) did appear but with all singular mercy shined, and the Mariners
minds were mollified, in that they sacrificed him not to Satan, but much more
that he by that means truly repented. Insomuch that the old Idolatrous
Mariners, presently by him were converted, and he cast into the Sea, was not
drowned, swallowed of the whale, and three days continuing therein perished
not, but miraculously was preserved, and most graciously cast on land safe: and
lastly, crying against Nineveh that sinful City, had his Preaching so
mightily prevailing, that he wonderfully humbled them all. This mercy was
mavelous, this goodness of God to Jonah most glorious: For the Ninevites
hearing, Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be overthrown, Jonah 3. 5. first
as the Mariners had before done, believed the Word of GOD, though they never
heard it before? If we heard the Word of God preached as the Mariners and
Ninevites did with trembling hearts, in the sense of Gods Majesty, it would not
be but we should feel the power of it lively, and filled with all joy in
believing speedily, but uneffectuall and fruitless is Preaching, because there
is nothing almost but unreverent and senseless hearing. And why should God
teach the heedlesse to learn? Why should he give pearls to dunghill Cocks,
nay, to very swine? But they believed the Word as soon as they heard it, though
they never heard it before. What does that argue? Surely it shows, that the
foolish and simple are more diligent and ready, both to hear and receive the
Word of God, then those that are wise in their own conceit, or also in the
view of the world. What says Christ? The poor receive the Gospel, Mat. 11.
5. What says Paul? Not many rich, not many wise, 1 Cor. 1. 26. For though we
have knowledge, if our knowledge be like the Pharisees, Mat. 23. 13, 14, 25,
26, 27, 28. that is, in show of sincerity only, in counterfeit holiness, and
hollow hearted friendship through hypocrisy, it had been better for us that
we had been ignorant, for it will but leave us the more inexcusable, it will
be found insufficient to save us, but sufficient the more fearfully to
condemn us, because we know our Masters will and do it not. Therefore as
Peter said to Simon Magus, Thy money perish with thee, Acts 8. 20. So will the
Lord say unto such, Thy knowledge perish with thee, seeing it is fruitless.

But when Nineveh had believed God, what did they secondly? They speedily, they
notably repented, they proclaimed a fast, they put on sackcloth, they humbled
themselves before the Lord, they earnestly besought him to turn away his wrath
from this woeful City. Jonah preached at Nineveh, crying against it, seems
to have humbled them, and that without a miracle (without which scant any
doctrine is of credit among the Gentiles) not only within forty, but within
four days, much within forty days, he converted Nineveh, ruffling Nineveh,
old and Idolatrous Nineveh, long before forty days be ended, the seed is
sown, grown, increased mightily, and full ripe, in a soil in reason most
barren. Sow therefore, ye Seedsmen, where you are set. If ye sow cheerfully,
ye shall reap plenteously in due time: Faint not: say not I have a stony, or a
starved, or a thorny ground: Nineveh repents in sackcloth.

In which willing submission of theirs, and speedy lively repentance at the
words of the Prophet, (after he had been three days and three nights in the
Whales belly) the calling of the Gentiles by Christ, (after he had been three
days and three nights in the bowels of the Earth) might well be signified.
For they no less willingly than the Ninevites, submitted themselves to the
Gospel preached no less speedily, and peradventure more truly repented. For
though they now thus wonderfully humbled themselves, not the fearful
multitude only, but the richest and greatest, the Nobles and King also, and so
all escaped now: soon after they returned to their vomit, and never ceased to
add sin to sin, till they were by open wars miserably weakened, and at
length fulfilling the Prophecy of Nahum, (Nah. 3. 16.) utterly consumed.
Therefore first, for the comfort of the godly, since Ahab humbled himself
before the Lord, (1 King. 22. 26, 27, 29.) Ahab, I say, that had done exceeding
abhominably, in following Idols, and sold himself to work wickedness in the
sight of the Lord, submitted himself under the hand of God, fasting in
sackecloth, though he did all in hypocrisy: had not the evil threatened
brought upon him in his days: seeing Rehoboam (and the Princes of Israel who
had forsaken the Lord) and the whole Tribe of Judah, which wrought wickedness
in the sight of the Lord, and provoked him more with their sins than all that
their Fathers had done humbling themselves before the Lord, and confessing him
just, had not the wrath of the Lord powered upon them, by Shishak King of Egypt
were not destroyed, but shortly delivered, yea also things prospered in Judah,
though the Lord had threatened to leave them in the hands of Shishack, albeit
they truly repented not: lastly, for as much as Nineveh that bloody City full
of lies and robbery, the beautiful harlot, with multitude of fornications,
that Mistress of Witchcrasts, which sold the people through her whoredoms,
and the nations through her witchcraft, humbling themselves with fasting, and
putting on of sackcloth, the Lord repented of the evil he had threatened them,
and did it not: how assured may we be that whatsoever judgment the Lord
threatens us, and howsoever he threaten it, it shall not light on us, when we
unfainedly humble our selves in true fasting, turning from our evil ways, and
from the heart vowing to serve God in all holiness? For this is the clear
promise of the faithful God; 2 Chronicles. 7. 13, 14. If I shut the Heaven that
there be no rain, or if I command the Grasshopper to devour the land, or if I
send pestilence amongst my people, if my people, among whom my Name is called
upon, do humble themselves, and pray and seek my presence, and turn from
their wicked ways: then will I hear in Heaven, and be merciful to their
sins, and heal their land. Again, as generally most plainly says just
Jehovah; Ier. 18. 7, 8. I will speak suddenly against a Nation, or against a
kingdom, saying, I will pluck it up, and root it out, and destroy it, but if
this Nation against which I have pronounced this, turn from their wickedness,
I will repent of the plague that I thought to bring upon them. Let us then, O
beloved of the Lord, whosoever love the Lord Jesus, be careful to fulfill the
condition, and then confident not doubting of the performance of the promise,
by so much the more, by how much the fewer we be, and by how much the longer
and clearer the Lord has threatened most terrible judgments.

Now for the terror of the ungodly, as many of them as repent only when Gods
hand is upon them, and then humble themselves outwardly only, and that but
only when the fierceness of his wrath appears, or else after they have
escaped the feared judgment, fall to their wonted wickedness again: let them
be sure the strong and just God, that consumed Nineveh slidden back, will
overtake them also in wrath, and for ever turn them over to ceaselesse woe.
For the greatness, the beauty, the strength, and riches of Nineveh, could not
withstand the hand of God, or keep it from destruction, but rather furthered
and hastened it. For with the more excellent ornaments that it was adorned by
the Lord, the more heinous and grievous in his sight was the abuse of them.
Therefore the hugeness, or the strength of this, or any other City cannot
save it from the judgment of God, being sinful in his sight.

Great Sodom is destroyed, Genesis 19. great Jericho is destroyed, Josh. 6. great
Nineveh is destroyed: great Jerusalem is destroyed, 1 King. 24. 25. and great
Rome, (Rev. 18. 2.) the room of all unclean spirits, stays for her
destruction, like a whore that stays for her punishment till she be
delivered: and these were and shall be punished for unthankfullnesse and
contempt of the Word of God. Yet Nineveh, Jericho, Sodom, nor Rome, have had
half the Preaching that we have had, yet we are unthankful too, then what
have we to look for? but when Sodom was burned, Zoar stood safe, Genesis 19.
21. when Jerusalem was destroyed, Bethlehem stood still, Ier. 41. 17. So the
Lord does always provide for his people, though he make never so great a
slaughter and destruction amongst his enemies. For the Lord because of his
covenant does always provide for his chosen, although they be but a remnant,
like the gleaning after harvest, or like a cluster of Grapes on the top of the
vine after the vintage, and though there be never so great calamity or ttouble,
as we see in the Book of Genesis 45. Chap. when there was a great time of dearth
and scarcity to come upon the land where Jacob was, the Lord had sent Joseph to
provide for his Father Jacob, lest he should want bread, he or any of his
sons and folks, and so ordered the matter, that Joseph was Treasurer over
all the Corn in Egypt. And so among the Turks, and Spaniards, and Infidels,
the Lord will find means to do them good, which unfainedly love him, and in
the dungeon, in prison, and in bonds, yea, and in death, the godly shall find
GOD.

FINIS.
Morning Prayer.
O Eternal God, and merciful Father, which art the light that no man can
attain unto, and yet by thy marvailous lightness, drivest away the darkness
of the night, and shadow of death, and by thy grace enlightnest all those,
that being in darkness come unto thee: I thy unworthy servant, do bless and
praise thy most holy Name, for all the mercies and gracious benefits, that from
time to time I have received from thee; and most humbly thank thee, that thou
have vouchsafed me this favor, to pass this night in so quiet and comfortable
rest, and have brought me again to see and enjoy the light of the Morning. And
now, I beseech thee, O Lord, of thy infinite goodness and mercy, by the merits
of my blessed Savior, that thy merciful compassion may this day be extended
to me, that being enlightened with thy grace, I may not be carried away by the
power of darkness, to spend this day after the lust and pleasures of my own
corrupt mind; but that I may with all care and conscience, follow thy Fatherly
will, which thou have revealed unto me in thy holy Word. Increase in me (O
Lord) all spiritual gifts and graces, and beat down in me all carnal and
corrupt affections: enable me by thy blessed Spirit, in some measure, both to
withstand that which is evil, and to perform what is good and pleasing unto
thee; and that neither by my own negligence, nor the power of any temptation,
which either the World, the Flesh, or the Devil shall present unto me, I be
driven away from a true faith, but may lay hold of those gracious promises,
that thou have made unto me in Jesus Christ my Savior. Disperse (O Lord) the
thick mists and clouds of my sins, which corrupt my soul, and darken my
understanding, and wash them away (I most humbly beseech thee) in the precious
blood of thy Sons Passion, that so I may be acknowledged for one of thine
Elect, when I shall appear before thy Judgment seat. Give me a will
carefully to follow my vocation, and let thy blessing be upon me in the same:
bless me in my body, in my soul, and in whatsoever belongs unto me: lighten
my mind, and inflame my heart with a love of those things that are good; and
as my body (by thy power) is risen from sleep, so my soul may daily be raised
from the slumber of sin, and the darkness of this world, and so both
together may enjoy that everlasting light which thou have provided for thy
Saints, and purchased with the blood of thy dear Son our Savior Jesus
Christ: to whom with thee, O Father, and the blessed Spirit, be all honor and
glory for evermore, Amen.

Evening Prayer.
O Almighty and everlasting God, the Father of mercy, and God of all
consolation, that by thy merciful Providence, defendest all those that walk
before thee, and put their trust in thee: I poor and miserable sinner
(unworthy of the least of thy favors) do yet presume (in the name and
mediation of Jesus Christ) to present my self before thee, and to offer up
this poor sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving unto thee, that thou have
nourished and preserved me by thy power, and have guided and governed me by thy
Word and Spirit: and (as for all other thy blessings) so for that mercy that
has this day accompanied me, whereby I have both been preserved from many
sins, that the wickedness of my nature was inclined unto, and also delivered
from many punishments, that the sins that I have committed have deserved: I
most humbly beseech thee, in the merits of Christ Jesus, to pardon and forgive
me all my sins, which eith^^ in thought, word, or deed, I have this day, or
any time heretofore committed against thee; whether they be the sins of my
youth, or of my age, the sins of omission or commission, whether wittingly or
ignorantly committed: good Lord, pardon them unto me, and let them not cause
thee this night (as justly thou may do) to take vengeance of me, but be
merciful unto me, O Lord, in forgiving the evil I have committed, in
supplying the good that I have omitted, in restoring me to that which I have
lost, in healing my sores, in lightning my blindness, in clensing my
filthiness, and in altering the whole course of my corrupt mind, that I may
be delivered from that which is evil, and enabled to perform that which is
agreeable to thy blessed Will and Word. And Lord, as thou have this day
preserved and kept me in safety, so I most humbly beseech thee to protect me
this night from all danger, both bodily and ghostly, and to give me such quiet
and comfortable rest, as may enable me to walk on in that vocation, wherein
thou have placed me, and that I may both be delivered from the darkness of
this present night, and may also escape that everlasting darkness, which thou
have provided for those, that without Repentance continue in their sins: from
which, good Lord, deliver me, and all those that belong unto thee; and that for
the merits of the death and passion of my blessed Savior Jesus Christ: in
whose Name I continue my prayers for my self, and thy whole Church, saying, as
he has taught us. Our Father. etc.

O Lord, prepare our hearts to Prayer.
O Lord God our heavenly Father, we thy poor and wretched creatures, give
thee most humble and hearty thanks for our quiet and safe sleep, and for
raising us up from the same. We beseech thee, for Jesus Christ's sake, to
prosper us this day in our labor and travel, that it may be to the
discharging of our duty in our vocations, principally to thy glory; next, to
the profit of this Church and Commonweal; and last of all, to the benefit and
content of our Masters. Grant, dear Father, that we may cheerfully and
conscionably do our business and labors, not as men-pleasers, but as serving
thee our God, knowing thee to be the chief Master of us, and that thou see
and beholdest us with thy Fatherly eyes, who have promised reward to them that
faithfully and truly walk in their vocation, and threatened everlasting death
and damnation to them, that deceitfully and wickedly do their works and
labors. We beseech thee, O heavenly Father, to give us the strength of thy
Spirit, that godly and gladly we may overcome our labors, and that the
tediousness of that irksome labor, which thou for our sins have powered
upon all mankind, may seem to us more delectable and sweet. Fulfill now, O
Lord, these our requests, for thy Son our Saviors sake, in whose Name we
pray, as he himself has taught us.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. FINIS.

