THE SERMONS OF MASTER HENRY SMITH, GATHERED INTO ONE VOLVME.

Printed according to his corrected Copies in his life time.

ANCHORA SPEI
printer's or publisher's device

AT LONDON Printed by Richard Field for Thomas Man, dwelling in Pater Noster
row, at the sign of the Talbot. 1593.

NOBILISSIMO VIRO, GVILIELMO CECILIO, EQVITI AVRATO, BARONI BVRGHLEIENSI, SVMMO
ANGLIAE THESAVRARIO, ET CANTABRIGIENSIS ACADEMIAE CANCELLARIO: HENRICUS SMITHVS
HAEC PIGNORA IN GRATI ANIMI TESTIMONIVM CONSECRAVIT.

THE SEVERAL TEXTS and titles of the Sermons contained in this Book.
A Preparatiue to Marriage.

A treatise of the Lords supper, in two Sermons.

I. Corinthians 11. 23. 24. etc. The Lord Jesus in the night that he, etc.

The Examination of Usury, in two Sermons.

Psalm 15. 1. 5. Lord who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle, etc.

The benefit of Contentation.

1. Timothy. 6. 6. Godliness is great gain, if a man be, etc.

The affinity of the Faithful.

Luke 1. 19. 20. 21. Then came to him his mother and his, etc.

The Christians Sacrifice.

Proverb. 23. 26. My Son, give me thy heart.

The true trial of the Spirits.

1. Thessalonians 19. 20. 21. 22. Quench not the Spirit, etc.

The Wedding garment.

Romans 13. 14. Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

The way to walk in.

Romans 13, 13 Let us walk honestly, as in the day, etc.

The pride of Nabuchadnezzar.

Daniel 4. 26, 27. At the end of twelve months he, etc.

The fall of Nabuchadnezzar.

Daniel 4. 28. 29. 30. While the word was in his mouth, etc.

The Restitution of Nabuchadnezzar.

Daniel 4. 31. 32. 33. 34. And at the end of these days, etc.

The honor of Humility.

1. Peter 5. 5. God res^steth the proud, and gives, etc*

The Young-mans Task.

Ecclesiastes 12. 1. Remember thy Creator in the days of, etc.

The trial of the righteous.

Psalm 34. 19. Many are the troubles of the righteous, etc.

The Christians practice.

Romans 12. 2. Be ye changed by the renewing of your, etc.

The Pilgrims Wish.

Philippians 1. 23. I desire to be dissolved, and to be with, etc.

The Godly man's request.

Psalm 90. 12. Teach us, O Lord, to number our days, etc.

A Glass for Drunkards in two Sermons.

Genesis 9. 20. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. And Noah began to be an husband, etc.

The Art of Hearing, in two Sermons.

Luke 8. 18. Take heed how you hear.

The Heavenly Thrift.

Luke 8. 18. Whosoever has, to him shall be given, etc.

The Magistrates Scripture.

Psalm 82. 76. I have said, Ye are Gods, but ye shall die, etc.

The Trial of Vanities.

Eccle. 1. 2. Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher.

The Ladder of Peace.

1 Thessalonians. 15. 16. 17. 18. Rejoice evermore, etc.

The betraying of Christ.

Math. 27. 1. 2. 3. 4. When the morning was come, and the, etc.

The petition of Moses.

Deuteronomy. 3. 23. 24. And I besought the Lord the same, etc.

The Dialogue between Paul and Agrippa.

Act. 26. 27. 28. 29. O King Agrippa, beleeuest thou the, etc.

The Humility of Paul.

Romans 12. 1. 2. I beseech you therefore brethren, etc.

A looking Glass for Christians.

Romans 12. 3. I say through the grace that is given, etc.

Food for newborn babes.

1. Pet. 2. 2. As newborn babes desire the sincere, etc.

The banquet of Jobs Children.

Job. 1. 4. 5. And his Sons went and banqueted, etc.

Satan's compassing the Earth.

Job. 1. 7. 8. Then the Lord said unto Satan, etc.

A Caveat for Christians.

1. Cor. 10. 12. Let him that thinks he stands, take, etc.

To the Reader.
BEcause sickness has restrained me from preaching, I am content to do any
good by writing. Happy is that author which is instead of other, that after
his book is read, men need read no more of that matter. I go upon a Theme
which many have trauersed before me prolixly, Reuere^dum Couerdalum excipio.
or cursorily, or barrenly: If I have performed by study any more then the
rest, let my Reader judge, and give glory to him which teaches by whom he
will, What I have endeavored, my self do feel and others know. We are ignorant
of many things for a few that we understand: but I have bin always ashamed, that
my writings should weigh lighter for want of pains, which is the bane of
printing, and surfetteth the Reader. Now I send thee like a Be to gather honey
out of flowers and weeds. Every garden is furnished with others, and so is
ours. Read, pray, and meditate: thy profit shall be little in any book,
unless thou read alone, and unless thou read all, and record after, as the
Bereans did the sermons of Paul. It is one of the births of my fainting,
therefore take it with a right hand: and if thou find any thing that does make
thee better, I repent not that others importunity has obtained it for thee.
Farewell. As Jacob blessed his sons when he left them, so now I must leave my
fruit to others; I pray God to bless it, that it may bring forth fruit in
other, and be the savor of life to all that read it.

Thine in Christ, H. S.

THE EPISTLE TO THE TREATISE OF THE LORDS SVPPER.
IN the first sermon the adversary is confuted. In the second sermon the
Communicants are prepared: In both are many observations, and the words of
the Text expounded. Now labor for thy self as I have labored for thee: I
would have thee profit somewhat more by this book, because it has weakened me
more then all the rest.

Farewell.
The principal contents of this Treatise.
THe cause of contracts before marriage. 1 Three honors given of God to marriage.
2 Three causes of marriage. 9 Whether Ministers may marry. 12 Whether an old
man may marry a young woman, and contra. 13 Whether Protestants may marry
Papists. 31 Whether children may marry without Parents consent. 31 Whether
husbands may strike their wives. 44 Whether the use of marriage be sin. 18
Whether mothers should nurse their Children. 63 How children should be brought
up. 64 Five marks in the choice of a husband or wife. 26 The husbands duties.
40 The wives duties. 47 Their duties to their servants. 56 Their duties to
their children. 62 Three examples of good parents. 66 Of Stepmothers. 67 Of
Diuorcement. 69
Other observations that fall in handling the parts.
Marriage, the first ordinance of God, and calling of men. fol. 3 Christ's first
miracle at a marriage. 4 Three marriages of Christ. 4 By marriage the woman's curse
turned to two blessings. 5 A note of Adams sleep. 6 Another application of the
rib, whereof was made the woman. 7 The day of marriage counted the ioyfullest
day in man's life. 7 Fornicators like the devil. 12 No bastard prospered but
Iephtah. 12 A married Fornicator like a Gentleman thief. 13 A wife is the
poor man's treasure, wherein only he matcheth the rich. 16 Two spies for a
wife, discretion and fancy. 17 The wife must not only be godly but fit. 18 A
memorable saying of one that light upon a fit wife. 20 The beginning of the
ring in marriage. 20 Why marriage does come of Nuptiae. 22 Maids must speak
like an Echo. 24 A lesson for the married, drawn from the name of wedding
garment. 33 The man and wife like Cock and Dam. 32 Marriage compounded of two
loves. 36 The best policy in marriage is to begin well. 37 They must learn one
another nature. 38 A sweet example, teaching how couples shall never fall out.
39 Man and wife like two partners. 42 Abraham bid to leave all but his wife. 44
Why wives are called huswiues. 50 When the Man is away, the wife must live like
a widow. 52 Why a wife was called the contrary to a husband. 52 The cause why
many despise their Husbands.
Other observations.
Many observations upon servants. 56 The master must correct his men, and
mistress her maids. 62 Children like mediators between a man and his wife.
63 Adultery like the disease of Marriage, and diuorcement like the remedy. 70
Why adultery should dissolve marriage more then any thing else. 69 A sentence
for the married to think upon. 71
A PREPARATIVE TO MARRIAGE.
YOu are come hither to be co^tracted in the Lord, that is, of two to be made
one: for as god has knit the bones and sinews together for the strengthening
of men's bodies, so he has knit man and woman together, for the stre^gthening
of their life, because two are firmer the^ one, and therefore when God made the
woman for man, Eccle. 9 9.
he said; Genesis 2. 18.
I will make him a help: showing that man is stronger by his wife. Every
marriage before it be knit, should be co^tracted, Exo. 22. 16.
as it is showed in Exo. 22. 16. and Deu. 22. 28. which stay between the
contract and the marriage, Deu. 22. 28.
was the time of longing for their affection to settle in, Why contracts go
before marriage.
because the deferring of that which we love, does kindle the desire, which if
it came easily and speedily unto us, would make us set less by it. Mat. 1. 18.
Therefore we read how Joseph and Marie were contracted before they were
married. In the That is, between ye contract and the marriage. Luke 1. 27. and
42. and 49. etc.
contract Christ was conceived, and in the marriage Christ was borne, that he
might honor both estates: virginity with his conception, and marriage with his
birth. You are contracted but to be married, What marriage is.
therefore I pass from contracts to speak of marriage, which is nothing else
but a communion of life between man and woman, joined together according to
the ordinance of God.

First, I will show the excellency of marriage; The parts of the treatise.
then the institution of it; then the causes of it; then the choice of it; then
the duties of it; and lastly the diuorcement of it.

Well might Paul say, Marriage is honorable: Heb. 13. 4.
for God has honored it himself. It is honorable for the author, The
excellency of marriage.
honorable for the time, and honorable for the place. Whereas all other
ordinances were appointed of God by the hands of men, or the hands of Angels,
marriage was ordained by God himself, Act. 7. 53.
which cannot err. Heb. 2. 2.
No man, nor Angel, brought the wife to the husband, Genesis 2. 22.
but God him self: so marriage has more honor of God in this, then all other
ordinances of God beside, because he solemnized it himself.

Then it is honorable for the time, for it was the first ordinance that God
instituted, Marriage the first ordinance of God.
even the first thing which he did after man and woman were created, and that
in the state of innocence, before either had sinned, like the finest flower,
which will not thrive but in a clean ground. Before man had any other
calling, he was called to be a husband, therefore it has the honor of
antiquity above all other ordinances, because it was ordained first, and is
the auncientest calling of men.

Then it is honorable for the place: For whereas all other ordinances were
instituted out of Paradise, marriage was instituted in Paradise, in the happiest
place, to signify how happy they are that marry in the Lord, they do not
only marry one another, but Christ is married unto them: and so marriage has
the honor of the place above all other ordinances, because it was ordained in
Paradise.

As God the Father honored marriage, so did God the Son, Genesis 3. 15.
which is called the seed of the woman: and therefore Marriage was so honored
amongst women because of this seed, that when Elizabeth brought forth a son,
Luke 1. 25.
she said, that God had taken away her rebuke: counting it the honor of women
to bear children, and by consequence, the honor of women to be married; for
the children which are borne out of marriage, are the dishonor of women, and
called by the shameful name of Bastards. Deu 32. 2.


As Christ honored Marriage with his birth, so he honored it with his
miracles: for the first miracle which Christ did, Christ's first miracle at a
Marriage.
he wrought at a marriage in Canaan, where he turned their water into wine: so,
if Christ be at your marriage, that is, if you marie in Christ, Ioh. 2. 8.
your water shall be turned into wine, that is, your peace, and your rest, and
your joy, and your happiness shall begin with your Marriage: but if you marie
not in Christ, then your wine shall be turned into water, that is, you shall
live worse hereafter then you did before.

As he honored it with miracles, so he honored it with praises: Mat. 22. 2.
for he compares the kingdom of God to a Wedding, Verse 11.
and he compares holiness to a wedding Garment. And in the fifth of
Ca^ticles, Cant. 5. 9.
he is wedded him self.

We read in Scripture of three Marriages of Christ. Three marriages of Christ.
The first was, when Christ and our Marriage, so do Christ's Disciples: for John
calls the conjunction of Christ and the faithful, Reave. 19. 7.
a Marriage. And in the one and twentieth of the Revelation and ninth verse, Reu.
21. 9.
the Church has the name of a Bride, Reu. 17. 1.
whereas Heresy is called an harlot. By marriage the woman's curse turned into
two blessings.
Further, for the honor of Marriage, Paul shows how by it, the curse of the
woman was turned into a blessing, for the woman's curse was the pains which she
should suffer in her travail. Now by marriage this curse is turned into a
blessing: Genesis 3. 16.
for children are the first blessing in all the Scripture. Genesis 1. 28.
And therefore Christ says, that so soon as the mother sees a manchilde
borne into the world, Ioh. 16. 11.
she forgets all her sorrows, as though her curse were turned into a
blessing.

And further Paul says, 1. Tim. 2. 15
that by bearing of children, if she continue For those pains will try her
faith.
in faith and patience, she shall be saved: as though one curse were turned
into two blessings. For first, she shall have children, and after, she shall
have salvation. What a merciful God have we, whose curses are blessings? Note.
So he loved our Parents, when he punished them, that he could scarce punish
them for love, and therefore a comfort was folded in his judgment.

To honor marriage more, it is said, that God took a rib out of Adams side,
Genesis 2. 22.
and thereof built the woman. He is not said to make man a wife, but to build
him a wife: signifiing, that man and wife make (as it were) one house together,
and that the building was not perfect, until the woman was made as well as the
man, therefore if the building be not perfect now, it must be destroyed again.

Before God made the woman: it is said, that he cast the man into a sleep, A
note of Adams sleep.
and in his sleep he took a rib out of his side, and as he made man of earth,
so he made the woman of bone, Genesis 2. 21.
while Adam was a sleep.

This does teach us two things: as the first Adam was a figure of the second
Adam, so the first Adams sleep, was a figure of the second Adams sleep, 1.
Cor. 15. 22. and 45.
and the first Adams spouse, was a figure of the second Adams spouse. That is,
as in the sleep of Adam, Eve was borne, so in the sleep of Christ the church
was borne; as a bone came out of the first Adams side, so blood came out of the
second Adams side. As Adams spouse received life in his sleep, so Christ's
spouse received life in his sleep: that is, the death of Christ is the life of
the Chruch, Ephesians. 5. 14.
for the Apostle calls death a sleep: Ioh. 14. 6.
but Christ which died is called life, A note of Adams sleep.
showing that in his death we live. Secondly, this sleep which the man was cast
into, while his wife was created, does teach us, that our affections, our
lusts, and our concupiscences, should sleep while we go about this action.
As the man slept while his wife was making, so our flesh should sleep while
our wife is choosing, Genesis 27. 3.
least as the love of venison wanne Isaac to bless one for another, so the
love of gentry, or riches, or beauty, make us take one for another.

To honor marriage more yet, or rather to teach the married how to honor one
another, A note of Adams rib
it is said, that the wife was made of the husbands rib, not of his head, for
Paul calls the husband the wives head: Genesis 2. 22.
nor of the foot, Ephesians. 5. 23.
for he must not set her at his foot: the servant is appointed to serve, The
Fathers observation.
and the wife to help. If she must not match with the head, not stoop at
the foot, where shall he set her then? He must set her at his heart, and
therefore she which should lie in his bosom, was made in his bosom, and
should be as close to him as his rib, of which she was fashioned.

Lastly, in all Nations the day of marriage was reputed the ioyfullest day in
all their life, and is reputed still of all, as though the sun of happiness
began that day to shine upon us, when a good wife is brought unto us.
Therefore one says: that marriage does signify merrie-age, because a
play-fellow is come to make our age merry, as Isaac and Rebecca sported
together.

Solomon considering all these excellencies, as though we were more indebted
unto God for this, then other temporal gifts, says, House and riches are the
inheritance of the fathers, Pro. 14. 14.
but a prudent wife comes of the Lord.

House and riches are given of God, and all things else, and yet he says,
house and riches are given of parents, but a good wife is given of God: as
though a good wife were such a gift, as we should account from God alone, Thus
Adam does.
and accept it as if he should send us a present from heaven, with this name
written on it, Genesis 2.
The gift of God.

Beasts are ordained for food, and clothes for warmth, and flowers for
pleasure, but the wife is ordained for man, Genesis 29. 20.
like little Zoar, a City of refuge to fly to in all his troubles, and there
is no peace comparable unto her, but the peace of conscience.

Now it must needs be, that Marriage, which was ordained of such an excellent
author, and in such a happy place, and of such an ancient time, and after
such a notable order, must likewise have special causes for the ordinance of
it. Therefore the holy Ghost does show us three causes of this union.

One is, Three causes of marriage.
the propagation of children, signified in that when Moses says; He created
them male and female: not both male, nor both female, Genesis 2. 7.
but one male, and the other female, as if he created them fit to propagate
other. And therefore when he had created them so, to show that propagation of
children is one end of marriage, he said unto them; Genesis 1. 28.
Increase and multiply. That is, Bring forth children, as other creatures
bring forth their kind.

For this cause Marriage is called Matrimony, Why marriage is called Matrimony.
which signifies mothers, because it makes them mothers which were virgins
before: and in the seminary of the world, without which all things should be
in vain, for want of men to use them, for God reserueth the great City to
himself, and this Suburbs he has set out to us, which are Regents by sea and
by land.

If children be such a chief end of marriage, then it seems, that where there
can be no hope of children, for age and other causes, there marriage is not so
lawful, This is signified in
because it is maimed of one of his ends, and seems rather to be sought for
wealth, Deu. 23. 1.
or for lust, then for this blessing of children. It is not good grafting of an
old head upon young shoulders, for they will never bear it willingly, but
grudgingly.

Twice the wife is called The wife of thy youth, Prou. 5. 18.
as though when men are old, Mal. 2. 15.
the time of marying were past. Therefore God makes such unequal matches so
ridiculous every where, that they please none but the parties themselves.

The second cause is to avoid fornication; The second cause
this Paul signifies when he says; 1. Cor. 7. 8.
For the avoiding of fornication, let every man have his own wife. He says
not for avoiding of adultery, but for avoiding of fornication: showing that
fornication is unlawful too, which the Papists make lawful, Papists stews.
in maintaining their stews, as a stage for fornicators to play upon, and a
sanctuary to defend them, like to Absaloms tent, 2. Sa. 16. 22
which was spread upon the top of the house, that all Israel might see how he
defiled his fathers concubines.

For this cause Malachie says, Mal. 2. 15.
that God did create but one woman for the man, he had power to create more,
but to show that he would have him stick to one, therefore he created of one
ribbe, but one wife for one husband: And in the Arc there were no mo women
then men: but four wives for four husbands, although it was in the beginning
of the world, when many wives might seem necessary to multiply mankind.

If any might have a dispensation herein, it seems that Kings might be
privileged before any other, because of their succession to the Crown, if his
wife should happen to be barren: and yet the King is forbidden to take many
wives, Deu. 17. 17.
in Deuteronomy. 17. 17. as well as the minister in 1. Tim. 3. 2. showing, 1. Tim. 3.
2.
that the danger of the state does not counteruaile the danger of fornication.

For this cause we read of none but wicked Lamech before the flood, Genesis 4.
23.
that had more wives then one, whom Iouinian calls a monster, because he
made two ribs of one. And another says, that the name of his second wife
does signify a shadow, because she was not a wife, but the shadow of a wife:
For this cause the Scripture never bids man to love his wives, but to love
his wife, and says, Mat. 9. 5.
They shall be two in one flesh, not three, nor four, but only two. For this
cause king Solomon calls the whorish woman a strange woman, Prou. 2. 16.
to show that she should be a stranger unto us, and we should be strange to her.

For this cause children which are borne in marriage are called Liberi, which
signifies free borne: and they which are borne out of marriage are called
Bastardes, that is, base borne, Genesis 36. 25.
like the Mule which is engendered of an Ass and a Mare. Fornicators like the
devil.
Therefore adulterers are likened to the devil, which sowed another man's
ground, Mat. 13. 22.
other sow for a harvest, but they sow that which they dare not reap.
Therefore children borne in wedlock are counted Gods blessing, because they
come by virtue of that blessing, Psa. 128. 4.
Increase and multiply. Genesis 1. 28.
But before Adam and Eve were married, God never said, Increase, showing that he
did curse, and not bless such increase. Therefore we read not in all the
Scripture of one Bastard that came to any good, Bastards.
but only Iephtah, Judge. 11. 1.
and to show that no inheritance did belong to them in heaven, They might be
saved, but they had the mark of the curse.
they had no inheritance in earth, neither were counted of the congregation as
other were. Deuteronomy. Chap. 23. verse 2.

Now because Marriage was appointed for a remedy against fornication, therefore
the law of God inflicted a sorer punishment upon him which did commit
uncleanness after marriage, Leu. 20. 10.
then upon him which was not married, Deu. 22. 22.
because he sinned, Married fornicators.
although he had the remedy of sin, like a rich thief which steals, and
has no need.

Now if marriage be a remedy against the sin of fornication, then unless
Ministers may commit the sin of fornication, Marriage of Ministers.
it seems that they may use the remedy as well as other: for as it is better
for one man to marie then to burn, so it is better for all men to marie then
to burn: and therefore Paul says, Marriage is honorable amongst all men. 1.
Cor. 7. 9.
And again, Heb. 13. 4.
For the avoiding of fornication let every man have his wife. 1. Cor. 7.
And as though he did foresee that some would except the Minister in time to
come; in the first Epistle of Timothy, the third Chapter and second verse, he
speaks more precisely of the Ministers wife then of any other, 1. Tim. 3. 2.
saying; Let him be the husband of one wife. And least ye should say that by
one wife he means one Benefice, like the Papists; he expounds himself in
the fourth verse, and says, that he must be one that can rule his house
well, and his children.

Sure God would not have these children to be bastardes, and therefore it is
like that he allows the Minister a wife. Therefore Paul said well, 1. Cor. 7.
6.
that he had no commandment for Virginity: for Virginity cannot be
commanded, because it is a special gift, but not a special gift to
Ministers, and therefore they are not to be bound more then other. A peculiar
gift may not be made a general rule, because none can use it but they which
have it. And therefore in 1. Cor. 7. 17. he says: 1. Cor. 7. 17.
As God has distributed to every man, so let him walk. That is, if he have
not the gift of continency he is bound to marry, and therefore Paul
commands in the seventh verse, whether he be minister or other, If they can
not abstain, let them marry, as though they tempted God if they married not.

The Law was general, It is not good for man to be alone, Genesis 2. 18.
exempting one order of men no more then another. Mat. 19. 11.
And again, Christ speaking of chastity, says; All men cannot receive this
thing. Therefore, unless we know that this order of men can receive this
thing, Christ forbids to bind them more then other: and therefore as the
Priests were married that taught the Law, so Christ chose Apostles that were
married, to preach the Gospel. Therefore the doctrine of Papists is the
doctrine of devils: 1. Tim. 4. 3.
for Paul calls the forbidding of marriage, the doctrine of devils, a fit
title for all their books.

Lastly, if marriage be a remedy against sin, then Marriage it self is no
sin: for if marriage it self were a sin, Romans 3. 8.
we might not marry for any cause, because we must not do the least evil,
that the greatest good may come of it: and if marriage be not a sin, then the
Be not thou vain, and these words will not be offensive.
duties of marriage are not sin, that is, the secret of marriage is not
evil, and therefore Paul says, Heb. 13. 4.
not only Marriage is honorable: but the bed is honorable, that is, even the
action of marriage is as lawful as marriage.

Besides, 1. Cor. 7. 8.
Paul says, Let the husband give unto the wise due benevolence. Here is a
commandment to yield this duty: that which is commanded, is lawful; and
not to do it, is a breach of the commandment. Therefore marriage was
instituted before any sin was, to show that there is no sin in it, if it be
not abused: but because this is rare, therefore after women were delivered,
Leuit. 12. 4. 5. etc.
God appointed them to be purified, showing that some stain or other does
creep into this action, which had need to be repented, 1. Cor. 7. 5.
and therefore when they prayed, Paul would not have them come together, least
their prayers should be hindered.

The third cause is to avoid the inconvenience of solitariness signified in
these words, The third cause.
It is not good for man to be alone, Genesis 2.
as though he had said; this life would be miserable and irksome, and
unpleasant to man, if the Lord had not given him a wife to company his
troubles. If it be not good for man to be alone, then it is good for man to
have a fellow: therefore as God created a pair of all other kinds, so he
created a pair of this kind.

We say that one is none, because he cannot be fewer then one, he cannot be
lesser then one, he cannot be weaker then one: and therefore the wise man says;
Eccl. 4. 10.
Woe to him which is alone, that is, he which is alone shall have woe.
Thoughts, and cares, and fears, will come to him, because he has none to
comfort him, as thieves steal in when the house is empty; like a Turtle,
which has lost his mate, like one leg when the other is cut off, like one
wing when the other is clipte, so had the man been if the woman had not been
joined to him: therefore for mutual society God coupled two together, that
the infinite troubles which lie upon us in this world, might be eased with the
comfort and help one of another, and that the poor in the world might have
some comfort as well as the rich, Pro. 19. 6.
for The poor man (says Solomon) is forsaken of his own brethren, Pro. 27.
10.
yet God has provided one comforter for him, like Ionathans armor-bearer, 1.
Sam. 14. 7
that shall never forsake him, that is another self, which is the only
commodity (as I may term it) wherein the poor do match the rich: A wife is
the poor man's riches.
Without which some persons should have no helper, no comforter, no friend at
all.

But as it is not good to be alone, so Solomon shows, Prou. 21. 9.
That it is better to be alone, then to dwell with a froward wife, which is
like a quotidian ague, to keep his patient in ure. Such furies do haunt some
men, 1. Sa. 16. 14
like Saules spirit, as though the devil had put a sword into their hands
to kill themselves, therefore choose whom thou may enjoy, or live alone
still, and thou shall not repent thee of thy bargain.

That thou may take and keep without repentance, The choice.
now we will speak of the choice, which some call the way to good wives
dwelling, for these flowers grow not on every ground: therefore they say,
that in wiuing and striving, a man should take counsel of all the world, Deuteronomy.
1. 23. 4.
least he light upon a curse, while he seeks for a blessing. As Moses
considered what spies he sent into Chanaan, so thou must regard whom thou
sendest to spy out a wife for thee. Two spies for a wife.
Discretion is a wary spy, but fancy is a rash spy, and likes whom she
will mislike again.

In the Revelation Antichrist is described by a woman, and in Zachary sin is
called a woman, which shows, that women have many faults, Zach. 5. 7.
therefore he which chooses of them, had need have judgment, and make an
Anatomy of their hearts and minds, before he say, This shall be mine. For the
wisest man says; I have found one man of a thousand, but a woman among them
all have I not found. Although this may be understood of his Concubines, yet
it implies that generally there is a greater infirmity in women, than in men,
because he compares them together, as though there were a dearth of good
women over the world.

For help hereof, in 1. Cor. 7. 39. we are taught to marry in the Lord, then
we must choose in the Lord too: therefore we must begin our marriage where
Solomon began his wisdom. 1. Reg. 3. 9.
Give unto thy servant an understanding heart. So give unto thy servant an
understanding wife. Genesis 24. 12.
If Abraham's servant prayed unto the Lord to prosper his business, when he went
about to choose a wife for another, how should thou pray when thou go about
a wife for thy self, that thou may say after, My lot is fallen in a pleasant
ground? To direct thee to a right choice herein, the holy Ghost gives thee two
rules in the choice of a wife, Godly, and fit.
Godliness and fitness: Godliness, because our Spouse must be like Christ's
Spouse, that is, graced with gifts, and imbrodered with virtues, as if we
married holiness her self. For the marriage of man and woman is resembled of
the Apostle to the marriage of Christ and the Church. Ephe. 5. 29.
Now the Church is called holy, because she is holy. In the sixth of the
Canticles she is called undefiled, Cant. 6. 8.
because she is undefiled. Psalm. 45. 9.
In the 45. Psalm. she is called fair within, because her beauty is inward; 1.
Sa. 16. 7.
So our Spouse should be holy, undefiled, and fair within. As God respects
the heart, so we must respect the heart, because that must love, and not the
face. Covetousness has ever been a suitor to the richest, and pride to the
highest, and lightness to the fairest: and for revenge hereof, his joy has
ever ended with his wives youth, which took her beauty with it. The goods of
the world are good, and the goods of the body are good, but the goods of the
mind are better. 1. Cor. 13. 13.
As Paul commends Faith, Hope, and Charity, but says the greatest of these
is charity: so may I commend beauty, and riches and godliness, but the best
of these is godliness, because it has the things which it wa^ts, and makes
every state alike with her gift of contentation.

Secondly, A fit wife.
the mate must be fit: It is not enough to be virtuous, but to be suitable,
for diverse women have many virtues, and yet do not fit with some men; and
diverse men have many virtues, and yet do not fit to some women: and therefore
we see many times, even the godly couples to iar when they are married, because
there is some unfitness between them, which makes odds. What is odds, but
the contrary to even? The ceremony is not approved, but the invention declared.
therefore make them even (says one) and there will be no odds. From hence
came the first use of the Ring in weddings, to represent this evenness: for if
it be straiter then the finger, it will pinch, and if it be wider then the
finger it will fall off; but if it be fit, it neither pincheth nor slippeth:
So they which are like, strive not, but they which are unlike, as fire and
water. Therefore one observes, that concord is nothing but likeness, and all
that strife is for unfitness: as in things when they fit not together, and
in persons, when they suite not one another.

How was God pleased when he had found a King according to his own heart? 1.
Sa. 2. 35.
So shall that man be pleased that finds a wife according to his own heart,
whether he be rich or poor, his peace shall afford him a cheerful life, The
saying of a godly man.
and teach him to sing, In love is no lack. Therefore a godly man in our time
thanked the Lord that he had not only given him a godly wife, but a fit
wife: for he said not that she was the wisest, nor the holiest, nor the
humblest, nor the modestest wife in the world, but the fittest wife for him in
the world, which every man should think when that knot is tied, or else so
often as he sees a better, he will wish that his choice were to make again.
As he did thank God for sending him a fit wife, so the unmarried should pray
God to send him a fit wife: for if they be not like, they will not like.

The fitness is commended by the holy Ghost in two words: one is in the second
of Genesis, Genesis 2. 18.
and the other is in 2. Cor. 6. 14. that in Genesis is, 2. Cor. 6. 14.
Meet, God says, I will make man a help Meet for him. Showing that a wife can
not help well, unless she be meet. Further, it shows that man is such an
excellent creature, that no creature was like unto him, or meet for him, till
the woman was made.

This meetnesse God shows again, in the 22. verse, Genesis 2. 22.
where Moses says, That of the rib which was taken out of man, God built the
woman: signifying, that as one part of the building does meet and fit with
another: so the wife should meet and fit with the husband; that as they are
called couples, so they may be called paires, that is, as a pair of gloves, or
a pair of hose are like: so man and wife should be like, because they are a
pair of friends.

If thou be learned, choose one that loves knowledge; if thou be martial,
choose one that loves prowes; if thou must live by thy labor, choose one that
loves husbandry: for unless her mind stand with thy vocation, thou shall
neither enjoy thy wife nor thy calling.

That other word in 2. Cor. 6. 14. is Yoke, there Marriage is called a Yoke.
Paul says; Be not unequally yoked. If marriage be a yoke, then they which draw
in it must be fit, like two oxen which draw the yoke together, or else all the
burden will lie upon one. Therefore they are called yokefellows too, to show
that they which draw this yoke must be fellows. Phil. 4. 3.
As he which sows seed chooses a fit ground, because they say, it is good
grafting upon a good stock, so he which will have godly children, must choose a
godly wife, for like mother (says Ezechiel) like daughter. Ezec. 16. 44
Now as the traveler has marks in his way, that he may proceed aright: so
the suitor has marks in his way that he may choose right.

There be certain signs of this fitnes, Five rules in the choice of a good
wife.
and godliness, both in the man and in the woman. If thou will know a godly
man, or a godly woman, thou must mark five things: the report, the looks,
the speech, the apparel, and the companions; which are like the pulses, Psalm.
11. 26
because as the market goes, so they say the market men will talk. Pro. 10. 7.
A good man commonly has a good name, Mar. 14. 9.
because a good name is one of the blessings which God promises to good men,
but a good name is not to be praised from the wicked: and therefore Christ
says; Luke 6. 26.
Cursed are you when al men speak well of you: that is, when evil men speak
well of you, because this is a sign that you are of the world, John 15. 19
for the world likes and prayseth her own: Yet as Christ said, Who can accuse
me of sin? John 8. 46.
So it should be said of us, not who can accuse me of sin? but who can
accuse me of this sin? or who can accuse me of that sin? That is, who can
accuse me of swearing? who can accuse me of dissembling? who can accuse me
of fornication? No man can say this of his thought, but every man should say it
of the act, Luke 16.
like Zachariah and Elizabeth, which are called unblameable before men, because
none could accuse them of open sins.

The next sign is the look, for Solomon Eccle 8. 7.
Wisdom is in the face of a man, so godliness is in the face of a man, and so
folly is in the face of a man, and so wickedness is in the face of a man. And
therefore it is said in Esaias, Chapter 3. verse 9. The trial of their
countenance testifies against them. Esaias 3. 9.
As though their looks could speak, and therefore we read of proud looks,
and angry looks, and wanton looks: because they bewray pride, and anger, and
wantonness.

I have heard one say, that a modest man dwells at the sign of a modest
countenance, and an honest woman dwells at the sign of an honest face,
which is like the gate of the temple that was called Beautiful: showing, that
if the entry be so beautiful, Acts 3. 2.
within is great beauty.

To show how a modest countenance, and womanly shamefastnes do commend a chaste
wife, it is observed that the word Nuptiae, which signifies the marriage of the
woman, does declare the manner of her marriage: for it imports a covering,
because the virgins which should be married, when they came to their husbands,
for modesty and shamefastness did cover their faces: as we read of Rebeccah,
Genesis 24. 65.
which so soon as she saw Isaac, and knew that he should be her husband, she
cast a veil before her face, showing that modesty should be learned before
marriage, which is the dowry that God adds to her portion.

To Adam first and to Moses after.
for the ornament of a woman is silence: and therefore the law was given to the
man rather then to the woman, to show that he should be the teacher, and she
the hearer* Maids must speak (...)
As the Echo answers but one for many which are spoken to her, so a maids
answer should be in a word, for she which is full to talk, is not likely to
prove a quiet wife.

The eye and the speech are the minds glasses, Mat. 12. 34
for out of the abundance of the heart (says Christ) the mouth speaks: as
though by the speech we might know what abounds in the heart: Mat. 12. 36
and therefore he says: By thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy
words thou shall be condemned. That is, thou shall be justified to be wise, or
thou shall be condemned to be foolish: thou shall be justified to be sober, or
thou shall be condemned to be rash: thou shall be justified to be humble, or
thou shall be condemned to be proud: thou shall be justified to be loving, or
thou shall be condemned to be envious. Therefore Solomon says, Pro. 18. 7.
A fools lips are a snare to his own soul. Snares are made for other, but
this snare catches a man's self, because it bewraieth his folly, and causes
his trouble, and brings him into discredit. Pro. 17. 23.
Contrariwise, the heart of the wise (says Solomon) guides his mouth wisely,
Eccl. 12. 10.
and the words of his mouth have grace. Now to show that this should be one
mark in the choice of thy wife, Solomon describing a right wife, Pro 19. 15.
says; She opens her mouth with wisdom, Nu. 19. 15.
and the law of grace is in her tongue. A wife that can speak this language,
is better then she which has all the tongues. But as the open vessels were
counted unclean, so account that the open mouth has much uncleanness.

Luke 16. 19.
in that he went in purple every day, so the humility of John is noted, in
that he went in hair-cloth every day. Mar. 1. 6.
A modest woman is known by her sober attire, as the prophet Eliah was known
by his rough garment. 2. King. 1. 8.
Look not for better within, the^ thou see without: for every one seems
better then she is, if the face be vanity, the heart is pride. He which
bids thee abstain from the show of evil, would have thee to abstain from
those wives which have the shows of evil: 1 The. 5. 22
for it is hard to come in the fashion, and not to be in the abuse: and
therefore Paul says: Romans 12. 2.
Fashion not your selves like unto this world, as though the fashions of men
did declare of what side they are.

1. Reg. 12. 8.
even as young Rehoboam chose young companions. The tame beasts will not keep
with the wild, nor the clean dwell with the leprous. If a man can be known
by nothing else, then he may be known by his companions: for like will to
like, as Solomon says; Thieves call one another. Therefore when David left
iniquity, Pro. 1. 11.
he said; Away from me all ye that work iniquity: Psalm. 6. 8.
showing, that a man never abandoneth evil, until he abandon evil company:
for no good is concluded in this Parliament. Therefore choose such a companion of
thy life, as has chosen company like thee before. For they which did choose
such as loved profane companions before, in a while were drawn to be
profane too, that their wives might love them. All these properties are not
spied at three or four commings, for hypocrisy is spun with a fine thread,
and none are so often deceived as lovers. He which will know al his wives
qualities before he be married to them, must see her eating, and walking, and
working, and playing, and talking, and laughing, and chiding, or else he shall
have less with her then he looked for, or more then he wished for.

When these rules are warily observed, they may join together, and say as
Laban and Bethuel said; Genesis 24. 50.
This comes of the Lord, therefore we will not speak against it. How happy
are those, in whom Faith, and Love, and Godliness are married together before
they marie themselves? For none of these martial, and cloudie, and whining
marriages can say, that Godliness was invited to their Bridal; and therefore
the blessings, which are promised to godliness, do fly from them.

Now in this choice are two questions. Parents consent in Marriage.
First, whether children may marry without their parents consent: Second,
whether they may marry with Papists or Atheists, etc. Touching the first,
Exodus 20.
God says: Honor thy father and thy mother. Now, wherein can thou honor
them more, then in this honorable action, to which they have preserved thee,
and brought thee up, which concerns the state of thy whole life? Again, in
the first institution of Marriage, when there was no father to give consent,
the^ our heavenly father gave his consent: Genesis 2. 22.
God supplied the place of the Father, and brought his daughter unto her
husband, and ever since the father after the same manner, has offered his
daughter unto the husband.

Beside, there is a law, that if a man defloure a virgin, Exodus 22.
he shall marry her: but if the father of the virgin do not like of the
marriage, then he shall pay unto her the dowry of virgins, that is, so much as
her virginity is esteemed, so that the father might allow the marriage, or
forbid it.

Again, Number. 30. 6.
there is a law, that if any free man, or free woman make a vow, it must be
kept. But if a virgin make a vow, it should not be kept, unless her father
approve it, because she is not free: therefore if she did vow to marry, yet
the father has power by this law to break it. Again, our Savior says, that
in heaven there is no marrying, nor giving to marriage, showing that in earth
there should be a giving to marriage, as well as marrying. Therefore the law
speaks unto the father, saying. Deuteronomy. 7. 3.
Thou shall not take a wife for thy son of strangers. Therefore Paul speaks
to the father, 1. Cor. 7. 38.
If thou give thy daughter to marriage, thou do well. Job. 1. 3. and 10.
Therefore Jobs children are counted part of Jobs substance, showing, that as a
man has the disposition of his own substance, so he has the disposition of
his own children. Therefore in Mat. 22. 30. the wife is said to be bestowed in
marriage, which signifies, that some did give her beside her self: therefore
it is said, Genesis 29. 18.
that Jacob served Laban, (...) Laban might give him his daughter to wife. 1 Samuel 18. 17. ^
Therefore Saul says to David, I will give thee mine eldest daughter to wife:
Gen 28. 6.
therefore it is said that Judah took a wife to Er his son. Genesis 34. 9.
Therefore Sichem says to his Father, Genesis 24. 51. 52. 53.
get me this maid to wife. Therefore in the marriage of Isaac, we see Abraham's
servant in the place of Isaac, and Rebecca the maid and her parents, Judge. 14 2.
sitting in Parliament together: therefore Sampson, though he had found a maid
to his liking, yet he would not take her to wife, before he had told his
parents, and craved their assent. It is a sweet wedding, when the father and
the mother bring a blessing to the feast: and a heavy union which is cursed
the first day that it is knit.

The parents commit their children to Tutors, but themselves are more then
Tutors. If children may not make other contracts without their good will, shall
they contract marriage, which have nothing to maintain it after, unless they
return to beg of them whom they scorned before.

Will you take your fathers money, and will you not take his instruction? Marriage
has need of many Counselors, and do thou count thy father too many, which
is like the foreman of thy instructors? If you mark what kind of youths they
be, which have such have, that they dare not stay for their parents advise,
they are such as hunt for nothing but beauty, and for punishment hereof they
marry to beggerie, and lose their father and mother for their wife: Therefore
honor thy parents in this, as thou would that thy children should honor
thee.

The second question is answered of Paul, when he says: Be not unequally
yoaked with Infidels. As we should not be yoked with Infidels, so we should not
be yoked with Papists, Marriage with Papists, etc.
and so we should not be yoked with Atheists, for that also is to be unequally
yoked, Genesis 24. 3.
unless we be Atheists too. As the Jews might not marry with the Chananites,
Exo. 34. 16.
so we may not marry with them, Genesis 28. 1.
which are like Chananites, Mal. 2. 11.
but as the sons of Jacob said unto Emor, Ezra. 9. 12.
which would marry their sister; Genesis 34. 14.
We may not give our sister to a man uncircumcised, The similitude holds in
their saying, and not in their meaning, for they spoke truly, but they meant
falsely.
but if you will be circumcised like us, then we will marry with you.

So parents should say to suitors, I may not give my daughter to a man
unsanctified, but if you will be sanctified, then I will give my daughter unto
you. Though heresy and irreligion be not a cause of divorce, as Paul teaches,
yet it is a cause of restraint, for we may not marry all, with whom we may live
being married. If adultery may separate marriage, shall not idolatry hinder
marriage, which is worse than it? Mat. 29. 6.
Christ says; Let no man separate whom God has joined, Mark. 10. 9
so I may say, Let no man join whom God does separate. For if our father must
be pleased with our marriage, much more should we please that Father which
ordained marriage.

Shall I say, Be my wife, to whom I may not say, Esaias. 52. 11
Be my companion? Or, Come to my bed, to whom I may not say, Come to my table?
How should my marriage speed well, 2. John. 10.
when I marry one to whom I may not say, God speed, because she is none of
Gods friends?

If a man long for a bad wife, he were best go to hell a wooing, that he may
have choice. Is there no friend but the enemy? no tree but the forbidden tree?
He marries with the devil, which marries with the tempter: for Tempter is
his name, Matt. 4. 3.
and to tempt is his nature. When a man may choose, he should choose the best,
but this man chooses the worst, like them which call good evil, and evil
good.

He prays Not to be lead into temptation, Luke 11. 4.
and leads himself into temptation. Surely he does not fear sin, which
does not shun occasions, and he is worthy to be snared which makes a trap
for himself. When Solomon, 1. Reg. 11. 1. etc.
the mirror of wisdom, the wonder of the world, the figure of our Lord, by
Idolatrous concubines is turned to an Idolater, let no man say, I shall not be
seduced: but say, how shall I stand, where such a Cedar fell? The wife must be
meet, as God said, Genesis 2. 18. But how is she meet, if thou be a christian and
she a Papist? We must marry in the Lord as Paul says, 1. Cor. 7. 39.
but how do we marry in the Lord, when we marry the Lords enemies? Our
spouse must be like Christ's spouse, but Christ's spouse is neither harlotte, nor
heretic, nor atheist. If she be poor, the Lord reproves not for that; if she
be weak, the Lord reproves not for that; if she be hard favored, the Lord
reproves not for that; all these wants may be dispensed with: but none gives
any dispensation for godliness but the devil. Therefore they which take that
privilege, are like them which seek to witches, and are guilty of preferring
evil before good. This unequal marriage, Genesis 3. 4.
was the chief cause that brought the flood, and the first beginning of
Giants, and monstrous births, showing by their monstrous children what a
monstrous thing it is, Genesis 6. 2.
for believers and unbelievers to match together.

In Matthew. 22. Christ shows, that before parties married, they were wont to
put on fair and new garments, Mat. 22. 11
which were called Wedding garments, a warning unto all which put on wedding
garments, Wedding garment.
to put on truth and holiness too, which so precisely is resembled by that
garment more then other. It is noted in the fourteenth of Luke, that of all
them which were invited to the Lords banquet, Note.
and came not only he which had married a wife, Luke 14. 21.
did not desire to be excused, but said stoutly, I cannot come. Showing how
this state does occupy a man most, and draw him often from the service of
God: and therefore we had not need to take the worst, for the best are
combersome enough. In the second of Job, Job. 2. 9. and 3. 1.
it is observed of the patient man, that he did not curse the day of his birth,
until his wife brake forth into blasphemy, showing, that wicked women are
able to change the stedfastest man, more then all temptations beside. Sampson
would take a Philistian to wife, Judge. 14.
but he lost his honor, his strength, and his life by her, least any should do
the like.

But what a notable warning is that in the 2. Chro. 21. 6. where the holy Ghost
says: 2. Chro. 21. 6
Iehoram walked in the ways of Ahad, for he had the daughter of Ahad to wife,
as though it were a miracle if he had been better then he was, because his
wife was a temptation. Miserable is that man which is fettered with a woman
that likes not his Religion, she will be nibling at his prayer, and at his
study, and at his meditations, till she have tired his devotions, and turned
the edge of his soul, as David was tired of his malapert Michol, 2. Sa. 6. 16.
she mocked him for his zeal, and liked herself in her folly. Many have
fallen at this stone: Luke 16. 32.
Therefore as Christ says: Remember Lots wife; so when thou marriest, remember
Iehorams wife, and be not wedded to her which has not the Wedding garment:
but let unity go first, and let union follow after, and hope not to convert
her, but fear that she will pervert thee, least thou say after like him which
should come to the Lords banquette, I have married a wife, Luke 14. 20.
and cannot come. Luke 14. 20.

Yet the chiefest point is behind, The duties of marriage
that is, our duties. The duties of marriage may be reduced to the duties of
man and wife one toward another, and their duties toward their children, and
their duty toward their servants. For themselves, says one, they must think
themselves like two birds, Pro. 31. 26.
the one is the cock, The man and wife like Cock and dam*
and the other is the dam: the cock flies abroad to bring in, and the dam
sits upon the nest to keep all at home. So God has made the man to travel
abroad, and the woman to keep home: and so their nature, and their wit, and
their strength, are fitted accordingly; for the man's pleasure is most abroad,
and the woman's within.

In every State there is some one virtue which belongs to that calling more
than other: as Justice unto Magistrates, and Knowledge unto Preachers, and
Fortitude unto Soldiers: so Love is the Marriage virtue, which signs Music
to their whole life.

Wedlock is made of two loves, which I may call the first love, Marriage
compounded of two loves.
and the after love. As every man is taught to love God before he be bid to
love his neighbor; so they must love GOD before they can love one another.

To show the love which should be between man and wife, Marriage is called
Coniugium, which signifies a knitting or joining together: showing, that
unless there be a joining of hearts, and a knitting of affections together, it
is not Marriage in deed, but in show and name, and they shall dwell in a house
like two poisons in a stomach, and one shall ever be sick of another.

Therefore, first that they may love, and keep love one with another, it is
necessary that they both love God, and as their love increases toward him, so
it shall increase each to other. But the man must take heed that his love
toward his wife be not greater than his love toward God, Genesis 3. 6.
as Adam and Sampsons were, Judge 16. 17
for all unlawful love will turn to hatred, as the love of Amon did toward
Thamar, 2. Sa. 13. 15
and because Christ has forbidden it, therefore he will cross it. This made
Vriah so fearful, Mat. 10. 36
least the pleasure of his wife should withdraw his heart from God, that he
would not go to his own house, so long as he had cause to mourn and pray,
although he had a wife which feared God like himself: and that you may see it
is no cheap dalliance for the husband to make the wife, or the wife to make
the husband less zealous then they were. In Deuteronomy. 13. the wife which did draw
her husband from God is condemned to die: therefore good wives, when their
husbands purpose any good, should encourage them like Jacobs wife, Genesis 30. 16.
which bade him do according to the word of God, and if they see them minded to
do any evil, they should stay them, Mat. 17. 19
like the wife of Pylate, which counsayled her husband not to condemn Christ.
For seeing holiness is called the Wedding garment, Mat. 22. 11
who shall wear this wedding garment, if they wear it not which are wedded?
When one holy has found another, then the holiest seems to make the Marriage,
and his angels come to the feast.

To pass over sleights which seldom prosper, unless they have some warrant.
The best policy in marriage is to begin well, Best policy in marriage to
begin well.
for as boords well joined at the first, sit close ever after, but if they
square at the first, they warpe more and more: So they which are well joined,
are well married, but they which offend their love before it be settled, fade
every day like a Marigold, which closes her flower as the sun goes down,
til they hate one another more then they loved at first.

To begin this concord well, They must learn one another nature.
it is necessary to learn one another nature, and one another affections,
and one another infirmities, because ye must be helpers, and ye cannot help
unless you know the disease. All the iarres almost which do trouble this
band, do rise of this, that one does not hit the measure of the others heart,
to apply themselves to eithers nature, whereby it comes to pass, that
neither can refrain when either is offended; but one sharpeneth another, when
they had need to be calmed. Therefore they must learn of Paul to fashion
themselves one to the other, 1. Cor. 9. 20.
if they would win one another, and if any jar do arise, one says; in no
wise divide beds for it, for then the sun goeth-down upon their wrath, Ephe.
4. 25.
and the means of reconcilement is taken away. Give passions no times, for if
some man's anger stand but at night, it turns to malice which is incurable.

The Apostle says, 1. Cor. 11. 19
that there will be offenses in the church: so sure there will be many offenses
in marriage: but as he says, these are trials who have faith, so these are but
trials who are good husbands, and who are good wives. His anger must be such a
mood, as if he did chide with himself, and their strife as it were a sauce
made of purpose to sharpe^ their love when it waxes unpleasant: like
Ionathans arrows which were not shot to hurt, 1. Sa. 20. 20
but to give warning. A sweet example teaching how couples shall never fall out.
Knowing once a couple which were both choleric, and yet never fell out, I
asked the man how they did order the matter, that their infirmity did not make
them discord. He answered me, when her fit is upon her I yield to her, as
Abraham did to Sara; Genesis 16. 6.
and when my fit is upon me, she yields to me, and so we never strive together,
but asunder. Me thought it was a good example to commend unto all married
folks: for every one has his frenzy and loves them that can bear his
infirmity. Whom will a woman suffer, if she will not suffer her husband? and
whose defects will a man bear, if he will not bear hers which bears his?
Thus much of their duties in general, now to their several offices.

The man may spell his duty out of his name, Ephe. 5. 23.
for he is called the Head: to show, that as the eye, and the tongue, and the
ear, are in the head, to direct the whole body: so the man should be stored
with wisdom, and understanding, and knowledge, and discretion, to direct his
whole family: for it is not right that the worse should rule the better, but
the better should rule the worse, as the best rules all. The husband says,
that his wife must obey him because he is her better, therefore if he let her
be better than himself, he seems to free her from her obedience, and bind
himself to obey her.

His first duty is called Harting, The husbands first duty.
that is, hearty affection. As they are hand, fasted, so they must be
heart-fasted, for the eye, and the tongue, and the hand, will be her enemies,
if the heart be not her friend. As Christ draws all the commandments to
love, so I may draw all their duties to love, which is the hearts gift to the
bride at her marriage. First, he must choose his love, and then he must love
his choice: this is the oil which makes all things easy. In Salomons song,
which is nothing else but a description of Christ the Bridegroom, and the
Church his spouse, one calls the other Love, to show, that though both do
not honor alike, yet both should love alike, which the man may do without
subjection.

The man is to his wife in the place of Christ to his Church: Understand in his
Marriage only.
therefore the Apostle requires such an affection of him toward his Spouse,
as Christ bears toward his Spouse: Ephe. 5. 25.
for he says; Husbands love your wives, as Christ loved his Congregation,
that is, with a holy love, and with a hearty love, and with a constant love,
as the Church would be loved of Christ. Will not a man love his glory? 1. Cor.
11. 7.
Why Paul calls the woman the glory of the man, for her reverence makes him
to be reverenced, and her praise makes him to be praised. Therefore he which
loves not his wife, loves his shame, because she is his glory. Ephe. 5. 28.
Ephesians. 5. 28. Paul says, He which loves his wife, loves himself, for
thereby he enjoys peace and comfort, and help to himself in all his
affairs: therefore in the same verse Paul counsels husbands to love their
wives as their bodies. And after in the 33. verse, as though it were too little
to love them as their bodies, Leui. 19. 18
he says: Let every one love his wife as himself, that is, as his body and
soul too. For if God commanded men to love their neighbors as themselves,
much more are they bound to love their wives as themselves which are their next
neighbors. As Elkanah did not love his wife less for her barrenness, but
said, 1. Sam. 1. 8.
Am not I better unto thee then ten sons? as though he favored her more,
for that which she thought her self despised. So a good husband will not take
occasion to love his wife less for her infirmities, but comfort her more for
them, as this man did, that she may bear with his infirmities too.

When Christ says, Mar. 10. 7.
that a man should leave father and mother, and cleave to his wife, he
signifies how Christ left his father for his spouse, and that man does not
love his wife so much as he should, until he affect her more then ever he did
his father or mother. Therefore when God bad Abraham forsake all his kindred,
Genesis 21. 1.
yet he bad him not forsake his wife: as though the other sometime might be
forsaken for God, but the wife must be kept for God, like a charge which
binds for term of life.

His next duty to love, The husbands second duty.
is a fruit of his love: that is, to let all things be common between them,
which were private before. The man and wife are partners, Man and wife are two
partners.
like two oars in a boat, therefore he must divide offices and affairs, and
goods with her, causing her to be feared and reverenced, and obeyed of her
children and servants like himself, for she is an under officer in his
Commonweal, and therefore she must be assisted and borne out like his
deputy, as the Prince stands with his magistrates for his own quiet,
because they are the legs which bear him up. To show this community between
husband and wife, he is to maintain her as he does himself, because Christ
says, Mar. 10. 8.
They are no more two but one.

Therefore when he mayntaineth her, he must think it but one charge, because
he mayntaineth no more but himself, for they two are one. He may not say as
husbands are wont to say, That which is thine is mine, and that which is mine
is mine own; but that which is mine is thine and my self too. For as it is
said, Romans 8 32.
He which has given us his son, can he deny us any thing? So she may
say, he which has given me himself, can he deny me any thing? The body
is better then the goods, therefore if the body be mine, the goods are mine
too.

Lastly, The husbands last duty.
he must tender her as much as all her friends, because he has taken her from
her friends, and couenaunted to tender her for them all. To show how he should
tender her, 1. Pet. 3. 7.
Peter says, Honor the woman as the weaker vessel. As we do not handle
glasses like pots, because they are weaker vessels, but touch them nicely and
softly, for fear of crackes, so a man must entreat his wife with gentleness
and softness, not expecting that wisdom, nor that faith, nor that patience,
nor that strength in the weaker vessel, which should be in the stronger; but
think when he takes a wife, he takes a vineyard, not grapes, but a vineyard to
bear him grapes: therefore he must sow it, and dress it, and water it, and
fence it, and think it a good vineyard, if at last it bring forth grapes. So
he must not look to find a wife without a fault, but think that she is
committed to him to reclaim her from her faults; for all are defectiues: and
if he find the proverb true, That in space comes grace, he must rejoice as
much at his wife when she amendeth, as the Husbandman reioiceth when his
Vineyarde begins to fructify.

This is far from civil wars between man and wife; Husbands must hold
their hands and wives their tongues.
in all his offices is found no office to fight. If he cannot reform his wife
without beating he is worthy to be beaten for choosing no better: when he
has used all means that he may, and yet she is like her self, he must
take her for his cross, and say with Jeremy, This is my cross, and I will
bear it. But if he strike her, he takes away his hand from her, which was the
first part he gave her to join them together: and she may put up her
complaint against him, that he has taken away part of her goods. Her cheeks
are made for thy lips, and not for thy fists.

The very name of a wife is like the Angel which stayed Abraham's hand, Genesis
21. 11.
when the stroke was coming. If David, because he could not express the good
and comfort of unity, was feign to say, Psalm. 133. 1
Oh how good and joyful a thing it is, for brethren to dwell together in
unity! Then weigh and judge how harsh and bitter a thing it is, for man and
wife to dwell together in enmity. For the first year after marriage, Deuteronomy. 24
9.
God would not have the husband go to war with his enemies but no year
would he have him war with his wife, and therefore God gave him that year to
stay at home and settle his love, that he might not war, nor jar after: for
the God of peace dwells not in the house of war. Mat. 12. 29
As a kingdom cannot stand if it be divided, so a house cannot stand if it be
divided: for strife is like fire which leaves nothing but dust, and smoke, and
ashes behind it. We read in the Scriptures, of masters that stroke their
servants, but never of any that stroke his wife, but rebuked her. Genesis 19. 33.
Lot was drunk when he lay with his daughter in stead of his wife, and so is
he which strikes his wife in stead of his servant. The law shows how a bond
man should be corrected, but the wife is like a judge, which is joined in
commission with her husband to correct other. Deuteronomy. 23. 2.
Will thou strike one in his own house? no more should thou strike thy wife
in her house. She is come to thee as to a sanctuary to defend her from hurt,
and can thou hurt her thy self? Therefore Abraham was called Saras veil,
Genesis 20. 16.
because he should shield her; for a veil is made to save. Abraham said to
Lot, Genesis 13. 8.
Are we not brethren? that is, may brethren jar? But they may say, Are we not
one? can one chide with another? can one fight with another? He is a badde
host, that welcomes his guest with stripes. Does a King trample his Crown?
Pro. 12. 4.
Solomon calls the wife, The crown of her husband: therefore he which
wounds her, wounds his own honor. She is a free Citizen in thine own
house, and has taken the peace of thee the first day of her marriage to hold
thy hands, till she release thee again. Genesis 2. 23.
Adam says of his spouse, This is flesh of my flesh, Ephe. 5. 19.
But no man (says Paul) ever hated his own flesh. So then, if a man ask
whether he may strike his wife, GOD says nay; thou may not hate thy wife,
for no man hates his own flesh: showing, that he should not come near
blows, but think his wrath too much: Col. 3. 16.
for Paul says, Be not bitter to your wives, noting that anger in a husband
is a vice.

Does the cock spur the hen? Every man is ashamed to lay his hands on a
woman, because she cannot match him, therefore he is a shameless man which
lays hands on his wife. The hand does not buffet his own cheek, but stroke
it. If a man be seen raging with himself, he is carried to Bedlem: so these
mad men which beat themselves, should be sent to Bedlem till their madness
be gone. Pro. 5. 16.
Solomon says, Delight continually in her love: that is, begin, proceed, and
end in love. In revenge whereof, he shows that delight is gone, because he
calls love their delight. 1. Tim. 3. 3^
Therefore as Paul says of Bishops; A Bishop must be no striker: Of his wife
so a husband must be no striker: Leu. 19. 28.
for he which strikes his own flesh, Deuteronomy. 14. (...).
breaks that law which says, 1. King. 18. 28.
Thou shall not make a skarre in thy flesh: and is like the Baalites, It is
properlyment in mourning for the dead, but it does imply an unlawfulness to
hurt our selves.
which wounded their own bodies. Thus we have sent a letter unto husbands to
read before they fight. Now let us go home to love again. Would thou learn
how to make thy match delightful? Solomon said, Rejoice in her love
continually. As though thou could not delight without love, and with love
thou may delight continually. Therefore love is called the thankful virtue,
Prou. 5. 19.
because it rendereth peace and ease, and comfort to them that makes of her. So
much to husbands.

Likewise the woman may learn her duty of her names. The woman's duties.
They are called goodwiues, as good wife A. and goodwife B. Every wife is
called a good wife, therefore if they be not good wives, their names do belie
them, and they are not worth their titles, but answer to a wrong name, as
plaiers do upon a stage. This name pleases them well: Phil. 4. 3.
but beside this, a wife is called a Yoake-fellow, to show that she should
help her husband to bear his yoke, that is, his grief must be her grief;
and whether it be the yoke of poverty, or the yoke of envy, or the yoke of
sickness, or the yoke of imprisonment, she must submit her neck to bear it
patiently with him, or else she is not his yoak-fellow, but his yoke, as though
she were inflicted upon him for a penalty, Job. 2. 9.
like to Jobs wife, whom the devil left to torment him, when he took away
all he had beside. Romans 12. 19
The Apostle bids to Rejoice with them that rejoice, and mourn with them
that mourn. With whom should the wife rejoice, rather then with her husband?
or with whom should she mourn, rather then with her own flesh? 2. King. 2. 6.
I will not leave thee, says Elisha to Eliah: so she should never leave him
till death. Gal. 6. 2.
Bear one another burden, says Paul, who shall bear one another burden,
if the wife do not bear the husbands burden? 1. King. 21. 5.
Wicked Iezabell comforted her husband in his sickness, 1. Kin. 14 4.
and Ieroboams wife sought for his health, though she was as bad as he. God did
not bid Sarah leave her father, and her country, as he bad her husband; yet
because he bad Abraham leave his, Genesis 12. 1.
she left hers too: showing that she was content, not only to be his
play-fellow, but his yoake-fellow too.

Beside a yoke fellow, Genesis 2. 18.
she is called a helper, to help him in his business, to help him in his
labors, to help him in his troubles, to help him in his sickness: like a
woman Physician, sometime with her strength, and sometime with her counsel: 1.
Cor. 1. 27.
for sometime as God confounds the wise by the foolish, and the strong by the
weak: so he teaches the wise by the foolish, and helps the strong by the
weak.

Therefore Peter says, 1. Pet. 3. 1.
Husbands are won by the conversation of their wives. As if he should say,
sometime the weaker vessel is the stronger vessel, Genesis 25. 2.
and Abraham may take counsel of Sara, 2. King. 5. 8.
as Naaman was advised by his servant. 2. Kin. 6. 10.
The Shunamites counsel made her husband receive a Prophet into his house, and
Hesters counsel made her husband spare the Church: Hest. 7. 3.
so some have been better helpers to their husbands, then their husbands
have been to them, for it pleases God to provoke the wise with the foolish,
as he did the Jews with the Gentiles.

Beside a helper, Pro. 5. 18.
she is called a Comforter too, and therefore the man is bid rejoice in his
wife: which is as much to say, that wives must be the rejoicing of their
husbands, even like David's harp to comfort Saul. 1. Sa. 16. 23
Therefore it is said of Rebeccah, that she prepared meat for her husband,
Genesis 27. 9.
such as he loved; so a good wife is known when her words, and deeds, and
countenances are such as her husband loves she must not examine whether he be
wise or simple, but that she is his wife: and therefore they which are bound
must obey, as Abigail loved her husband though he were a fool: 1. Sa. 25. 3.
for the wife is as much despised for taking rule over her husband, as he for
yielding it unto her. Therefore one says, that a mankind woman is a monster,
that is, half a woman, and half a man. It becomes not the mistress to be
master, no more than it beseems the master to be mistress, but both to
sail with their own wind.

Lastly, we call the wife Huswife: that is, house-wife, Genesis 38. 14.
not a street wife, like Thamar, nor a field-wife, Genesis 34. 2.
like Dinah: Why wives are called huswies.
but a house-wife, to show that a good wife keeps her house, and therefore
Paul bids Titus to exhort women that they be chaste, and keeping at home:
Tit. 2. 5.
presently after Chaste, he says keeping at home, as though home were
chastities keeper. And therefore Solomon depainting the whore, Pro. 7. 12.
sets her at the door, now sitting upon her stalles, now walking in the
streets, now looking out at the windows, like cursed Iezabel; as if she held
forth the glass of temptation, 2. Reg. 9. 30
for Vanity to gaze upon. But chastity cares to please but one, and
therefore she keeps her closet, as if she were still at prayer. Genesis 18. 9.
The Angel asked Abraham, Where is thy wife? Abraham answered, She is in the
Tent. The Angel knew where she was, but yet he asked, that we might see how
women in old time did keep their tents and houses. It is recorded of the
Shunamite that she did ask her husband leave to go unto the Prophet, 2. Reg.
9. 30
though she went to a Prophet, and went of a good errand, and for his cause as
much as her own, yet she thought it not meet to go far abroad without her
husbands leave.

Phidias when he should paynt a woman, painted her sitting under a Snailes
shell, signifying, that she should go like a snaile, which carries his house
upon his back. Solomon bad Shimei, 1. Reg. 2. 36. 37.
Go not beyond the river: so a wife should teach her feet, go not beyond the
door: Husbands should not keep their wives so strait, but ^iues should not
think their house their prison, but as their paradise where they would be.
she must count the walls of her house like the bands of the river which
Shimei might not pass if he would please the king.

For when Adam was away. Eve was made a pray: if her husband be from her,
until he return again she must think her self a widow, that is, separate
from man; for Vidua does signify, A viro diuisa: that is, widow does signify
divided from man: therefore now she must have no fellowship, nor company with
men, because she is divided from man.

As it becomes her to keep home, so it becomes her to keep silence, and
always speak the best of her head. Other seek their honor in triumph, but she
must seek her honor in reverence, for it becomes not any woman to set light
by her husband, nor to publish his infirmities. For they say that is an evil:
A wife may not utter her husbands faults.
bird that defiles her own nest, and if a wife use her husband so, how may
the husband use the wife? Because this is the quality of that sex, to
overthwart, and vpbraide, and sue the pre-eminence of their husbands, therefore
the Philosophers could not tell how to define a wife, A wife the contrary to a
husband.
but called her, The contrary to a husband, as though nothing were so cross
and contrary to a man, as a wife. This is not scripture, but no slander to
many.

As David exalted the love of women above all other loves, 2. Sa. 1. 26.
so Solomon mounteth the envy of women above all other enuies: Pro. 21. 19.
stubborn, sullen, taunting, gainsaying, outfacing, with such a bitter humor,
that one would think they were molten out of the salt pillar, Genesis 19. 26
into which Lots wife was transformed. We say not al are alike, but this sect
has many Disciples. Genesis 2. 20.
Does the ribbe that is in man's side fret or gaul him? no more then should
she which is made of the rib.

Though a woman be wise, and painful, and have many good parts, yet if she
be a shrow, her troublsome iarring in the end will make her honest behavior
unpleasant, as her ouer-pinching at last causes her good huswiferie to be
evil spoken of. Therefore although she be a wife, yet sometimes she must
observe the servants lesson, Tit. 2. 9.
Not answering again, and hold her peace, to keep the peace. Therefore they
which keep silence, are well said to hold their peace, because silence
oftentimes does keep the peace, when words would break it.

To her silence and patience, she must add The acceptable obedience, which
makes a woman rule while she is ruled. This is the wives tribute to her
husband: for she is not called his head, but he is called her head. Great
cause has man to make much of his wife, for great and many are her duties to
him, for Paul says; Ephesians. 5. 23
Wives submit your selves unto your husbands, as to the Lord. Showing that she
should regard his will as the Lords will, How far the wife should obey.
but withal, as the Lord commands only that which is good and right, so she
should obey her husband in good and right, or else she does not obey him as the
Lord, but as the tempter. The first subjection of woman began at sin: for
when God cursed her for seducing her husband, Genesis 3. 16.
when the Serpent had seduced her, he said, He shall have authority over thee.
And therefore as the man named all other creatures, Genesis 2. 20.
in sign that they should be subject to him, as a servant which comes when
his master calls him by his name: so did he name the woman also, Verse 23.
in token that she should be subject to him likewise. And therefore Assuerus
made a law, Hest. 1. 20. 22.
that every man should bear rule in his own house, and not the woman, Number.
30. 7.
because she sinned first, therefore she is humbled most: Judge. 19. 26
and ever since, the daughters of Sara are bound to call their husbands Lords,
Genesis 18. 12
as Sara called her husband: that is, to take them for their Lords, 1. Pet. 3.
6.
for heads and governors. If ye disdain to follow Abraham's spouse, the apostle
bids you follow Christ's spouse: Ephesians. 5. 24.
for he says; Let a wife, be subject to her husband, as the church is to
Christ. A greater love then this (says Christ) no man can have So a better
example then this, John 15. 13
no woman can have. That the wife may yield this reverence to her husband, The
cause why many despise their husbands.
Paul would have her attire to be modest and orderly, for garish apparel has
taught many gossips to disdain their husbands. This is the folly of some men,
to lay all their pride upon their wives, 1. Tim. 2. 9.
they care not how they slouen themselves, so their wives iette like Peacockes.
1. Pet. 3. 5.
But Peter does commend Sara for her attire, and not Abraham, showing that
women should brave it no more then men, Genesis 3. 21.
and God made Eues coat of the same cloth that he made Adams. Ger. 3. 7.
They covered themselves with leaves, and God derided them, but now they cover
themselves with pride, like Satan which is fallen down before them like
lightning, Luke 10. 18.
ruff upon ruff, lace upon lace, cut upon cut, four and twenty orders, until
the woman be not so precious as her apparel: that if any man would picture
Vanity, he must take a pattern of women, or else he cannot draw her likeness.
Mat. 14. 6.
As Herodias was worse for her fine dancing: so a woman may have too many
ornaments, frisled locks, naked breasts, painting, perfume, and especially a
rolling eye are the forerunners of adultery, and he which has such a wife,
has a fine plague. Once women were married without dowries, because they were
well nurtured, but now if they weighed not more in gold then in godliness,
many should sit like Nuns without husbands. Thus we have shadowed the man's
duties to his wife, and the woman's to her husband.

After their duties one to another, Their duties to their servants.
they must learn their duties to their family. One compares the master of
the house to the Seraphin, Esaias. 6. 6.
which came and kindled the prophets zeal: so he should go from wife to
servants, and from servants to children, and kindle the^ in the zeal of God,
longing to teach his knowledge, as a Nurse to empty her breasts. Another says,
Revel. 5. 10.
that a master in his family has all the offices of Christ, for he must
rule, and teach, and pray; rule like a king, and teach like a prophet, and pray
like a Priest. To show how a godly man should behave himself in his household:
when the holy Ghost speaks of the conversion of any housekeeper, Acts 16. 13
and 18. 8.
lightly he says, That the man believed, with all his household.

As Peter being converted, Luke 22. 23.
must convert his brethren; so the master being converted, must convert his
servants. For therefore God said, that he would not hide his counsel from
Abraham, because he would teach his family, and surely all duty which is not
done of conscience, is but ey-seruice, and fails at most need. as Ziba
betrayed his master, when he should have defended him. Therefore before
Onesimus was converted, Paul said he was an unprofitable servant, Phil. 18.
but when he was converted, he calls him more then servant, because such a
servant is better then many servants.

Therefore though Laban was wicked himself, Genesis 29. 27.
yet he rejoiced that Jacob his servant was godly, because God blessed him
better for him. Josh. 14. 55
Joshua says: I and my household will serve the Lord. Showing, that masters
should receive none into their houses, but whom they can govern, as Joshua
did: and if any have crept into their doors, then they must put him forth
again, for David says: I will not suffer a liar to stay in my house, Psalm.
101. 7. He says not, a swearer, nor a thief, but a liar, as if he should
say, I will rid him out of my doors before he be a swearer, and a thief, for
a liar will grow to a swearer and a thief in a day, as a Dicer grows to a
beggar in a night. Therefore it is noted of Cornelius, Acts 10. 2.
that all his household served God himself. This is reported also of Joseph and
Marie for an example, that they went up every year with all their families,
Luke 2. 41.
to worship at Jerusalem, that their children, and their servants might learn
to know God as well as they. These examples be written for householders, as
others are for magistrates and ministers and soldiors, that no calling might
seek further then the Scripture for instruction. Wherefore as you are masters
now, and they your servants instruct them, and train them, as if you would show
what masters they should be hereafter.

After the care of their souls, they must care for their bodies: Luke 10. 7.
for if the laborer is worthy of his hire which labors but a day; what is
the servant worth, which labors every day? Philem. 17.
Therefore Paul is so earnest with Philemon to make much of Onesimus his
servant, that he desires Philemon to receive him as he would himself.
Therefore because cruel and greedy masters should not use them too hardly,
Genesis 2. 2.
God remembered them in his creation, and made every week one day of rest,
wherein they should be as free as their masters: so God pittieth the labourer
from heaven, and every Sabbath looks down upon him from heaven, as if he
should say, one day thy labors shall have an end, and thou shall rest for ever,
2. Sam. 18. 5
as thou restedst this day.

By this we see, as David did limit Ioab that he should not kill Absalon; so God
has bound masters, that they should not oppress their servants? Shall God
respect thine more then thou? Art thou made fresher to thy labor by a little
rest, and is not thy servant made stronger by rest to labor for thee? Genesis 31.
9.
How many beasts and sheep did Laban lose, only for hardly entreating of a
good servant? therefore that is the way to lose, but not to thrive. He which
counts his servant a slave, is in an error: for there is difference between
believing servants, and infidel servants: the infidels were made slaves to the
Jews, because God hated them, and would humble them; but their brethren did
serve them like helpers, which should be trained by them.

It is not a base nor vile thing to be called a servant, Esaias. 42. 1.
for our Lord is called a servant: Mat. 12. 18
which teaches Christians, to use their servant well for Christ's sake,
seeing they are servants too, and have one master Christ. As David speaks of
man, saying: Psa. 8. 6.
Thou have made him a little lower then the Angels; so I may say of servant,
that God has made them a little lower then children, not children, but the
next to children, as one would say inferior children, or sons in law.

And therefore the householder is called Pater familias: which signifies, a
Father of his family, because he should have a fatherly care over his
servants, as if they were his children: and not use them only for their
labor, like beasts.

Besides, the name of a servant, does not signify suffering, but doing;
therefore masters must not exercise their hands upon them but set their hands to
work, 1. Cor. 12. 13
and yet as God lays no more upon his servant then he makes them able to
bear, so men should lay no more upon their servant then they are able to
bear. Pro. 12. 10.
For a good man (says Solomon) will be merciful to his beast, and therefore
he will be more merciful to his brother.

That man is not worthy to be served which cannot afford that his servants
should serve God as well as himself. Give unto God that which is Gods, and
then thou may take that which is thine. He that cares not for his family
(says Paul) is worse then an infidel: 1. Tim. 5. 8.
because infidels care for their family. But as Agur prays, Pro. 30. 8.
Give me not too much nor too little, but feed me with food convenient: so their
care should not be too much nor too little, but convenient, or else they are
worse then infidels to, because covetousness is called Idolatry, Ephesians. 5. 5.
which is worse then infidelity, for it is less rebellion not to honor the
king then to set up another king against him, as the Idolatrous do against the
king of heaven.

Next unto servants instruction and labors, must be considered their
corrections. As Paul says, Ephesians. 6. 4.
Fathers provoke not your children to wrath: So may I say, Masters provoke not
your servants to wrath: that is, use such reproves, and such corrections, that
you do not provoke them, but move them, that you do not exasperate them, but
win them, for reuiling words and unreasonable fierceness, does more hurt
then good. And therefore the law of God did charge the master, that he should
not inflict above forty stripes upon his servant, Deuteronomy. 25. 2.
least he should seem despised in his eyes For while a child, or scholar, or
servant does think that he is reproved for love, or beaten with reason, it
makes him think of his fault and is ashamed: but when he sees that he is
rebuked with curses, and beaten with staves, as though they were hated like a
dog, his heart is hardened against the man which corrects him, and the fault
for the which he is corrected, and after he becomes desperate, like a horse
which turns upon the striker: and therefore think that God even then chides
you whenever you chide in such rage. For though there be a fault, yet some
things must be winkt at, and some things must be forgiven, and some punished
with a look, for he which takes the forfeite of every offense, shall never
be in any rest, but vex himself more then his servant.

Further I have heard experience say, The master must correct his men, and the
mistress her maids.
that in these punishments it is most meet and acceptable to the offender, that
the man should correct his men, and the woman her maids: for a man's nature
scorneth to be beaten of a woman, and a maids nature is corrupted with the
stripes of a man. Therefore we read, that Abraham would not meddle with his
maid, but committed her to his wife, and said, Genesis 16. 6.
Do with her as it pleases thee: as if he should say, It belongs not to
me but to thee.

Lastly we put the duty toward children, Their duties toward their children.
because they come last to their hands. In Latin children are called pignora,
that is, pledges, as if I should say, a pledge of the husbands love to the
wife, and a pledge of the wives love toward the husband: for there is nothing
which does so knit love between the man and the wife, as the fruit of the
womb. Therefore when Leah began to conceive, she said, now my husband will
love me; Genesis 28. 31.
as though the husband did love for children. If a woman have many defects (as
Leah had) yet this is the mendes which she makes her husband, to bring him
children, which is the right wedding Ring, that seals and makes up the
marriage. When their father and mother fall out, they perke up between the^
like little mediators, and with many pretty sportes make truce when other dare
not speak to them. Therefore now let us consider what these little ones may
challenge of their parents, that stand them in stead of Lawyers. Before we
teach parents to love their children, they had need be taught not to love them
too much, for David's darling, was David's traitor: and this is the manner of
God, when a man begins to set any thing in Gods room, and love it above him
which gave it, either to take away it, or to take away him, before he provoke
him too much; therefore if parents would have their children live, they must
take heed to love them too much: for the giver is offended, when the gift is
more esteemed than he.

The first duty is the mothers, Mothers should nurse their children.
that is, to nurse her child at her own breasts, as Sara did Isaac, and
therefore Esaias joins the nurses name and the mothers name both in one: and
calls them nursing mothers, Genesis 21. 7.
showing, that mothers should be the nurses. So when God those a nurse for
Moses, Exodus 2. 8.
he led the hand maid ^ Pharaos daughter to his mother, as though God would
have none nurse him but his mother. After, when the son of God was born, his
father thought none fit to be his nurse, Mat. 2. 14.
but the virgin his mother. The earths fountains are made to give water, and
the breasts of women are made to give suck. Every beast, and every foul is
bred of the same that did bear it, only women love to be mothers, but not
nurses.

Therefore if their Children prove unnatural, they may say, thou followest thy
mother, for she was unnatural first, in locking up her breasts from thee, and
committing thee forth like a Cuckoo to be hatched in a Sparrowes nest. Hereof
it comes that we say, He sucked evil from the dug, that is, as the Nurse is
affected in her body, or in her mind, commonly the child draws the like
infirmity from her, as the eggs of a Hen are altered under the Hawk; yet
they which have no milk, can give no milk. But whose breasts have this
perpetual drought? Forsooth it is like the gout, no beggars may have it, but
Citizens or Gentlewomen. In the ninth chapter of Hosea, thy breasts are named
for a curse: what lamentable hap have Gentlewomen, to light upon this curse
more then other? sure if their breasts be dry as they say, they should fast
and pray together, that this curse migro be removed from them.

The next duty is, Prou. 22. 6.
Catechize a child in his youth, How children should be brought up.
and he will remember it when he is old: This is the right blessing which
fathers and mothers give to their children, when they cause God to bless them
too. 1. Re. 3. 26.
The wrong mother cared not though the child were divided, but the right
mother would not have it divided: so wicked Parents care not though their
children be destroyed, but godly parents would not have them destroyed but
saved, that when they have dwelt together in earth, they may dwell together in
heaven. As the Midwife frames the body when it is young and tender, so the
parents must frame the mind while it is green and flexible, for youth is the
seed time of virtue. Luke 11. 2.
They which are called fathers, are called by the name of God, to warn them
that they are in stead of God to their children, which teaches all his sons.
What example have children but their parents? and sure the providence of God
does ease their charge more than they are aware; for a child will learn
better of his father than of any other. Except of kings sons.
And therefore we read of no Schoolemaisters in the scripture but the Parents:
for when Christ says to the Jews, Ioh. 8. 38.
If ye be the sons of Abraham, ye will do the works of your Father
Abraham: he shows, that sons use to walk in their Fathers steps, whether
they be good or bad.

It is a marvelous delight to the father and mother, when people say that
their children are like them: but if they be like them in godliness, it is as
great delight to other as to the parents: or else we say that they are so like,
that they are the worse for it. Well does David call children arrows, Psalm.
127. 4
for if they be well bred, they shoot at their parents enemies, and if they be
evil bred they shoot at their parents. Therefore many fathers want a staff
to stay them in their age, because they prepared none before, like old Eli,
which was corrected himself, 1. Sa. 2. 29.
for not correcting his sons. Are not children called the fruit of their
parents? Ps. 132. 11.
Therefore as a good tree is known by bringing forth good fruit, Mat. 12. 33
so parents should show their godliness in the education of their children,
which are their fruit. 1. Sa. 1. 20.
For this cause the Jews were wont to name their children so when they were
borne, 1. Sa. 13. 24.
that ever after, if they did but think upon their names, they would put them
in mind of that religion which they should profess: for they did signify some
thing that they should learn.

An admonition to such as call their children at all adventures, Three examples
of good parents.
sometime by the names of dogs, even as they prove after. In 1. Kings 2. 2. we
have David instructing his sons. In Genesis 39. Jacob correcting his sons: and
in Job. 1. Job praying for his sons. These three put together, instructing,
correcting and praying, make good children, and happy parents.

Once Christ took a child, and set him in the midst of his disciples, Luke
18. 17
and said, He which will receive the kingdom of heaven, must receive it as a
little child: showing, that our children should be so innocent, so humble, and
void of evil, that they may be taken for examples of the children of God.
Therefore in Psalm 127. 4. children are called the heritage of the Lord, to
show that they should be trained, as though they were not men's children, but
Gods, that they may have Gods heritage after. Col. 4. 15.
Thus if you do, your servants shall be Gods servants, Phil. 1. 8.
and your children shall be Gods children, and your house shall be Gods house,
like a little Church, when others are like a den of thieves.

Now I speak to one which is a mother so soon as she is married: The name of
stepmother expounded, and their duty.
therefore peradventure you look that I should show the duty of stepmothers.
Their name does show them their duty too, for a stepmother does signify a
stedmother, that is, one mother dies, and another comes in her stead:
therefore that your love may settle to those little ones as it ought, you must
remember that ye are their stedmother, that is in sted of their mother, and
therefore to love them, and tender them, and cherish them as their mother did.
She must not look upon them like Rehoboam, who told his people that he would
be worse unto them then his predecessor; for then they will turn from her, as
his subjects did from him: but she must come to them as David came to the
people after Saules death, and said, 1. Sam. 2. 7.
Though your master Saul be dead, yet I will reign over you: so she must say
to them, though your mother be dead, yet will I be a mother: so the children
will love her as much as their father. Further, these children are orphans, and
therefore you must not only regard them as children, but as orphane children.
Iere. 22. 2.
Now God requires a greater care over widows and Orphans, Deu. 14. 17. and
24. 17. and 26. 12.
than over any other women or children.

Lastly, you must remember that saying, As you measure unto other, Mat. 7. 2.
so it shall be measured unto you again: that is, as you entreat these
children so another may come after and entreat your children; for he which has
taken away the first mother and sent you, can take away the second mother and
send a third, which shall not be like a stepmother to yours, unless you be
like a stepmother to these.

If these duties be performed in marriage, then I need not speak of
Diuorcement, Diuorcement, the physic of marriage.
which is the rod of marriage, and divides them which were one flesh, as if the
body and soul were parted asunder. But because all perform not their
wedlock vows, therefore he which appointed marriage, has appointed
diuorcement, as it were taking our privilege from us, Mat. 18. 19
when we abuse it. As God has ordained remedies for every disease, so he has
ordained a remedy for the disease of marriage. Mat. 19. 8.
The disease of marriage is adultery, Why Christ would have no diuorcement but
for fornication.
and the medicine hereof is diuorcement. Moses licensed them to depart for
hardness of heart, but Christ licenseth them to depart for no cause but
adultery. If they might be separated for discord, some would make a commodity
of strife: but now they are not best to be contentious, for this law will hold
their noses together, till wearines make them leave struggling: like two
spaniels which are coupled in a chain, at last they learn to go together,
because they may not go asunder. As nothing might part friends, Mat. 5. 32.
but If thine eye offend thee, pull it out, that is, if thy friend be a
tempter: so nothing may dissolve marriage but fornication, Mat. 19. 9.
which is the breach of marriage, for marriage is ordained to avoid
fornication, 1. Cor. 7. 10
and therefore if the condition be broken, the obligation is void.

And beside, so long as all her children, are his children, she must needs be
his wife, because the father and mother are man and wife: but when her children
are not his children, she seems no more to be his wife, but the others whose
children she bears, and therefore to be divorced from him. In all the old
Testament, Note.
we read of no divorce between any, which shows that they lived chaster then
we: yet no doubt this law was better executed amongst them, then amongst us.
Such a care God has had in all ages and callings, to provide for them which
live honestly: for diuorcement is not instituted for the carnal, but for the
chaste, least they should be tied to a plague while they live. As for the
adulterer and adultresse, Leu. 20. 10.
he has assigned death to cut them off, least their breath should infect
others. Thus he which made marriage, did not make it inseperable, for then
marriage were a servitude. But as Christ says of the Sabbath, Mar. 2. 27.
The Sabbath was made for man, that is, for the benefit of man, and not for the
hindrance of man: so marriage was made for man, that is, for the honor of man,
and not for the dishonor of man: Leu. 20. 10.
but if marriage should turn to fornication, and when it is turned to
fornication, there might be no separation, then marriage were not for the honor
of man, but for the trouble, and grief, and dishonor of man. Therefore now ye
have heard how diuorceme^t is appointed for a remedy of fornication, if any be
ashamed of this physic, let the^ be more ashamed of the disease. Conclusion.
Because I have spoken more then you can remember, if you ask me what is most
needful to bear away, In my opinion, A sentence for the married to think upon.
there is one saying of Paul, which is the profitablest sentence in all the
scripture for man and wife to meditate often, and examine whether they find it
in themselves as they do in other, least their marriage turn to sin, which
should further them in godliness. 1. Cor. 7. 32.
The unmarried man cares for the things of the Lord, how he may please the
Lord, but he that is married cares for the things of the world, how he may
please his wife. Also, The unmarried woman cares for the things of the Lord,
how she may be holy, but she that is married, cares for the things of the
world, how she may please her husband. As though their pleasing of god, were
turned al to pleasing one another, and their carnal love had eaten their
spiritual love, Genesis 41. 4.
as the lean kine deuourd the fat. Therefore it follows in the next words, Ver.
3. 4.
This I speak for your commodity, As though there were great commodity in
remembering this watchword. All men have not the feeling of Gods word, or else
such a sentence might be an anchor for the married to stay the^, when any
tentatio^ goes about this change, which Paul feared even in them which feared
GOD before.

If thou have read all this book, and art never the better, yet catch this
flower before thou go out of the garden, and peradventure the sent thereof will
bring thee back to smell the rest. 1. Sam. 1. 23
As the corpse of Azael made the passengers to stand, so I placed this sentence
in the door of thy passage, to make thee stand and consider what thou do
before thou marriest. For this is the scope and operation of it, to call the
mind to a solemn meditation, and warn him to live in marriage as in a
temptation, which is like to make him worse then he was, 2. Chr. 21. 6
as the marriage of Iehoram did, if he use not Jobs preservative, Job. 9. 28.
to be jealous over all his life.

The allurements of beauty, the trouble about riches, the charges of children,
the losses by servants, the unquietness of neighbors cry unto him that he
is entered into the hardest vocation of all other: and therefore they which
have but nine years Prentiship to make them good Mercers or Drapers, have
nineteen years before marriage, to learn to be good husbands and wives, as
though it were a trade of nothing but mysteries, and need of double time over
all the rest.

Therefore so often as you think upon this saying, think whether you be
examples of it, Genesis 24. 40
and it will waken you, and chide you, and lead you a straight path, like the
Angel which led the servant of Abraham.

Thus have I chalked the way, to prepare you unto marriage, as the Levites
prepared their brethren to the Passe-ouer: 2. Chr. 35. 6
remember that this day ye are made one, and therefore must have but one will.
And now the Lord Jesus, in whom ye are contracted, knit your hearts together,
that ye may love one another like David and Jonathan, 1. Sam. 18. 1
and go before you in this life, Mat. 2. 9.
like the Star which went before the Gentiles, that ye may begin, and
proceed, and end in his glory. To whom be all glory for ever, Amen.

FINIS.
A TREATISE OF THE LORDS SVPPER, IN two Sermons.
THE FIRST SERMON.
1. Cor. 11. 23. 24. The Lord Jesus in the night that he was betraytooke bread:

And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat: this is my
body which is broken for you, this do ye in remembrance of me.


THe word, The two breasts of the Church.
and the Sacraments are the two breasts wherewith our Mother does nurse us.
Seeing every one receives, and few understand what they receive; I thought it
the necessariest doctrine to preach of the Sacrament; which is a witness of Gods
promises, a remembrance of Christ's death, and a seal of our adoption: therefore
Christ has not instituted this Sacrament for a fashion in his Church, to
touch, and feel, and see, as we gaze upon pictures in the windows, but as
the woman which had the bloody issue, Mat. 9. 20.
touching the hemme of Christ's garment, drew virtue from Christ himself,
because she believed: so Christ would that we touching these signs should
draw virtue from himself, that is, all the graces which these signs
represent. Therefore as the Levites under the Law, 2. Chr. 35. 6
were bound to prepare their brethren before they came to the Passe-ouer: So
preachers of the Gospel should prepare their brethren before they come to the
supper of the Lord. For which purpose I have chosen this place to the
Corinthians, which is the clearest and fullest declaration of this Sacrament in
all the Scripture.

The Lord Jesus in the night, etc.

The sum of all these words is, The division.
the Institution, and use of the Lords supper. First, Paul shows the author
of it, the Lord Jesus: then the time when it was instituted, in the night that
he was betrayed: then the manner how he did institute it, he took bread, and
when he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave unto his disciples, etc. then
the end why he did institute it, for a remembrance of his death.

Touching the Author, The Author.
he which is signified by it, was the author of it. The Lord Jesus has bid us
to supper, John 1. 27.
I am not worthy (says John) to loose his shoo: so we are not worthy to
wait at his trencher, and yet he will have us sit at his table. None but
Christ may ordain Sacraments.
To him belongs the power to ordain Sacraments in his Church, because he
fulfilled the Sacraments of the Law. When Christ came, the Passover creased,
John 1. 29.
because he is our Passover; that is, the Lamb by whose blood we are saved.
When Christ came, Circumcision ceased, because he is our circumcision, that is,
the purifier and cleanser of our sins. Revel. 7. 14.


Now these two Sacraments are fulfilled, he has appointed two other Sacraments
for them; in stead of the pascall Lamb, which the Jews did eat, he has
given us another Lamb to eat, John. 1. 29.
which John calls the Lamb of God, that is himself, upon whom all do
feed, whosoever do receive this Sacrament with an assured faith that Christ
died to possess them of life. The breaking of the bread does signify the
wounding of the body: the pouring out of the wine does signify the shedding
of his blood. The eating of the bread and drinking of the wine does signify
that his flesh and blood do nourish in us life eternal, as the bread and wine
do nourish the life present.

In stead of Circumcision, Genesis 17. 10.
which began at Abraham, Who was therefore called John the Baptist.
he has ordained Baptism, which began at John, a more lively representation
of the true circumcision of the heart, because it represents unto us the
blood of Christ, which washes our souls as the water in baptism washes our
bodies. Mat. 3. 1.


Touching the time, Reu. 1. 5.
In the night (says Paul, Re. 22* 14.
) therefore this Sacrament is called the Lords Supper, Time.
because it was instituted at night when they used to sup. But what night? Even
that night (says Paul) when he was betrayed: Verse 23.
that night which he should have cursed, Job. 3. 3.
as Job did the day of his birth, if he had suffered against his will: that
night when he should have thought to destroy men, as men conspired to destroy
him. That night (says Paul) this Sacrament of grace, and peace, and life
began: Even that night when we betrayed him. Many nights did he spend in
watching, and praying for us; and is there a night now for us to kill and
betraie him? That was a dark night, when men went about to put out the Sun
which brought them light. Who can but wonder, to see how Christ and they for
whom Christ came, were occupied at one time? when they devised mischief
against him, and sought all means to destroy him, then he consulted how to
save them, and instituted the same night this blessed sacrament, to convey all
his graces and blessings unto them, Even that night when they betrayed him.

The reason why this action was deferred until night, Why this sacrament was
instituted at night.
is, because that was the time appointed by the Law to eat the Passe-ouer,
which was like a predecessor of this Sacrament. Why it was deferred till his
last night.
The reason why he deferred it until his last night, was, because the
Passe-ouer could not be ended before the fullness of time, and the true
Paschall Lamb were come to be slain in stead of the other. Therefore how
fitly did Christ end the Passe-ouer, which was a sign of his suffering, so
presently before his suffering? And beside, how sweetly did he confirm his
Disciples faith, when as they should see that the next day performed before
their eyes, which over night both in the Passe-ouer and in the Sacrament, was
so lively resembled unto them? If any man from this do gather, Why we receive
not the Lords Supper at night.
that we ought to eat the Lords Supper at night, as Christ did, he must
understand that we have not the same cause to do so which Christ had, because
of the Passe-ouer. And therefore the Church which has discretion of times and
places, has altered both the time and the place, using the Temples in sted of
the chamber, and the morning in sted of the evening: for indifferent things are
ruled by order and decency.

Touching the manner, Ver. 23. 24.
He took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave it unto
them. He would not eat it, nor break it, before he had given thanks to God.
What need he which was God, give thanks to God, but to show us what we
should do when we eat our selves? 1. These. 5. 18
In all things give thanks, (says Paul:) whereby we declare that all things
come from God: but the wicked believe easier that God does take, Note.
then that he does give, and therefore they never pray heartily unto him for
any thing, nor feelingly thank him for it. For which the Lord complains,
Mal. 1. 2.
saying: I have loved you, yet ye say, wherein have thou loved us? Esaias 1. 5.
Showing that we are worse then the ox, which knows his feeder. And if we
acknowledge all things from God, Genesis 19. 20.
yet we do like Lot, Is it not a little one (says he) when he craved to go
unto Zoar, as though it were not much which he asked: so we mince and extenuate
the gifts of God, before we receive them and after: like them which have a
grace for dinner, and none for breakfast, as though they had their dinners from
God, and breakfasts of their own.

Our example did not so, although it was but bread which he received, yet he
was more thankful for bread, then many which bury the fowls, and fishes, and
beasts in their belly: for if a count of all were kept, for one that prays;
Luke 11 3.
Give us this day our daily bread, a hundred take their bread, and meat, and
sleep too which never pray for it.

After he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave unto them, and said, Take
eat, for when he had given thanks to God, then it was sanctified, and
blessed, and lawful to eat. So when thou seruest God, Note.
then it is lawful for thee to use Gods blessings, then thou may eat and
drink as Christ did, but not before, for these things were created to serve
them which serve God: if thou do not serve him for them, thou encrochest
upon Gods blessings, and stealest his creatures, which are no more thine, then
thou art his, for the good God created all things for good men, as the devils
possessions are reserved for evil men.

Therefore, as Christ would not break the bread before he had given thanks
to the founder, so know, that there is some thing to be done before thou
receive any benefit of GOD, and presume not to use his creatures with more
liberty than his son did, which did not eat without giving thanks, nor
rise again without singing a Psalm.

It follows, Mat 26. 30
This is my body. Here is the fruit of his thanks before; he prayed that
the bread and wine might be blessed, and they were blessed. Genesis 27.
As Isaacks blessing showed it self upon Jacob whom he blessed, so Christ his
blessing appeared straight upon these mysteries: for it could not be said
before, This is my body, because it was mere bread: but now it may be called
his body, because his blessing has infused that virtue into it, that it does
not only represent his body, but convey his body and himself unto us. The
efficacy of this blessing is in this Sacrament ever since, sanctifying it unto
us as well as it did to the Apostles, Luke 22. 32.
even as Christ's prayer stayed Peter's faith after Christ was dead.

Now ye have heard the meaning of these words, He took bread, and blessed it,
and brake it, and gave it: you shall see with what a mystical resemblance they
unite Christ and us First, as Christ in the Supper took bread to feed us:
Heb. 2. 16.
so in his birth he took our flesh to save us. Secondly, as Christ when he had
taken the bread, blessed the bread to make it a spiritual food: so Christ,
when he had taken our flesh, powered forth most rich and precious graces into
it, to make it food of life unto us. Ioh. 17. 19.
Thirdly, as Christ when he had blessed the bread, brake the bread: so Christ
when he had filled his body with most precious graces, 1. Pe. 2. 24.
brake it up like a rich treasure house, his hands by the nails, his back by
the stripes, his head by the thorns, his side by the spear; that out of
every hole a river of grace and goodness might issue and flow forth unto us.
Ephe. 3. 17.
Lastly, as Christ gave the bread when he had broken it: so Christ (by a lively
faith) communicates his body after he has crucified it. Hereby we are
taught, that when we see the Minister take the bread to feed us, we must
conceive, that Christ (being God from everlasting) took our flesh to save us.
When we see the Minister bless the bread to a holy use, we must conceive,
that Christ (by uniting the Godhead unto it) sanctified his flesh for our
redemption. When we see the Minister break the bread to sustain our bodies,
we must conceive, that Christ in his death, brake his body to refresh our
souls. When we see the Minister give the bread to our hands, we must
conceive, that Christ as truly offers himself to our faith to be received of
us.

Because upon these words the Papists ground their Transubstantiation, that is
that the bread is changed into Christ's flesh, and the wine is turned into
Christ's blood, whereby we eat the same body which dyed upon the Cross, and
drink the same blood which issued out of his side. That you may see the
blindness of this Popish dream. I would have you but mark every word of this
scripture, how they make against transubstantiation, that ye may see them
slain like Goliath with their own sword. 1. Sa. 17. 15
Even as God made Caiphas speak against himself; Ioh. 18. 14.
so the scriptures which heretics allege, 1. K. 18. 28.
do make against themselves, like the Baalites which wounded their own flesh.
Heretics allege scripture like the devil.
I may liken their allegations to Satan's when he tempted Christ in the
wilderness, he alleged but one sentence of scripture for himself, Mat. 4. 4.
and that Psalm out of which he borrowed it made so plain against him, Psa.
91. 11.
that he was feign to pick here a word and there a word, and leave out that
which went before, and skip in the midst, and omit that which came after, or
else he had marred his cause. the scripture is so holy, and pure, and true,
that no word nor syllable thereof can make for the devil, or for sinners, or
for heretics: yet as the devil alleged scripture, though it made not for
him, but against him; so do the Libertines, and Epicures, and heretics, as
though they had learned at his school,

Now there is no sentence of the scripture, which the wiser Papists allege
boldly for their Transubstantiation, Mat. 26. 26
but this, that Christ said, This is my body: by which they may prove as well,
Ioh. 10. 7. 9
that Christ is a door, because he says, Ioh. 15. 1.
I am the door: or a vine, because he says, I am a vine: for his sayings are
like. Figurative speeches must not be construed literally, but this is
heretics fashion. If you mark you shall see throughout, that all the
testimonies which the Papists allege for their heresies, Note.
are either tropes, or figures, or allegories, or parables, or allusions, or
dark speeches; which when they presume to expound allegoricallie, or
literallie, without conference of other scriptures, then they wander and straie
from the mark, or else it is impossible that the truth should maintain error,
that is, that the scripture should speak for heresy, if it were not
perverted: therefore we see that. Genesis 3. 3.
Eve never erred, until she corrupted the text.

Now we will enter the lystes with our adversaries, Arguments against Popish
transubstantiation.
and see whether these words do prove that the bread and wine are turned into
Christ's body, Paul says, Jesus took bread: well then, yet it is bread: when
he had taken it, then he blessed it; what did he bless? the bread which he
took; well then, yet it is bread: when he had blessed it, then he brake it;
what did he break? the bread which he blessed; well then, yet it is bread:
when he had broken it, then he gave it; what did he give? the bread which he
brake: well then, yet it is bread: when he had given it, they did eat it; what
did they eat? the bread which he gave them; well then, yet it is bread: when
they did eat it, then he said, This is my body; what did he call his body?
the bread which they did eat; well then, yet it is bread. If it be bread all
this while, when he did take it, and bless it, and brake it, and gave it, and
they did eat it, when is it turned into his body? here they stand like the
Sadduces, Mat. 22. 34
as mute as fishes.

Now that ye may see, that not we only say it is bread and wine after the
consecration; in the 27. verse, Christ himself does call it bread and wine
after he had given it, as he did before. Mar. 14. 25
And in Mark he says, I will drink no more of the fruit of the vine. Here
Christ says, that it was the fruit of the vine which he drank; but his blood
is not the fruit of vines, but wine, therefore wine was his drink, and not
blood.

Beside, if you would hear Paul expound Christ, he shows that all our
Fathers had the same substance of Christ in their Sacraments, that we have in
ours; for he says, They all did eat the same spiritual meat, 1. Cor. 10. 4.
and al drink the same spiritual drink. Straight he says, that this meat
and this drink was Christ. Mark that he says not only, Verse. 3. 4.
They did eat the same meat that we eat; but he says, that this meat was
Christ: Verse. 4.
and not only so, but to show that Christ is not a corporal meat, as the
Papists say; he says, he is a spiritual meat as we say: therefore you see
that we do not eat him corporally, no more then our Fathers, but that as
they did eat him spiritually, so do we; for spiritual meat must be eaten
spiritually, as corporal meat is eaten corporally.

Again, for the signs to be turned into the thing signified by them, is
utterly against the nature of a Sacrament, and makes it no Sacrament, because
there is no sign: for every Sacrament does consist of a sign, and a thing
signified: the sign is ever an earthly thing, and that which it signifies is
a heavenly thing. This shall appear in all examples: As, in Paradise there was
a very Tree for the sign, and Christ the thing signified by it: Genesis 17. 11.
in Circumcision there was a cutting off of the skin, and the cutting off of
sin: in the Passe-ouer there was a Lamb, Exodus 12. 3.
and Christ: in the Sabbath there was a day of rest, Exo. 23. 11.
and eternal rest: Heb. 9^.
in the sacrifices there was an offering of some beast, and the offering of
Christ: Exodus 30.
in the Sanctuary there was the holy place, Exo. 25. 24.
and heaven: in the Propitiatory there was the golden covering, and Christ our
cover: Exodus 17. 16
in the Wilderness there was a Rock yielding water, and Christ yielding his
blood: Mat. 3. 16.
in the Apparition there was a Dove, and the holy Ghost: John 6. 49.
in the Manna there was bread, John 1. 33.
and Christ: in Baptism there is very water which washes us, and Christ's
blood washing us: 1. Cor. 11. 19
so in the Supper of Christ there is very bread and Wine for the sign, and
the body and blood of Christ for the thing signified, or else this Sacrament
is against the nature of all other sacraments.

Again, there must be a proportion between the Passe-ouer and the Lords
Supper, Exodus 12.
because this was figured by the other. Now, the Jews had in their
Passe-ouer, Bread, and Wine, and a Lamb: So our savior Christ instituting
his last Supper, Mat. 26. 26
left Bread, and Wine, and a Lamb: the which name is given to himself, John.
29.
because he came like a Lamb, and died like a Lamb.

Again, if Christ's very body were offered in the sacrament, then it were not
a sacrament, but a sacrifice, which two differ as much as giving, and taking:
for in a sacrifice we give, and in a sacrament we receive, and therefore we
say our sacrifice, and Christ's sacrament.

Exodus 27.
Now mark the wisdom of the Holy Ghost, least we should take this for a
Sacrifice, he never names Altar when he speaks of it, but, The Table of the
Lord. Therefore it is no doubt but the devil has kept the name of Altar, that
we might think it a sacrifice.





bread, or else qualities should stand without substances, which is, as if one
should tell you of a house without a foundation.

Again, as Christ dwells in us, so he is

Again, none can be saved without the

Again, Christ says not, This wine, but This cup, and therefore by their
conclusion, not only the wine should be turned into blood, but the cup too.

Again, Paul says; They which receive vnwoorthilie, receive their own
damnation, But if it were the flesh of Christ, they should rather receive
salvation then damnation, because Christ says; He that eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, has life everlasting, John 6. 54.

Again, if they would hear an Angel He is risen, and is not here, Mat. 28.
as if he should say; his body is but in one place at once, or else he might
have been there though he was risen.

Lift up your hearts, if they have al in their mouths? To end this
controversy, here we may say as the Disciples said to Christ, Whither shall
we go from thee? John 6. 68.
I mean we need not to go to any other expositor of Christ, then Christ
himself, therefore mark what he says: John 6. 60.
at first, when Christ said that he was the bread of life, and that al which
would live, must eat him, they murmured until he expounded his words, and how
did he expound his words? John. 6. 35.
Thus, He that comes unto me has eaten, and he that believes in me, has
drunk. After when he instituted this Sacrament, in like words they murmured
not, which they would as before, if he had not resolved the^ before, that to
eat his body, and to drink his blood, was nothing but to come to him, and
believe in him.

After he had said so, they murmured not, because they did see some reason in
it, as it is plainly said, This is my body, so it is plainly said, John 6.
63.
These words are spirit: that is, they must be understood spirituallie, and
not literallie.

But if it be flesh indeed, why do they not satisfy the simple people how
they may eat this flesh in Lent, when they forbid them to eat any flesh, they
must needs eat it doubtfully, and he which doubts, says James, receives
nothing: therefore he which eats the mass, receives nothing.

I did not allege the Fathers in my Sermon, but if any suspend his assent,
till they bring in their verdit, let him hear the^ make confession of their
belief.

Augustine says, Aug. upon the 3. psalm.
the Lord doubted not to say, This is my body, when he gave only a sign, or
Sacrament of his body.

Tertullian says, Tert. against marcion the 4. book.
This is my body, that is, a sign of my body.

Ambrose says, the bread and wine remain still the same thing that they were.
4. book 4. can. of sacraments. In his first dialogue.


Theodoret says, after the consecration, the mystical signs do not cast off
their own nature, but abide still in their first substance and form.

Origene says, Upon the 15. of Mat.
the bread that is sanctified with the word of God, as touching the material
substance thereof, goes into the belly and forth again like other meats.
Iren. 4. book. cap. 34. against Vale^tinus.


Irenaeus says, that it has two things in it, one earthly, and the other
heavenly.

Cyril says, Ad ob. Theod. Anathe^atis.
our Sacraments avouch not the eating of a man.

Cyprian says, 1. Book of Epi.
the Lord calls bread made of many grains, his body; and called wine made
of many grapes, his blood.

Athanasius says, In that gospel whosoever speaks a word, etc. Hom. 60. to
the people of Antioch.
Christ made mention of his ascension into heaven, that he might withdraw his
Disciples from corporal and fleshly eating.

Chrysostom says, God gives us things spiritual, under things visible and
natural. And again, being sanctified, it is delivered from the name of bread,
and is exalted to the name of the Lords body, To Caesarius the Monk.
although the nature of the bread still remain.

And because they believe that the Pope cannot err, Against Eutiches the
Heretic.
Pope Gelasius sets too his hand, and says with the rest: Neither the
substance of the bread, nor nature of the wine, cease to be more then they
were before.

Tell us Papist, do not these Fathers speak as plain as we? Can thou avouch
Transubstantiation more flatly then they deny it? How had this heresy been
chased, if the devil had hatched it in their time?

Thus the Scriptures on the one side, and the Fathers on the other side, did so
trouble three Archpapists, Upon the Canon lect. 40.
Biel, Tonstal, and Fisher, that Gabriel Biel says, how the body of Christ is
in the Sacrament, is not found in the Canon of the Bible.

Tonstall says, 1. Book of the Sacra. pa. 4^.
It had been better to leave every man to his own conjecture, as they were
before the Council of Laterane, than to bring in such a question.

Fisher says, Against the captivity of Babilo^, made by M. Luther.
No man can prove by the words of the Gospel, that any Priest in these days
does consecrate the very body and blood of Christ.

Here is fulfilled, Out of thine own mouth I will condemn thee. Luke 19. 22.
But we will not carry the matter so, because a Judge must have two ears,
therefore now let them speak.

Because they cannot tell how the bread and wine should be turned into flesh
and blood, The Papists allegations for the real presence.
and yet appear bread and wine still, they say it is a miracle: but how do
they prove it? If they contend it is a miracle, they must show us a sign:
for every miracle may be seen, Exo. 4. 8. and 21.
like all the miracles of Moses, and Christ, and the Apostles: and therefore a
miracle is called a sign, because it may be seen like a sign, and the word
signifies a wonder. And the Jews craving a miracle, said; Show us a miracle:
Exodus 9.
as though they were taught to judge of miracles by sight. All which does show
that a miracle may be seen, but here no miracle is seen.

Again, a miracle (especially in the time of the Gospel) is an extraordinary
thing, but they make this an ordinary thing: for if the bread and wine be
turned into flesh and blood, then miracles are as common as Sacraments, and so
because they have Mass every day, they should work miracles every day.

Lastly, this seems strange, that Augustine (whom they so much honor)
gathered all the miracles which are written in the scripture, and yet amongst
all, speaks not of this: therefore then it was counted no miracle: but Paul
speaks of lying miracles, 2. These. 2. 9.
and this is one of them.

If they say that Christ can turn bread and wine into his body, Objection
and therefore he does. First, Answer.
they must prove that he will, for they can do many things themselves which
they do not, because they will not: therefore it is an old answer, that from
Can to Will no Argument follows. The Leper did not say unto Christ, Mar. 1.
40.
If thou can, thou will: but, If thou will thou can.

But the question which they think cannot be answered, like their invincible
Nauies, is this. Objection
If the bread be not his body, why does he call it his body? Resolve this
knot, and all is clear. Answer.
Mark then, and we will loose it as well as we can: He says, This is my
body, as he says after; which is broken for you, Why? his body was not
broken before he suffered, how did he say then, which is broken, before it was
broken? There is no sense of it but this, the bread was broken, and signified
that his body should be broken.

Now, as the breaking of the bread did signify the breaking of his body, so
the bread must needs signify his body: but as his body was not broken
indeed when the bread was broken, so the bread could not be his body indeed,
for then his body should have bin broken when the bread was broken: Yet let
them object what they can.

If (say they) the bread and wine be not changed into his body and blood, why
does he speak so darkly? Objection
he might have spoken plainer.

I answer, Answer.
though this seem dark to Papists, yet it was not dark to the Apostles, they
understood his meaning well enough, and all the rest for 1215. years after
Christ before Transubstantiation was spoken of. If the Apostles had not
understood his meaning, they would not stick to ask him, as their manner was,
until they were acquainted with Christ's phrase, whenever they doubted upon
any of his speeches, they were wont to come unto him and say; Luke 8. 9.
Master, what is the meaning? but they were used to such phrases: for it was
Christ's manner to teach by similitudes, showing one thing by another, which is
the plainest manner of teaching, and most used in holy scripture, especially
in the types and shadows of this Sacrament. Mat. 26. 17.
For example, Christ calls the Lamb the Passover, in place whereof this
Sacrament succeeded, and therefore presently after they had eaten the
Passe-ouer, Christ instituted this Sacrament to be used for it. Christ (I say)
called the Lamb the Passe-ouer, and yet the Passe-ouer was this, an angel
passed over the houses of the Israelites, Exo. 12. 27.
and stroke the Egyptians: this was not a Lamb; and yet because the Lamb was
a sign of this Passe-ouer, as the bread and wine is of Christ's body,
therefore Christ called the Lamb the Passover, as he calls the bread and
wine his body.

Again, Genesis 17. 13.
Circumcision is called the Covenant, and yet Circumcision was nothing but the
cutting away of a skin: but the Covenant is, Genesis 12. 3.
In Abraham's seed all Nations shall be blessed, I will be their God, and they
shall be my people, I will defend and save them, and they shall serve and
worship me. This is not Circumcision, and yet as though circumcision were the
covenant it self, it is called the covenant because it signifies the
Covenant: so bread and wine are called Christ's body, because they signify
Christ's body.

Again, Tit. 3. 5.
Baptism is called Regeneration, and yet Baptism is a dipping of our bodies
in water; 1. Cor. 6. 11.
but regeneration is the renewing of the mind to the image wherein it was
created. This is not Baptism, and yet as though Baptism were Regeneration it
self, it is called Regeneration, because it signifies Regeneration: so the
bread and wine are called Christ's body, because they signify Christ's body.

Again, Luke 22. 20.
the Cup is called the new Testament; and yet the Cup is but a piece of metal
filled with wine: but the new Testament is, Ioh. 3. 36.
He which believes in the Son, shall be saved. This is not a Cup, and yet as
though the Cup were the new Testament it self, it is called the new Testament,
because it signifies the new Testament: so the bread and wine are called
Christ's body, because they signify Christ's body.

They which knew that the Lamb is not the Passe-ouer, though Christ called it
the Pass over; that Circumcision is not the Covenant, though God calls it
the Covenant; that Baptism is not Regeneration, though it be called
Regeneration; that the Cup is not the new Testament, though Christ called it
the new Testament; could they not as well understand, that the bread and wine
were not Christ's body, though Christ called them his body? As they understood
these speeches, so they understood this speech: therefore they which say, that
the bread and wine are Christ's body, because Christ says, Mat. 26. 26
This is my body; may as well say, that the Lamb is the Passe-ouer, because
Christ calls it the Passe-ouer; that Baptism is Regeneration, because Paul
calls it Regeneration; that the Cup is the new Testament, because Christ
calls it the new Testament.

If every Sacrament was called by the thing which it signified, and yet never
any Sacrament was taken for the thing it self; what reason have they to take
this Sacrament for the thing it self, more than all the rest? It is the
consent of all Writers, that a Sacrament is a sign, therefore not the thing
signified: no more than the bush at the door is the wine in the seller. If I
call the Prince a Phoenix, the University a Fountain, the Court a Peacocke,
the City a Sea, the Country an Hermit: why, can the Papists understand
me, and not understand Christ?

What a dark, and strange, and intricate, and incredible speech had this been
for them to understand groslie, and literallie? Would they think, that they
did eat Christ's body, when his body stood before them, and he had told them
before that his body was like their body? Nay, this would have required more
words, and made them come again; with Master, Luke 9. 8.
what is the meaning? for they were not so instructed yet before the
resurrection, to believe every thing without questioning, if it were contrary
to sense and reason: but as they asked, who had given him any meat, when he
said that he had meat, Ioh. 4. 33.
and they could see none: so they would have asked, what meat is this which we
see not? How can every one of us eat his body, and yet he has but one body,
and that body is whole when we eat it? Lo, he stands before us and says,
that his body is like unto ours, and yet he takes bread and breaks it, and
gives it unto us to eat, and when we eat it, Luke 24. 39.
This is my body, and yet his body stands before us still. If his body be like
ours (as he says) how can it be eaten, and be there, for ours cannot? Thus
they would have questioned, if they had not been used to such phrases: but as
they could understand him, when he called himself a stone, a rock, a door, a
window, and a vine: so they picked out his meaning when he said that bread was
his body: for he had told them before, that he was the bread of eternal
life.

Now the bread of eternal life is not eaten with teeth, for the body cannot
eat spiritually, no more then the soul can eat corporally, and therefore he
is such a bread as is eaten with faith, and so himself says in the Gospel of
John. Ioh. 6. 35.
Mark this eating by faith, and all the strife is ended. Flesh and blood
indeed need not faith to chew them, for the teeth can chew them well enough.
Therefore if the bread and wine were the body of Christ, then we need not
faith to eat it, but all which have teeth might eat Christ's body, yea the
Myce might eat it as well as men, for they eat the same bread that we do,
as well after it is consecrated as before.

If this be not enough to batter the ruins of this vpstart Heresy, I will
come to Interrogatories, and see whether they have learned it by roate, or by
reason.

If they ground their Transubstantiation upon these words of Christ, Mat. 26.
26*
This is my body, which he spoke to his Disciples: I ask them, whether they
receive that body which was mortal, or that body which is glorified? because
one of these bodies they must needs receive, either his mortal body, or his
glorified body. Neither Christ's mortal body, nor his immortal body can be
in the Sacrament.
If they say that it is his mortal body, the mortal body will not profit
them: for you see that mortal food is but for this mortal life, neither has
Christ a mortal body now to communicate unto them, because it is changed to
an immortal body; therefore they cannot receive the mortal body, because
Christ has not a mortal body to give unto them. If they say, that they
receive his glorified body; then they must fly from this Text: for at that
time Christ had not any glorified body.

When this Sacrament was instituted, and Christ said, This is my body, his
body was not glorified, because the Sacrament was instituted before his death,
and his body was glorified after his resurrection. Therefore if they receive
the same body which the Apostles received, as they say they do, they cannot
receive a glorified body, because then Christ had not a glorified body to
communicate unto them.

Thus the rocks and sands are of both sides them, they receive a body
neither mortal nor immortal: if Christ has any such body, judge you. Here
they stand like a fool, which cannot tell on his tale: Nabuchadnezzar dreamed
a dream and knew not what it meant. Dan. 4. 15.


Beside, I ask them to whom Christ spoke when he said, Mar. 14. 24.
This is my body? Mark says, he spoke to them, that is, to his Disciples:
well then, if these words, This is my body, were not spoken to the signs,
but to the persons: not to the bread and wine but to the Receivers, as the
words which follow, Do this in remembrance of me: Christ spoke not to the
bread and wine, but to his disciples.
if these words were not spoken to the bread and wine, then it is plain that
they do not change the nature of the Bread and Wine. If the nature of them be
not altered, then the substance remains, and then we receive no other
substance with them, because two substances can not be in one place.

What then, is there nothing in the sacrament but bread and wine, More in the
Lords Supper, then bred and wine.
like a hungry nunscion? Nay, we say not that the sacrament is nothing but a
bare sign, or that you receive no more then you see: for Christ says, that it
is his body: and Paul says, that it is the communion of Christ's body and
blood: Therefore there is more in sacramental Bread, 1. Cor. 10. 16
then in common bread; though the nature be not changed, yet the use is
changed: it does not only nourish the body as it did before, but also it
brings a Bread with it which nourishes the soul: for as sure as we
receive bread, so sure we receive Christ; not only the benefits of
Christ, but Christ: although not in a popish manner, yet we are so joined unto
him, as though we were but one body with him.

As the spouse does not marry with the lands and goods, A similitude.
but with the man himself, and being partaker of him, is made partaker of
them: so the faithful do not only marry with Christ's benefits, but with
Christ himself, and being partakers of him, they are made partakers of his
benefits: for Christ may not be divided from his benefits, no more then the
Sun from his light.

It is said, Romans 8. 32.
The Father gave us his Son, and so the son gives us himself. For as the
Bread is a sign of his body, so the giving of the Bread, is a sign of the
giving of his body. Thus he lies before us like a Pellicane, which lets
her young ones suck her blood: so that we may say, the Lord invited us to
supper, and he himself was our meat.

But if you ask how this is? I must answer. It is a mystery: but if I
could tell it, it were no mystery. Yet, as it is said, when three men walked
in the midst of the furnace, Dan. 3. 25.
One like the son of God walked amongst them: So, when the faithful receive
the Bread and Wine, one like the son of God seems to come unto them, which
fills them with peace, and joy, and grace, that they marvel what it was which
they received besides bread and wine.

For example, A similitude.
thou make a bargain with thy neighbor for house or land, and receyuest in
earnest a piece of gold: that which thou receiuest is but a piece of gold,
but now it is a sign of thy bargain, and if thou keep not touch with him,
happily it will claspe thee for all that thou art worth: so, that which thou
receiuest is bread, but this bread is a sign of another matter which passes
bread.

Again, Another similitude.
thou have an obligation in thy hand, and I ask thee what have thou there? and
thou say, I have here an hundred pounds: why (say I) there is nothing but
paper, ink, and wax: Oh, but by this (say thou) I will recover an hundredth
pounds, and that is as good. So beloved, this is as good, that under these
signs, you receive the virtue of Christ's body and blood by faith, as if you
did eat his body, and drink his blood indeed, which is horrible to think
that any should devour their God, thinking thereby to worship him: never any
heretic, nor Idolater, conceived so grossly of their god before the Papist. We
read of a people which did eat men, but never of any people which did eat
their God.

All the Apostles say, that it was needful that Christ should take our flesh:
but no Apostle says, that it is needful that we should take Christ's flesh;
for all the blessings of Christ are apprehended by faith, and nothing is fit
to apprehend him whom we see not, but faith: and therefore one of their own
pillars said, Augustine.
Believe, and thou have eaten. Faith does more in religion then the mouth,
Luke 11. 27.
or else we might say with the woman, Blessed are the breasts which gave thee
suck, and so none should be blessed but Marie: but Marie was not blessed
because Christ was in her body, but because Christ was in her heart: and least
this should seem incredible unto you, because Marie is called blessed among
women: when Christ heard the women say, Blessed are the breasts which gave thee
suck, he replied unto her, Luke 8. 21.
Blessed are they which hear the word of God and keep it: these are my
brethren, and sisters, and mother (says Christ) as though the rest were no kin
to him in heaven, though they were kin in earth.

Thus if Christ were in thy body, and thou should say as this woman: Blessed
is the body that has thee in it, nay would Christ say, Blessed is the heart
that has me in it. If Marie were no whit better for having Christ in her
arms, nor for having her in her body, how much better art thou for having
him in thy belly, Note.
where thou can not see him? Must the sun needs come to us, or else cannot
his heat and light profit us? nay it does us more good, because it is so
far off: so this Sun is gone from us, that he might give more light unto
us, which made him say, It is good for you that I go from you: John 16. 7.
therefore away with this carnal eating of spiritual things. Pro. 31. 29.
Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou (says Solomon) surpassest them
all. So, many heretics have spoken absurdlie, but this surpasses them all,
that Christ must be applied like physic, as though his blood could not
profit us, unless we did drink it, and swallow it as a potion.

Is this the Papists union with Christ? Is this the manner whereby we are made
one flesh with Christ, to eat his flesh? nay, when he took our flesh unto
him, and was made man, then we were united to him in the flesh, and not now.
Christ took our flesh, we take not his flesh, but believe that he took ours,
therefore if you would know whether Christ's body be in the sacrament, A way to
know whether Christ's body be in the sacrament.
I say unto you as Christ said unto Thomas, touch, feel, and see. In visible
things God has appointed our eyes to be judges, for as the spirit discerns
spiritual objects, so sense discerns of sensible objects. As Christ taught
Thomas to judge of his body, so may we, and so should they: therefore if you
cannot see his body, nor feel his body, you may gather by Christ's saying to
Thomas, that he would not have you believe that it is his body, Ioh. 20. 27.
for my body (says Christ) may be seen and felt. And thus Transubstantiation
is found a liar.

Now, why christ calls the bread his body.
if you ask me why Christ calls the sign by the name of the thing it
self, I ask thee again; May thou say when thou see the picture of the
Queen, this is the Queen; and when thou see the picture of a Lion, this is
a Lion: and may not Christ say when he sees a thing like his body, This is my
body?

I showed you before, that every Sacrament is called by the name of the thing
which it does signify, and therefore why should we stumble at this more then
the rest? The reason why the signs have the name of the things, is to strike a
deeper reverence in us to receive this sacrament of Christ reuere^tly,
sincerely, and holily, as if Christ were there preset in body and blood
himself.

And surely, as he which defaceth the Queens seal is convicted of contempt
and treason to her own person: so he which prophaneth these seals of Christ,
does not worship Christ, but despise him, and that contempt shall be required
of him, as if he had contemned Christ himself. This is the reason why Christ
calls the signs of his body his body, to make us take this Sacrament
reverently, because we are apt to contemn it, as the Jews did their Manna.

It follows: Verse 24.
Do this in remembrance of me: that is, these signs shall be a remembrance
of my death: when you break the bread, you shall remember the wounding of my
body: and when you drink the wine, you shall remember the sheading of my
blood. If we do this is remembrance of Christ's body, which was broken like
the bread, it is* an argument that his body is not there, because remembrance
is not of things present, but of things absent: we remember not. but we see
that which is before us. This might put the Papists in remembrance that Christ
is not sacrificed now, when we do but remember his sacrifice: this is not
Christ's sacrifice, but a remembrance of his sacrifice: he was sacrificed
before, and now it is applied, lest his sacrifice should be in vain. This was
done once reallie, when he offered himself upon the cross, therefore that
offering was called a sacrifice, because he was sacrificed indeed; but this
offering is called a Sacrament, because it is but a sign of his sacrifice.

If Christ in this Sacrament were offered indeed, If Christ's body were in the
Sacrament, it were not a Sacrament, but a sacrifice.
then it should be called a sacrifice as his once offering was: but because it
is but a remembrance of his sacrifice, therefore it is called a Sacrament. This
is not a sacrifice of Christ, but a sacrifice of our selves. Lest we should
take it to be a sacrifice of Christ, Christ himself calls it a remembrance
of his sacrifice, Do this in my remembrance.

Here is our work, as Christ has done, so must we do, so we minister, and so
you receive: we can give you nothing but that which we have received from him,
as Paul says. Therefore, if Christ did not give his mortal body which stood
before them, and could not profit them; nor his glorified body, which was not
glorified then, and when it was glorified, ascended up unto heaven, and there
abides: how can these iugling Priests make their God again, which made them?
They can no more turn wine into blood, and bread into flesh, than they can
command a gnat to become a camel: for it is a greater work to make God, than
to make the world. Mat. 24. 23.
Therefore as Christ says; When they tell you here is Christ, and there is
Christ, believe them not: So when they tell you that Christ is in heaven, and
that Christ is in earth, 2. Rin. 2. 17.
in this place and that place, believe them not: for Elias ascension was a
figure of Christ's ascension: when Elias was ascended, yet some sought for his
body upon earth: so though Christ be ascended, yet many seek his body upon
earth: but as they could not find Elias body, so these cannot find Christ's
body, although they have sought three hundred years.

But if his body were upon earth, as they say, should we handle it, and touch
it, now it is glorified? After his resurrection he said unto Marie, Ioh. 20. 17.
Touch me not, because his body was glorified: that is, not to be touched
with fingers any more, but with faith. Therefore we read of none which touched
his body (after it was risen) but only Thomas, to settle his faith.

Thus you see we need to suborne no witnesses, for every word in this Text
which they allege for Transubstantiation, does make against
Transubstantiation, whereby if Antichrist does signify those which are against
Christ, you see who may be called Antichrist. There is no question in Popery
(except Purgatory the Popes publican and tasker) about which the Papists are
at such civil wars among themselves, as about this Transubstantiation. They
cannot tell when the change begins, nor what manner of change it is, nor
how long the change continues: some hang one way, and some another, Judge. 7. 22
like the Midianites, which fought one against another. And no marvel though
their consciences stagger about it: for to show you the right father of it, it
was one of the dreams of Innocentius the third, A monster of his age.
in the year of our Lord 1215. so many years passed before
Transubstantiation was named, and then a Pope set it first on foot: so it came
out of Rome, the grandame of all heresies, and for want of scriptures, has
been defended with fire and sword, and swallowed mo Martyrs than all the gulfs
of the Papal sea beside.

Now, Eight absurdities which follow Transubstantiation.
when the doctrines of men go for scriptures, you shall see how many errors
rush into the Church: for grant but this to Pope Innocentius as the Papists
do, that the bread and wine are changed into Christ's body. First it will
follow, that Christ's body is not upon earth, and so one of the articles of our
faith shall be falsified, Act. 19. 11.
which says, He is ascended into heaven: or if he be ascended, and descended
again, another article will be falsified, Romans 8. 34.
which says, That he sits at the right hand of his father: Act. 3. 21.
that is (as Peter says) he abides Heb 9. 28. and 10. 12.
was not sufficient, because we must sacrifice him again, and break his
body, and shed his blood, as the Jews crucified Christ did eat his own
body: for all the fathers say, that he did eat the same Bread which he gave
to his Disciples. Lastly, it will

Thus when men devise Articles of their own, while they strike upon the
anuill, the sparks fly in their face; and they are like the man which began
to build, and could not finish it. When I see the Papist in so many absurdities
for entertaing one error, me thinks he seems like a Collier, which is
grymed with his own coals. Therefore, as in manners we should think of of
Peter's saying, Act. 5. 29.
Whether is it meet to obey God or men: So in doctrines we should think,
whether it be meet to believe God or men.

Thus have you heard the Author of this Sacrament, Conclusion.
The Lord Jesus; the time when it was instituted, in the night that he was
betrayed; the manner how it was instituted, after thanksgiving: the end why it
was instituted, for a remembrance of his death; and the discovery of
Transubstantiation, one of the last heresies which Babylon hatched. Now, they
which have been Patrons of it before, should do like the father and mother of
an idolater, that is, Deuteronomy. 13. 6. and 9.
lay the first hand upon him to shorten his life. Thus I end. Think what
account ye shall give of that ye have heard.

The end of the first Sermon.
A TREATISE OF THE Lords Supper.
THE SECOND SERMON.
1. Cor. 11. 25. 26. 27. 28. 25 After the same manner also he took the Cup
when he had supped: saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my blood, this do
as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me.

26 For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this Cup, ye show
the Lords death till he come.

27 Wherefore, whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink the Cup of the
Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.

28 Let a man therefore examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread,
and drink of this Cup.


Here I am to speak of the second service, as it were, at the Lords table,
and of that preparation, which is like the Wedding garment, that every man
must bring to this Ba^quet. These words are diversely repeated of the
Evangelists. Here it is said, This Cup is the New Testament in my blood. Mat.
26. 28
In Matthew and in Mark it is said, Mar. 14. 24
This Cup is my blood of the new Testament. This is the first mention which
Christ makes of a Testament, as though now his promises deserved the name of a
Testament, because the seal is set unto them, which before this Sacrament was
not sealed, but like a bare writing without a singet. This word Testament,
does implie a promise, and therefore teaches us, that the Sacrament does
confirm, and strengthen, and nourish our faith, because it seals the promise
which we should believe.

Here is to be noted, that Christ does not only speak of a Testament, but he
calls it a New Testament; which words never met together before, as though
the Law were for the old man to mortify him, and the Gospel for the new man
to comfort him again: or, as if the old Testament had so washed her face, and
changed her apparel at Christ's coming, that one would not think it the
same, but a new Testament, because even now she was shadowed with a thousand
Ceremonies, and now they are gone from her, like a mist at the Sun rising. As
Christ calls Love, Ioh. 13. 34.
A new Commandment, because he renewed it like a Law worn out of memory; so
he calls the promise of salvation, a New Testament, because as it was renewed
to Sem, and after renewed to Abraham, and after renewed to David, so now he
renewed it again, which should be always new and fresh unto us. Every
Testament is confirmed with blood, the old Testament was confirmed by the
blood of Goats and Bullockes, and Rams; Heb. 9. 18.
but the new Testament is confirmed by the blood of Christ: Mat. ^
My blood (says Christ) is the blood of the new Testament. nay This Cup (says
Christ) is the new Testament. Luke 26. 20.
You may see then that they may gather as well out of Christ's words, that the
Cup is the new Testament, as that the Wine is his blood: for Christ says, This
Cup is the new Testament, as well as he says, this Wine is my blood, or this
bread is my body. Beside. when Christ speaks of a new Testament, he implies
that the old Testament is fulfilled; the sacrifices, Heb. 8. 13.
and Ceremonies of the Law did signify Christ before he came, therefore they
are fulfilled in his coming: no more Sacrifices, no mo For types and figures.
Ceremonies, for the truth is come. Sacrifices and Ceremonies are honorably
buried with the Priesthood of Aaron, let them rest: it is not lawful to
violate the sepulchers of the dead, and take their bodies out of the earth, as
the witch would raise Samuel out of his grave. 1. Sa. 28. 14
Therefore they which retain ceremonies, which should be abrogated, relics
of Iudaisme, or relics of Papisme, may be said to violate the sepulchers of
the dead, and disturb the dece^sed, like the Witch, which presumed to raise
Samuel out of his grave.

This Testament is called a Testament in blood, because the Testament and Will
of a man is confirmed, when the man is dead, so Christ confirmed his testament
by his death. Moses says, Leu. 17. 11.
that life is in the blood; so the blood of Christ is the life of this
Testament. If Christ's blood had not been shed, this testament made unto us,
had been unprofitable, as the Testament of a Father is unto his son, if the
father should not die but live: therefore the Apostle says, Heb. 9. 22.
without shedding of blood, there is no remission of sins. Therefore the
Testament or Covenant of the remission of our sins, is called the Testament
in blood: the blood of Christ is the seal of the Testament, which we have to
show unto God for the remission of our sins, and the two Sacraments are a seal
of that blood, to witness that it was shed.

Again, this is a matter regarded in testaments and Wills; to the Testament
of him that is dead, no man adds or detracteth, but as the testator made it,
so it stands without alteration: so should this testament of Christ, and this
sacrament of Christ, no man should alter it now he is dead, for he which
adds or detracteth, Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
has a curse in Gods book. Reu. 22. 18.


Therefore Christ when he instituted this Sacrament, commanded, Do this; that
is, do as I do: least they should swerve one whit from his own manner: yet
how many gaudes have the Papists added to it, that he which had heard Christ
say, Do this in remembrance of me, and should see how they handle the matter
in their Mass, The Popish receiving under one kind confuted.
could see nothing to remember Christ by, but a veil to hide Christ from him.
Therefore this Commandment was repeated again, when he gave the Wine, Do
this, etc.

As he commanded them to eat the Bread in remembrance of him, so he
commands them to drink the wine in remembrance of him: nay, he speaks
more precisely of the wine then of the bread; for he says of the wine, Mat.
26. 27
Drink you all of this, which he says not of the bread. Surely, Christ did
foresee that some proud heretics would do otherwise after him, even as it is
come to pass: for the Papist does break this Commandment of Christ, as flatly
as Saul brake the commandment of Samuel. Samuel commanded him to kill the
fat and the lean, 1. Sam. 15. 9
Saul killed the lean but not the fat; so Christ commands to receive bread
and wine: they teach to receive bread, but not wine: Christ says, Drink you
all of this: they say, drink not al of this: Christ gave the bread and wine to
all; they give the bread to all, and the wine to some: their Priests receive
all but the people must content themselves with half: the Priest eats and
drinks, but the people must not drink for spilling on their clothes. Is this
the Church which cannot err? Do they think to hemme Christ in their Mass,
Mat. 27. 35
and shut his ordinance out of their Mass? The soldiors divided Christ's
coat, but these divide his body, and separate the bread and wine which Christ
has joined. Paul's speaks of Heretics which taught, Touch not, Col. 2. 21.
taste not, handle not: so these say, Touch not, How the popish Priests do
iniure the people.
taste not, handle not; when they should say, Touch, and taste, and handle. Of
all heresies either old or new, there is none so injurious to the common
people, as the

Therefore we may say as a Heathen did, There is no charity in the Papists
Sacrament: Act. 5. 2.
because like Ananias, the Priests keep back that which they should
distribute, and: mangle the sacrifice, as though Ely his sons had left their
hook to the Massing Friars. 1. Sam. 2. 13


Thus that ye may know who succeed the Pharisees, they have fulfilled that
which the Pharisees did, Mar. 7. 13.
that is, By their own commandments, they have made the commandment of God
of no effect. For whereas the purpose of Christ was to tie our faith wholly to
himself, that we should not seek for any thing without him, knowing that the
maintenance of this life has need both of meat and drink, to teach us that
all sufficiency is in himself; by bread and wine he shows, that he is in
stead both of meat and drink, that is, in stead of all: which signification is
taken away where the wine is not given as well as the bread. Therefore as it
is said of a horrible and odious crime, Iud. 19. 30.
Consider the matter and give sentence: so I wish all to consider this
innovation, and give sentence of it. Can there be any clearer contradiction to
the word, or bolder check to Christ, then when he says; Drink you all of
this: to say, drink not all of this? It is even as when God said, Ye shall
die, the devil said, Genesis 2. 17.
ye shall not die. Shall we go now to a Council, or a Father, or a Doctor, to
enquire whether this doctrine be like Christ's doctrine, I do verelie think
that none is here so simple, but that he sees, that if any thing can be
contrary to Christ's speech, this is contrary to it: but this is only their
detraction from the sacrament.

Now you shall hear their additions to the Sacrament* look upon their
vestures, and their gestures, and their altars, and their pix, and their
incense, and their beckes, and their nods, and their turnings, all this is more
then Christ did, and therefore the Prophet may say again, Esaias. 1. 12.
who has required this of you? Did Christ command you to do more then he
did, and not do as he did? Therefore let them which have eyes to see, be
thankful for their light, when they hear how blind they were whom God gave
over to be seduced.

The fruit of this Sacrament is noted in these words, Verse 24.
which is broken for you, which is shed for you, that is (as Matthew
interprets) shed for the remission of sins. Mat. 26. 28
As all was made for us, Genesis 1.
so all which Christ spoke, he spoke for us, 2. Cor. 4. 15.
and all which Christ did, he did for us, and all which Christ suffered, he
suffered for us, that the sins of men might be forgiven, and yet so few
apprehende this benefit, that the way to heaven is called A narrow way, Mat.
7. 13.
as though all these pains did ransom but a small number, and certain order
of men. All are not saved by Christ's death, But all which are saved, are saved
by Christ's death: his death is sufficient to save all, as the sun is
sufficient to lighten all: but if any man wink, (...) will not give him light:
so if any (...), and will not receive, Christ will not thrust him into heaven,
but every man shall have that which he chooses, (as David says) Blessing to
him that loves blessing, Psa. 119. 17
and cursing to him which loves cursing.

There wants not a hand to give, but a hand to take. Matthew. 23.
I would, (says Christ) but you would not. Strech forth thy hand, and here
is Christ's hand, which takes Gods hand, and man's hand, and ioines them
together, and then the remission of sins is sealed. This is the Will and
Testament of Christ.

He had no goods, nor lands, nor money to give by his testament. A rich man
when he dies, bestows the money which he has gathered, and forgiueth many
debtes which are owing him, but Christ has nothing to give, nor any thing to
forgive. The Lord of all had least of all, and he might say like his servant
Peter, Act. 3. 6.
gold and silver have I none, no not a grave to bury his body in, Mar. 15. 46
but the grave that Joseph made for himself, served to bury Christ. Mat. 13.
55
His father was a Carpenter, but never made any house for himself: Luke 2. 16.
his mother lay in a stable for want of a chamber: his disciple was fain to
borow xx. pe^se for him of a fish: Mat. 17. 27
therefore when one offered, Luke 9. 57.
master I will follow thee, thinking to gain by his service, like retainers to
noble men; he replied unto him (...) Foxes have holes, and the fowls have
(...) the son of man has not a house to hide his head: showing that the beasts
and fowls were richer then he, therefore when he had nothing to give, he gave
himself, and when he had no debtors to forgive, Luke 23. 34.
he forgave his enemies: what then this is a poor and weak Testament, which
gave nothing? oh the goodliest testament that ever was made, for it brings to
us the remission of sins, is it such a matter to forgive sins? Yea, the
greatest benefit in all the world, A similitude of ma^s estate
nay, a greater benefit then all the world: for thus it stood, thou had
committed high treason against the Queens person, thou art detected,
apprehended, accused, convicted, and condemned upon it to be hanged, and
drawn, and quartered, and thy quarters to be set up for a spectacle, like a
carcass which thou have seen hanging upon a gibber, and the crows pecking
upon it. What a horror, and shaking to thy mind, to think of that day, when
all these torments, and shame and fear shall surprise thee at once, which
would make thee quake and tremble, if thou should see but another so
dismembered before thy face? Thou have no comfort now but this, when I have
suffered I shall be free, before to morrow at this time, all my pain will be
past, though my shame continue, and my children be beggars. What grace, what
favor, what mercy, now to pardon thee all this, and save thy life, and set
thee at liberty, as though thou had never offended? So I and thou, and
every one here had committed treason against the king of kings, and stood
condemned for it, not to suffer, and then to be free, like them which break
the laws of men: but to suffer and suffer, and ever to suffer all that the
devils would heap upon us.

Then came the mercy of God for Christ, which shed his blood, like an vmpire
between God and us, and said as Esaias said to Hezechia, His words are not so,
but the effect of his words.
Thou shall not dye but live, loose him, let him go, for he is mine. So we
were stayed like the widows son, when he was carried to his grave. This is
the benefit of Christ's death, 2. Kin. 20. 5.
and this Sacrament is the remembrance of it, Luke 7. 15.
and therefore whenever we receive it, this addition comes with it, which
is shed for the remission of sins: Mat. 26. 28
our fault was so heinous and grievous, that no ransom could counteruaile it,
unless God himself had suffered for us.

Being in this extremity, neither man, nor angel offered his life for us, but
the prince himself, which should have crucified us, came to be crucified of us
for us, yt we might say with steadfast faith, I believe the remission of sins,
not the satisfaction of sins, but the remission of sins. Mark this
distinction against Popish merits of works, or penance; Christ has
satisfied, and not we, we are remitted, and not Christ: therefore we say in our
confession, The merciful article.
I believe the remission of sins, which I may call the merciful Article,
because it is the quintessence, and sweetness of all the twelve. Therefore who
but Antichrist durst deprave it? If there be a satisfaction for our sins by
our works, or by our pilgrimages, or by our masses, or by our penance, let
Christ never be called a forgiuer, but an exchanger, like the Pope, which
sells his pardons

Wretched creatures which will not receive the Lord, when he comes to their
door. Christ says; Revel. 21. 6.
Take for nothing, and they say no, we will not take, but buy. Vile, base*
miserable men, disdain to take grace of God without satisfaction, but they
will cope with the Lord, and give him so many pilgrimages, fast so many days,
hear so many masses, and pay so many works for it, until they have done as
much good as they have done evil. Our sins are infinite, and God is infinite:
but our works are finite, in number and measure; how can they answer then to
that which exceeds number and measure? Therefore be content with Joseph's
brethren, to take your money again, Genesis 42. 25.
and say that you have corn for nothing, that is, you are saved for nothing,
or else when you say, I believe the remission of sins, you lie unto God,
because you do not believe the remission of sins, but satisfaction for
sins, like the Papists.

It follows, Verse 26.
As often as ye shall eat this bread, Three arguments against
transubstantiation in one verse.
and drink this cup, ye shall show the Lords death till he come. Here are
three invincible arguments against Popish transubstantiation, like the three
witnesses, under which every word does stand.

First we are said to eat bread, Deuteronomy. 17. 6.
then it is not flesh, but bread. Secondly, we are said to show the Lords
death, then it is but a show or representation of his death, Thirdly, it is
said, until he come, if he be to come, then he is not come: if he be come,
how can we say, until he come? The effect of this verse was showed in these
words, Do this in remembrance of me. For to say, Do this in remembrance of
me, and to say, So often as you do this, you show my death, is much at one: so
that if you call this Sacrament a show of Christ's death, as it is called
here, then it is not Christ; or if you call it a remembrance of Christ, as it
is called there, yet it is not Christ, but a show or remembrance of Christ:
but this is such a show and remembrance, that the next verse says, Verse 27.
Whosoever receives it unworthily, is guilty of the body and blood of Christ.

Will ye know who receives unworthily: What it is to receive unworthily.
In the nine and twentieth verse Paul says; he discerns not the Lords body:
that is, which puts no difference between this bread and other, but eats
like a child, the meat which he knows not: and after the bread seems
stones to him, and the wine poison, because his conscience tells him, I have
received vnwoorthelie, before I could say like David, My heart is prepared. My
sheep (says Christ) know my voice: Ioh. 10. 27.
as they discern Christ's words, so they discern Christ's body, and
therefore so often as they come to the Lords table, they seem to come into
the Lords presence: there they greet, and kiss, and embrace one another with
affections, which none can know but they that feel, like John, Luke 1. 41.
which leaped in the womb, so soon as Christ came near him. How receivers
may be guilty of Christ's death.


Will ye know beside, what it is to be guilty of the body and blood of
Christ? even as Judas was guilty for betraying him, and Pilate for delivering
him, Mar. 14. 44. mar. 25. 1^.
and the Jews for crucifying him: Mar. 15. 25
so they are guilty which receive this Sacrament unworthily, as Pilate and
Caiphas and Judas were. If they be guilty of Christ's death, they are guilty
of their own death too; as if they had committed two murders: and therefore
Paul says after, that many of the Corinthians dyed, Verse 30.
only for the unworthy receiving of this Sacrament. As the Word is the
savor of death to them which receive it unworthily, so the Sacrament is the
savor of death to them which receive it unworthily: 1. Cor. 216.
it never goes into their mouth, but they are traitors ipso facto, and may say
to Hell, this day have I taken possession of thee, How we should be prepared
before we come to the Lords table.
because I am guilty of Christ's blood. Therefore it follows immediately,
Let a man examine himself before he eat of this bread, or drink of this
wine: as if he should say, If he which receives this Sacrament unworthily, be
guilty of Christ's death, like Judas which hanged himself; if these signs be
received to salvation or damnation, like the Word; the next lesson is, to
examine your selves before you receive, lest you receive like the son of
perdition, Ioh. 13. 27.
which swallowed the bread and the Devil together. Therefore, Let a man
examine himself, and so let him eat: that is, let him examine first, and
receive after: for if we should receive the bread of the earth reverently, 1.
Sa. 9. 13.
how should we receive the bread of heaven? When Iehonadab came to Iehu his
chariot, he said, Is thy heart upright as my heart is toward thee? 1. K. 10.
15.
So when we come to the Lords table, he would have our hearts upright to
him, as his heart is to us: for who feasteth his enemies and mockers? Iam. 2. 2.
The golden Ring sits highest at our table, but the Wedding garment sits
highest at this table. It is safer eating with unwashed hands, than with an
unwashed heart. The Jews were taught to choose the Lamb of the Passe-ouer on
the tenth day of the first month, in which month they came out of Egypt,
Exodus 12. 3. and 6.
and on the fourteenth day after they were taught to eat him: so they had
four days respite between the choosing and the killing, to prepare and
sanctify themselves for the Passe-ouer, which was a sign of the Lords Supper.
This admonished them, that the matter (now to be performed) was very weighty,
and therefore they were deeply to consider it: for now was the action and sum
of al salvation in handling. If they did prepare themselves so, before they did
receive the figure of this Sacrament, how should we be prepared before we
receive the Sacrament it self? 2. Chro. 35. 6
Therefore as Josiah commands the Levites to prepare the people: so Paul
advises the people to prepare themselves, that is, to examine whether they
have faith, and love, and repentance, All are bound to know the scriptures.
before they come to this feast. By this all may see: first, that Paul would
have every lay man skillful in the scripture, that he be able to examine
himself by it; for this admonition is not to them which minister the
Sacrament, but to all which receive the Sacrament. And the rule by which we
must examine our selves, is the law which we should obey: therefore if the
rule be unknown, the examination must be undone. Our doctrine must be
examined by the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles; Act. 17. 11.
our prayers must be examined by the six petitions of Christ's prayer; Note.
our belief must be examined by the twelve Articles of faith; our life must
be examined by the ten Commandments of the Law. Exodus 20. 1. etc.
Now, he which has his Touchstone may try gold from copper; but he which
has it not, takes one for the other: therefore, 2. Cor. 13. 5.
before Paul's Examine, you had need to learn Christ's Search, Ioh. 5. 39.
Search the Scriptures, and they will lighten you to search your selves. This
is the doctrine with which I will end, and the necessary point for which I
choose this Text, to teach you (if I could) that Christian Art how to examine
your selves.

Let a man examine himself before he eat. Verse 28.
Here is first an examination: The Division.
secondly an examination of our selves: thirdly, an examination before we come
to the Sacrament. Touching the first, here Paul says, Examine your selves, but
in 2. Corinthians. 13. he doubleth his charge, Prove your selves; and again at
next word, Examine your selves: as if he should say, this work must be done
when it is done, because it is never thoroughly done; and therefore we must
double our examination, as Paul doubleth his counsel. If a man suspect his
enemy, he will try him with a question; if that will not search him, he will
put forth another; if that be spyed, he will move another, like one which
puts diverse keys into a lock until it open: So he which examineth, must
try and try, prove, and prove, search and search: 2. Cor. 11. 14.
for the angel of darkness is like an angel of light, 1. Ioh. 4. 1.
and we have no way to discover him, but that of John, Try the spirits. God
examineth with trials, the devil examineth with temptations, the world
examineth with persecutions: we which are thus examined, had need to examine
too. If any man skill not what Examining means, the very word Examine is so
pregnant, that it prompteth us how we should examine: for it signifies to put
our selves unto the Touchstone, as if we would try gold from copper.
Therefore one says, that Examination is the eye of the soul, A description of
true examination.
whereby she seeeth her self, and her safety, and her danger, and her way
which she walks, and her pace which she holds, and the end to which she
tends: she looks into her glass and spieth every spot in her face, how all
her graces are stained; then she takes the water of life, and washes her blots
away. After she looks again, and beholds all her gifts, her faith, fear,
love, patience, meekness, and marketh how every one does flourish or wither.
If they fade and decay, that she feels a consumption; then she takes
preservatives and restoratiues of prayer, and counsel, and repentance, before
the sickness grow. Thus every day she lets down a bucket into her heart,
to see what water it brings up, lest she should corrupt within, and perish
suddenly.

To hear, and read, and pray, and fast, and communicate, is a work of many:
but to examine those works is the fashion of few: and therefore Jeremy
complains, Ier. 8. 6.
No man says, what have I done? as if he should say, No man examineth
himself. And therefore in all the Scripture it is said but of one, Job. 9. 28.
That he feared all his works: as though he durst not think, nor speak,
nor do any thing before he had examined what it was, from whence it came, and
whither it went: so the more precious treasure is deeper hid in the ground.
Mat. 13. 44


The second point is, to Examine our selves; Paul says, 1. These. 5. 21
Try all things, much more should we try our selves. Mat. 13. 25
The good sower does sow his own ground, but the bad sower does so we another
man's ground* as the devil did. The Disciples of Christ said, Master, is it I?
not, Mat. 26. 22
Master is it he? The Disciples of John asked, Luke 3. 10.
Master, what shall we do? not Master, what shall they do? We must obey
some, and hear others, and admonish others, and love all; but examine our
selves. That which we apply unto others, the Apostle applies unto our selves:
for when we speak of an examiner, we intend one which examineth other; when we
speak of an accuser, we intend one which accuses other; when we speak of a
Judge, we mean one which judges others: 1. Cor. 11. 13
but the scripture cries, Examine thy self, accuse thy self, judge thy
self; Mat. 7. 3.
that is, be not curious to search a moat in thy brothers eye, but pull out the
beam which is in thine own eye. This does show that they which sit in Gods
chair to judge others, commonly have greater faults themselves, then they
whom they use to judge: and therefore Christ calls their fault a beam, and
the others a moate. This made David say, Psa. 4. 4.
Examine thy heart: thy heart is thy own heart, therefore thou must examine
whether thou pray, whether thou watch, whether thou fast; and not whether he
pray, whether he watch, whether he fast, as the Pharisie examined the
Publicane, Luke 18. 11.
least thou have Peter's check, when he examined what John should do, Ioh. 21.
22
Christ said, What is that to thee? follow thou me. Thou art a private man and
have a private examination, therefore let thy question be, What have I done?
and make thy Anatomy of thy self.

See beloved, we may not believe our selves, before we have examined our
selves: for we are false hearted, and the notablest cousiner that deceives
most, for one time that he deceives others, ten times deceives himself.
Because the flesh is a wily servant, and will lie like Gehezi to his master,
2. Kin. 5. 25.
and face him that it has not sinned, when it comes from sin: therefore as
Elisha examined his servant, 2. Kin. 5. 26.
so the soul must examine her servant, that is, man must be jealous of
himself, and take himself for a liar, for a flatterer, for a dissembler,
until he be thoroughly acquainted with himself: for no man is so often
beguiled as by himself, by trusting his double heart, and taking his own word
without further trial. If Paul had bid us examine others, Luke 22. 31.
we would have sifted them like Satan. Satan has desired to sift thee (says
Christ to Peter) so we have a desire to sift others. Even Peter which was
sifted of satan, longed to sift John, and know what he should do, before he
hearkened to his own charge. Therefore the help of examination is a needful
preservative, although we were as sound as Peter. They which are suspected of a
crime, do not examine themselves, but are examined of others, least they
should be partial: but a Christian must examine himself of his crime, 1. Cor.
2. 11.
and be his own judge, his own accuser, and his own condemner: for no man
knows the spirit of man, but the spirit which is in man, which will condemn
him if he be guilty, and tell him all that he has done, and with what mind
he did it, and what he deserves for it. This is the private araignment, or
close sessions, when Conscience sits in her chair to examine, and accuse, and
judge, and condemn her self, because she will not be condemned of God.

Thus holy men have kept their sessions at home, and made their hearts the
foreman of the jury, and examined themselves as we examined others, the
fear of the Lord stood at the door of their souls, to examine every thought
before it went in, and at the door of their lips, to examine every word before
it went out, whereby they escaped a thousand sins which we commit, as though
we had no other work. So thou should sit in judgment of thy self, and
call thy thoughts, and speeches, and actions, to give in evidence against thee,
whether thou be a Christian, or an infidel, a son, or a bastard, a servant,
or a rebel, a Protestant, or an hypocrite: if thou find not faith, nor fear,
nor love, nor zeal, when thou examinest thy self, let no man make thee
believe that thou art holy, that thou art sanctified, that thou art a
Christian, that thou art a believer, that thou art a Gospeller, because thou
art worse then thou seem thy self, for every man is partial to himself
when he is most humbled.

Therefore if my heart tell me that I do love God, whom shall I believe
before my self? Pro. 25. 3.
As Solomon says: No man can search the heart of the king: so Paul says, No
man knows the spirit of any man, 1. Cor. 2. 11
but the spirit which is in man: that is, no man feels the heart of man so
well as himself. And yet himself, although he have lived with it ever since he
was borne, does not know his own heart, unless he examine it narrowly, no
more than he knows his own bones, or his veins, or his sinews, or his
arteries, or his muskles, how many are in his body, or where they lie, or what
they do.

This seems strange that a man should not know his own heart: yet it is true
that the best of all does not know his own heart, though he has dwelt with
it from his mothers womb. For Christ says to his Disciples, Luke 9. 55.
even to his Disciples, you know not of what spirit you are, that is, you
think better of your selves then you are, and know not what the clock
strikes within. There is a zeal without knowledge, and there is a knowledge
without zeal; there is a faith without obedience, and there is an obedience
without faith; there is a love without fear, and there is a fear without
love, and both are hypocrites. Therefore as Dalilah searched where Sampsons
strength lay, Judge. 16. 6.
so let every man search where his weakness lies, and alwaie be filling the
empty gap.

Now this examination must go before us to the Sacrament. Every meat works
according as it is digested, and this meat works according as it is
received. Therefore when Christ had taught what we should do in receiving the
Sacrament, now Paul shows what we should do before we receive the
Sacrament. Let a man examine himself. But some will come before they examine
themselves: and therefore, as the Priests of the law had authority to put by
lame and blind sacrifices, so the ministers of the Gospel have power to put
by lame and blind receivers, and he which does not so, gives a sword into
their hands to kill themselves. If the Pastor would use this examination duly,
it were the only way to make every one examine himself, least he be put by
like Non proficients. As Iiphtah discerned the Ephramites, because when they
should pronounce Shibboleth, they pronounced Sibboleth: so all which cannot
pronounce Christ, that is, give a reason of their faith, are to be thrust from
this table.

There is a hearing, Luke 8. 18.
and a preparatiue before hearing. There is a praying, and a preparatiue before
praying. Eccle. 4. 17.
There is a receiving, and a preparatiue before receiving; which if it be
wanting, the receiver receives vncomfortablie, the prayer prays idly, the
hearer hears vnfruitfullie, like those which do eat before hunger, and
drink before thirst.

This preparatiue before hearing, and praying, and receiving does signify
that there is a kind of physic in these three, for preparatiues are ministered
always before Physic, and as the preparatiue which goes before, makes way
to the physic, or else it would do no good but hurt: so unless examination go
before the sacrament, we seal up the threatenings which are written against us,
in stead of the promises which are made unto us: for the sacrament is a seal,
and therefore seals good or evil, as every other seal does.

The preparatiue before we receive, Luke 1. 76.
is to Examine. The second examination.
As John was the forerunner of Christ, so examination is the forerunner of
the sacrament, like the Harbinger which rides before to prepare the room. Job
1. 5.
For, if Job commanded his sons to sanctify themselves before they did come
to his sacrifice, how should we sanctify our selves before we come to Christ's
sacrament, wherein we are commanded to do as the Lord himself did which
instituted it? Luke 22. 12.
It is said that the chamber wherein Christ did institute this sacrament, was
trimmed; the chamber wherein the Apostles received this sacrament, was trimmed.
If Judas chamber, his inner chamber had been trimmed so too, he had received
this Sacrament with as much comfort as the other disciples did: but because his
heart was not trimmed: therefore he was the first which was condemned for the
unworthy receiving of this Sacrament.

Adam did not think that death had been in an apple, Genesis 3. 6.
so you would not think that death should be in bread: but as a coal has
fire in it, beside the coal it self, which fire does either warm, or burn;
so this meat has another meat in it, beside that which is seen, which does
either save, or destroy: therefore he which comes to this spiritual meat,
must examine whether he have a spiritual mouth, as well as a carnal mouth, or
else he shall receive no more than he sees, and that which he sees not shall
destroy him.

No man (says Christ) puts new wine into old vessels, Mar. 2. 22.
lest the vessels break, and the wine leake. This wine is new wine, therefore
put it into new vessels, holy vessels, sanctified vessels, or else it will
leake forth, and break the vessel, and thou shall have no more taste of it,
than while the relish of bread is in thy mouth. When Christ comes to our
house, shall we not look whether our chamber be trimmed, as the chamber was
trimmed against his coming to the Passe-ouer? But how shall we trim it?

When a man takes an office, he examineth his substance; when he takes a
trade, he examineth his skill: when he goes to fight, he examineth his
strength: but these wants are no wants when he goes to the Sacrament. Will thou know now upon what articles thou must inquire at that time, that is, how
thou should examine thy self?

As some prayer may be at all times, 1. These. 5. 16*
and some rejoicing may be at all times; so some examination is at all times.
Job. 9. 28.
Thus Job examined himself every day, nay, every hour, because he scanned
all that he did.

But there is a special examination before the Sacrament, because it is the
bread which is received to salvation, 1. Cor. 11. 29.
or damnation; because it is the feast, Mat. 22. 11
to which whosoever comes without his wedding garment, shall be cast into
utter darkness; because it is a seal which seals a curse or a blessing.

Therefore having observed that examination is the necessariest lesson in
Christianity, and less known than other, I have studied since my Sermon to
lay down three examinations which you should use at all times, and a special
examination, for the Communicants Catechism, which leads immediately to the
Sacrament as a guest is handed to the Table. In the first examination I will
show thee a rule how thou shall try others spirits, and how thou shall try
thine own.

Thou shall try strange spirits by their The first examination upon the
marks of true spirits, and the false, in our selves or other.
plainly, or doubtfullie, boldly, or fearefullie, therefore we read that the
oracles of the heathen had a double meaning, and that the false Prophets never
spoke boldly, but where their patrons were ready to flesh them.

By the proportion of faith: for every heresy is contrary to some article of
our belief, 1. K. 22. 11.
as every sin is against some of the ten Commandments.

By the event of their speeches: for they Deu. 18. 22.
as it is said in the 18. chapter of Deuteronomie, Mat. 7. 15.
and therefore they are called false Prophets.

By their fruits: for none of the false Prophets Mat. 7. 16.


By their success: for if they be not of God

Thou shall try thine own spirit by the and all that it sees, and all that
it feels, unto some profit: but a bad mind makes a temptation of every
thing: therefore it is said, Romans 14. 14.
To the clean all things are clean, and so, to the unclean nothing is
clean: Tit. 1. 15.
that is, they defile themselves with every thing.

Mat. 6. 21.
to verify that saying; Where a man's treasure is, there will be his heart: for
lightly, the beginning is a picture of the end, and the act is like the
thought which set it a work.



a Christian, I will teach thee to know whether thy self be a Christian;
which that thou may reach too, observe this direction, and thou shall see of
what side thou art.

It must needs be, The second examination upon the differences between the
wicked and the godly.
that they which walk to contrary ends, should go diverse ways: therefore
there be more differences between the children of God and the children of the
world, than there be between men and beasts.

First, they are distinguished in will: for the Mat. 26. 36
which said; Not as I will, but as thou will.

They are distinguished in Faith: All men have not faith (says Paul) but the
just live by faith; 2. These. 3. 2.
as if he should say, Romans 1. 17.
the just believe, and the unjust believe not. The just believe, and apply
that they believe to themselves: the wicked may believe like the devils, Iam.
2. 19.
but their faith is like a gadding hen, which carries her eggs to other,
and never lays at home; so they believe that other shall be saved, but not
themselves.

They are distinguished in Hope: for because God, therefore they never defer
their reward; but if they do any good, they are trumpets of it themselves, for
fear it should not be blazed enough: Mat. 6. 2.
and therefore Christ said, that the Pharisees had their reward already,
because they were boasters of their works: 2. Tim. 3. 2.
and if they do not good but evil, yet they would be magnified as much for
evil, as other are for good. But the faithful are likened to handmaides, Psa.
123. 2.
which wait their reward; Mat. 6. 3.
Their left handseeth not when their right hand does well, and they are afraid
to take honor of men, for loosing their honor with God, like John Baptist,
Ioh. 1. 21.
which made his virtues meaner then they were, and debased himself, when he
might gave got a name above his Lord.

obedience: therefore Christ teaches us to judge men by their fruit, Mat. 7.
17.
as an infallible rule: for the evil tree will bring forth evil fruit, and
the good tree good fruit, and neither can change his property, although the
evil fruit is sometimes beautiful, and the good fruit sometime blasted. All
slip, but in the wicked, one sin teaches another, and in the faithful one
sin preuenteth another.

Repentance: for the wicked do but weep for their sins past, but the godly
purpose to sin no more: so Pharaoh, Exo. 10. 16.
Saul, and Judas said, I have sinned; but Shadrach, 1. Sa. 15. 30
Meshach, Mat. 27. 4.
and Abednego said, We will not sin: Dan. 3. 18.
therefore the heart of the godly is called a contrite heart, Psalm. 51. 17
but the heart the wicked is called a heart that cannot repent. Romans 2. 5.
Beside, Luke 8. 30.
as Christ cast out a legion of devils at once, so the godly would be purged of
all their sins together: but the wicked never consent to leave all, but as
Naaman said, Let the Lord spare me in this, 2. Kin. 5. 18.
so ever he excepteth one sin, which is his beloved sin; like Herod, Mat.
14. 3.
which reformed many things, and yet would not leave his brothers wife.

They are distinguished in Charity: for ye Mat. 5. 43.
they taught that men might hate their enemies: and Christ speaking of
Publicans and sinners, Luke 6. 32.
exhorts his Disciples not to love like them, because they loved none but
their friends.

They are distinguished in Prayer: for the They call not upon the Lord; Psalm.
14. 4.
as if they had not the spirit of prayer: Zach. 12. 10.
and therefore Christ calls their prayers, Romans 8. 16.
babbling, for they think not of God when they speak unto him. Mat. 6. 7.


They are distinguished in Patience: no hypocrite can bear the Cross, but
says like Cain, Genesis 4. 13.
It is heavier than I can suffer: but Paul and Silas sing in prison: Act. 16.
25.
for a faithful man would have something to humble him, and rejoices to bear
his masters marks, Gal. 6. 17.
because the wounds of a lover are sweet.

use of adversity: for this is a proper and peculiar mark of Gods children, to
profit by affliction: and therefore we read not in all the punishments of the
wicked, that one of them said like David, Ps. 119. 71.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted.

Humility: for the wicked are not humbled before the cross, like Pharaoh that
never sorrowed, Exo. 8. 8. 15.
but when he suffered: but the Apostles learned humility of their Master,
Mat. 11. 29
before their persecution came.

judgment of the word: for to the wicked it seems the hardest, and simplest,
and vnpleasantest book that is: 1. Cor. 1. 18.
and therefore Paul says, that it is foolishnes unto them. But to the godly,
it seems the wisest, and eloquentest, and sweetest, and easiest book of all
other, as though God did suddenly bring the understanding of it to them, Genesis
27. 20.
as Jacob said of his venison: according to that, Ioh. 7. 17.
He that will do his will, shall know his doctrime.

They are distinguished in their Judgment of God: the wicked are persuaded now
and then of Gods mercy for the present time while they feel it, as the Jews
praised him always, Exo. 15. 20.
when he did as they would have him; but they cannot persuade themselves,
that God will be merciful to them still, like Job, Job. 13. 15.
which said, Though the Lord kill me, yet will I trust in him: therefore the
hope of the righteous is called hope in death. Pro. 14. 32.
Beside, if the wicked love God, it is but for his benefits, Pro. 23. 18.
as Saul loved him for his kingdom. And this is always to be noted, 1. Sam.
10. 6
that in the wicked, the fear of hell is greater then is their hope of Heaven:
but in the faithful, the hope of heaven is greater then their fear of hell.

They are distinguished in their Delights: Dan. 5. 4.
like Belshazzers; and therefore when they are sick or troubled, they never
run to the Word for comfort, as though Gods promises pertained not to them;
but to feasts or tables, or tales, 1. Sa. 16. 23
or music, as Saul did to the harp. But all the delights of the godly are
like David's dance about the Arc; 2. Sa. 6. 14.
they are never merry, but when they are doing well; nor at peace, but when
their prayers have overcome God, Genesis 32. 28.
like Jacob.

Phil. 1. 23.
for the faithful long to be dissolved, Luke 2. 29.
and although they might live ever in continual prosperity, yet they would
not stay so long out of heaven: but the wicked would never be dissolved,
because death comes always unto them like a iailor to hale unto prison, 1.
Kin. 22. 8.
as Ahab said to Michaiah, That he never prophesied good to him. Hereby a man
shall know whether he have faith: for if he do believe the promises, he
will be glad to receive them.

sense of sin, Wicked men feel the lothsomnesse of their vices, but none but
the faithful feel the defects of their righteousness. The natural man never
complains of his good works, but vaunteth of them: but a godly man finds
fault with his prayers, Esa. 64. 6.
and his alms, and his watches, Psa. 16. 2.
like Isaiah, that said, his righteousness was like a menstruous cloth. As
Christ met the tempter in the wilderness, Mat. 4. 1, 2.
a place of prayer, and fasting, and meditation: so a godly man meets the
tempter in his prayers, and in his fasts, and in his meditations, that is, he
finds some let, or spotte, or want in all his devotions. Therefore, unless
thy righteousness mislike thee as well as thy prophanenes, know that yet thou
art no further than the wicked.

They are distinguished in their Ends, for

Thus did David when he said, Psa. 103. 1.
All that is within me, praise the Lord. As though himself had rather be
without praise, then his master, but the children of the world, set up their
own glory for their mark, like Nabuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. 27.
which said, For the honor of my Majesty. Dan. 4. 27. Therefore they speak,
and look, and walk, as if they did say to their tongue, and eyes, and feet,
and apparel, as Saul said to Samuel, 1. Sa. 15. 30.
Honor me before this people.

Lastly, they are distinguished in Perseverance, Exodus 32. 8.
They are soon turned out of the way: but the zeal of the faithful was
represented by the fire of the Temple, Leuit. 6. 12.
which never went out. By these differences thou may see how much thou do
differ from the wicked, or whether thou be of their band.

Then come to the third examination: The 3 examination.
as the devil tempts thee, Mat. ^
to see what thou will do for him, so thou must tempt thy self, and get of thy
soul what it would do for God, and what it would suffer for him, which has
suffered death for it. Therefore here we will set down certain
interrogatories, whereof thou shall examine it.

First, whether thou have the heart of Joshua to worship God as boldly as thou
do, Josh. 24. 15
though all the world did renounce him, and every one did mock thee as they
did Noah, while he built the Arc?

Whether thou would not deny Christ as Peter did, Mat. 26. 70
if thou were in Peter's straights, and nothing to succor thee but thy policy?

Whether thou would not steal, Josh. 7. 81.
if thou did see a booty as fit as Achan, which thou might catch up, and
no man spy thee?

Whether thou would refuse a bribe like Elisha, 2. Kin. 5. 16
if thou did meet with one which were as willing and able to give it as
Naaman?

Whether thou would not deceive, Luke 16. 6.
if thou were in such an office as the false Steward, Although this is a
parable, yet it carries the signification of a history.
whose master referred all unto him, and knew not when he kept any thing back?

Whether thou would not fulfill thy lust as David did, if thou had his
opportunity and allurement, and might do it without danger of law like a
king, 2. Sam. 11. 4
as David might?

Whether thou would not tell a lie, as Abraham did, Genesis 12. 13.
if it stood upon thy life, which made him twice dissemble that his wife was
his sister, Genesis 20. 2.
least he should die for her beauty?

Finally, if it should be said unto thee, as the devil said to Christ, Mat. 4.
9.
All these will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me: that is no
more, but if thou will sin, whether thou would yield or no?

If thou have sinned thus and thus before, I will not say, therefore the Lord
will not hear thee, Psalm. 66. 18
but David says, If I regard wickedness in my heart, the Lord will not hear
me, that is, if for any cause a man purpose and carry a mind to sin when he
is tempted, the Lord is so far from helping him, 1. Kin. 18. 26
that he will stand like Baal, as though he did not hear him; for he has a
traitors mind as deep as any, which thinks, for a Dukedom I would betray my
prince, though he never play the traitor in his life. Thus you have heard how
to try spirits, and how to discern a Christian from an hypocrite, and how to
appose your hearts, that ye may be sure to judge rightly what ye are.

Now we come to that examination, The 4. examination.
which is the Epitome or abridgement of all these, for memory is short, and
all are not of one strength: but some run, and some go, and some creep, and
all do well, so long as they strive to perfection. The matters whereof
principally the mind should be examined before the sacrament, Heb. 6. 1.
are these. The receivers articles.


First, whether thou have faith, not only to Esai. 59. 20
for as the scripture called him a redeemer, Job. 19. 25.
so Job calls him his Redeemer.

To love our enemies. Mat. 5. 44.


Mat. 12. 36
That we must give account for every idle word.

Reave. 22. 13
for Christ is Alpha and Omega, both the beginning, and the end, as well in our
living, as in our being, which has made no promise to them which begin, but to
them which persevere. Revel. 2. 11.


died for thee: for we are bid not only to follow him, but to bear his
Cross: and therefore we are called servant, Luke 12. 38.
to show how we should obey; 2. Tim. 3. 4.
and we are called soldiers, to show how we should suffer.

These are the receivers articles, whereof his conscience must be examined
before he receive this Sacrament: happy is he which can say, Mat. 19. 20
All these have I kept: for the Dove was not so welcome to Noah, Genesis 8. 11.
as this man is to Christ. But if thou find not these affections within, Mat.
5. 24.
but a neast of vices, leave thine offering at the Altar, and return to thine
examination again: for thou art not a fit guest to sup with the Lord, until
thou have on this Wedding garment. Mat. 22. 11


How is it then, that some regard their other garments more then this? Paul
says, Examine your selves, and they examine their apparel, if they have new
clothes in the country, The preparation of country folk before they receive.
then they are ready to receive. I have known many kept from the Sacrament a
whole year together by their masters, for nothing, but for want of a new suit
to set the^ forth with their fellows.

Others respect whether it be a fair day, that they may walk after service,
making that day, upon which they receive, like a scholars Thursdaie, which he
loves better then all the days in the week, only because it is his play-day.
Thus like the Jews, They sit down to eat, and rise up to play, that as
Christ calls the Pharisees prayer Babbling, Matthew. 6. 7. so their receiving
may be called dallying.

When they have the Sacrament in their belly, they think that all is well, as
Micah, when he had a Leuite in his house, thought that God loved him, but as
the Leuit did not profit him, Judge. 17.
because he received nothing but the Leuit, so the bread and wine does them no
good, because they receive nothing but bread and wine for want of faith.
Marvel not then if you have not felt that comfort after the Sacrament, which
you looked for, for it is comfortable to none, but to them which prepare their
hearts and examine themselves before, because it is not the mouth, but the
heart which receives comfort.

Now it may be that the most which are here have brought a mouth, and not a
heart, these go away from the Sacrament to despite Christ, Ioh. 13. 30.
as Judas went from the sacrament to betraie him.

The other go away like one which has received a cheerful countenance of
the Prince, all his thoughts are joy, and the countenance of the Prince is
still in his eye. As he which has eaten sweet meat, has a sweet breath: so
they which have eaten Christ, all their sayings, and doings, are sweet, like a
perfume to men, and incense to God: their peace of conscience, and joy of
heart, and desire to do good, will tell them whether they have received the
bare signs, or the thing signified.

Every one which receives this Sacrament, How a man shall know whether he
have received well.
shall feel himself better after it, like the Apostles: or else he shall
find himself worse after it, like Judas. Hereby ye shall know whether ye
have received like the Apostles, or like Judas. Thus we have ended the doctrine
of the Lords Supper. Now if you cannot remember all that I have said, yet
remember the Text: that is, Examine your selves before you receive this
Sacrament hereafter.

FINIS.
THE EXAMINATION OF VSVRIE, IN TWO SERMONS.
To the Reader.
HEre thou have the Sermons which have been often desired, because of the
matter fit for this City. One says, that he would never speak to Usurers,
and Bribemongers, but when they be upon their deathbeds: for he which lives
by sin, resolves to sin, that he may live. But when he goes to hanging,
Judas himself will say, I have sinned. Mat. 27. 4.
If I speak not to Usurers upon their deathbed, yet I speak to Usurers which
shall he on their deathbed. Three things do give me hope. One is, that all
hearts are in the hands of God, to call them at what hour he list, Act. 9. 15.
and therefore Saul may become an Apostle.

The next is, that the third crow does waken more than the former, and therefore
after the crowing of other, this Crow may happily be heard.

The last is, that there is no sin, but some men have been reclaimed from it,
and so may Usurers from their sin.

Therefore go my book like David against Goliath, 1. Sa. 17. 51
and fight the Lords battles against Usurers. The Lord give that success to
his doctrine in these leaves, that it may consume Usurers, Josh. 5. 1.
as Ioshuah drove out the Chananites before him. If I could take but this one
weed out of the Londoners garden, I were answered for my health, and my
strength spent amongst them. Read with thy best mind, and thou shall profit
more.

Thine H. S.

THE EXAMINATION OF VSVRIE.
THE FIRST SERMON.
Psalm. 15. verse 1. and 5. 1 Lord, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle? Who shall
rest in thine holy mountain?

5 He that gives not his money to usury.


THese two verses must be considered together, Verse 1.
because one is the question, and the other is the answer: David demaundes who
shall come to heaven? and God tells him that Usurers shall not come thither: as
if he should say, they go to hell. Therefore as Paul taught Timothy to warn
them which are rich, 1. Tim. 6. 17
as though they had more need to be warned than other: so this sentence
seems to be penned for a warning to the rich, because it strikes upon the
rich man's vice.

I have spoken of Briberie, and Symonie, and now I must speak of their sister
Usury. Many times have I thought to speak of this Theme, but the arguments
which are alleged for it, have made me doubtful what to say in it, because
it has gone as it were under protection. At last you see it falls into my
text, and therefore now I cannot bauke it any longer. Therefore if any here
have favored this occupation before, let him now submit his thoughts to Gods
thoughts, for I will allege nothing against it, but that which is built upon
the rock.

Usury is the sin which God will try now whether you love better than his
word: that is, whether you will leave it if he forbid it. For if he flatly
forbid it, and yet you wilfully retain it, then you love Usury better than
Gods word. Therefore one says well, that our Usurers are Heretics, Usurers
heretics.
because after many admonitions, yet they maintain their error, and persist
in it obstinately as Papists do in Popery. For this cause I am glad, that I
have any occasion to gripple with this sin where it has made so many
spoils, and where it has so many patrones: for it is said, that there be more
of this profession in this City, then there be in all the Land beside. There
be certain sins, which are like an unreasonable enemy, which will not be
reconciled to death; and this is one of these everlasting sins, which live
and dye with a man. For when he has resigned his pride, and his envy, and his
lust, yet Usury remains with him, and he says as Naaman said; Let the
Lord be merciful unto me in this, 2. Kin. 5. 18.
let me have a dispensation for this; as though this were a necessary sin,
and he could not live without it. Three sins counted no sins,
There be three sins which are counted no sins, and yet they do more hurt
then all their fellows; and those are, Briberie, Nonresidencie, and Usury:
these three (because they are gainful) are turned from sins to occupations.

How many of this City for all that they are usurers, yet would be counted
honest men, and would feign have Usury esteemed as a trade: whereas, if it
were not so gainefull, it would be counted as great a sin as any oath, and
so it is counted of all but them which live by it. This is the nature of
pleasure and profit, to make sins seem no sins if we gain any thing by
them: but the more gainful a sin is, the more dangerous it is; and the more
gainefull usury is, the more dangerous it is. I will speak the more of it,
because happily you shall not hear of this matter again.

First I will define what Usury is: The contents of this Treatise.
Secondly, I will show you what Usury does signify: Thirdly, I will show the
unlawfulness of it: Fourthly, I will show the kindness of it: Fifthly, I will
show the arguments which are alleged for it: Sixthly, I will show the
punishment of it: Seventhly, I will show you what opinion we should hold of
them, which do not lend upon Usury, but borrow upon Usury: Lastly, I will
show you what they should do which have got their riches by Usury.

Touching the first, The definition of Usury.
Usury is that gain which is gotten by lending, for the use of the thing
which a man lends, couenaunting before with the borrower, to receive more
then was borrowed: and therefore one calls the Usurer a legal thief, because
before he steal he tells the party how much he will steal, as though he
stoale by law. Usurers steal by law.
This word more, comes in like a sixth finger, which makes a monster, because it
is more then should be. Another defining usury, calls it the contrary to
Charity: for Paul says, Love seeks not her own, but usury seeks
another that is not her own; therefore Usury is far from love: 1. Job. 4.
8.
but God is love says John, therefore Usury is far from God too.

Now, all the Commandments of God are fulfilled by love; which Christ notes,
when he draws all the commandments to one commandment, Mat. 22. 37
which is, Love God above all things, and thy neighbor as thy self: as if he
should say, he which loves God, will keep all the Commandments which
respect God, and he which loves his neighbor, will keep all the
Commandments which respect his neighbor: therefore, to maintain love, God
forbids all things which hinder this love, and amongst the rest here he
forbids Usury, as one of her deadliest enemies. For a man cannot love and
be a Usurer, because Usury is a kind of cruelty, and a kind of extortion,
and a kind of persecution, and therefore the want of love does make usurers:
for if there were Love, there would be no usury, no deceit, no extortion, no
slaundering, no revenging, no oppression: but we should live in peace, and joy,
and contentment like the Angels; whereby you see that all our sins are
against our selves: for if there were no deceit, then we should not be
deceived: if there were no slander, then we should not be slaundered; if
there were no envy, then we should not be envied; if there were no extortion,
then we should not be injured; if there were no usury, then we should not be
oppressed. Therefore Gods law had been better for us than our own law: for if
his law did stand, then we should not be deceived, nor slaundered, nor envied,
nor injured, nor oppressed. God has commanded every man to lend freely,
Luke 6. 35.
and who would not borrow freely? Therefore they which brought in usury,
brought in a law against themselves.

The first Usurers which we read of, were the Jews, which were forbidden to
be Usurers: Eze. 18. 12.
yet for want of faith and love, Ezechiel and Nehemiah do show, Nehe. 2. 5.
how the Jews, even the Jews which received this law from God himself, did
swerve from it, as they did from the rest. First, they did lend upon usury to
strangers, after they began to lend upon usury to their brethren: and now
there be no such usurers upon earth, as the Jews which were forbidden to be
usurers: whereby you may see, how the malice of man has turned mercy into
cruelty. Deu. 15. 10.
For whereas lending was commanded for the benefit of men, usury has turned
it to the undoing of men: for they take when they seem to give, they hurt when
they seem to help, they damage when they seem to vantage: therefore it is
well noted, that usury has her name of biting: and she may well signify
biting, for many have not only been bitten by it, but devoured by it, that is,
consumed all that they have. Gal. 5. 15.
Therefore, as the Apostle says, If you bite one another, take heed you be
not devoured one of another: so I may say, If you be Usurers one to another,
take heed you be not devoured one of another, for Usurers are byters.

As the name of the devil does declare what an enemy he is; Because it
signifies an adversary Neschec.
so the name of usury does declare what an enemy she is. That you may know
usury for a byter, her name does signify biting. If there were one biting
usury, and another healing usury, then usury should have two names, one of
biting, and another of healing: but all usury signifies biting, to show that
all usury is unlawful.

Now you have heard what usury is, and of what it is derived, you shall hear
the unlawfulness of it.

The unlawfulness of Usury.
and to require no more then our own: but usury requires more then her own,
and gives not to other their own. Charity rejoices to communicate her goods
to other, and Usury reioiceth to gather other men's goods to her self.



so it is against the law of Nature, that is, the natural compassion which
should be among men. A similitude.
You see a river when it goes by an empty place, it will not pass until it
has filled that empty place, and then it goes forward to another empty
place and fills it, and so to another empty place and fills it, always
filling the places which are empty: so should we, the rich should fill the
poor, the full should fill the hungry, they which abound should fill them
which want, for the rich are but Gods Amners, and their riches are committed to
them of God to distribute and do goods as God does himself. As the water is
charitable after a sort, so is the air: for it goes to empty places too, and
fills them as the water does. Nature cannot abide that any place should be
empty, and therefore the air though it be a light body, and so naturally
ascends upward, yet rather then any place in the earth should be empty, the
air will descend as it were from his throne, and go into caves, into dens, and
into dungeous, to fill them. If the rich were so good to their empty brethren,
as the air and water are to other empty things: as there is no empty place
in the world, so there should be no empty person in the world: that is, the
rich in Israel would fill the poor in Israel. But the rich make the poor to
fill them: for Usurers feed upon the poor, even as great fishes devour the
small. Therefore he which said, Let there not be a beggar in Israel, Deuteronomy. 15.
4.
said too, Let there not be a Usurer in Israel; for if there be Usurers in
Israel, there will be beggars in Israel, for Usurers make beggars, even as
Lawyers make quarrellers.

If thou lend money unto my people, that is, to the poor with thee, thou shall
not oppress them with Usury: here is Usury called oppression; therefore if
oppression be a sin, Usury is a sin too. Secondly, it is forbidden in
Leuiticus 25. 26. where it is said. Thou shall not give thy money to Usury,
nor lend thy vittailes for increase: here you may see, that men may be Usurers
of vittailes and other things, as well as of money. Thirdly, it is forbidden in
the 23. chapter of Deuteronomium, where it is said, Thou shall not lend unto
thy brother upon Usury. And least you should say, that he means but one
kind of usury, he shows that he means all kinds of usury: for after in
verse 19. he says; As usury of money usury of vittailes, usury of corn,
or usury of any thing that is given to usury: because some are not usurers of
money, but some are usurers of vittailes, some are usurers of cloth, some are
usurers of corn, some are usurers of wine, some are usurers of oil, and some
of one thing, and some of another, and none would be counted usurers but they
which lend money upon usury; therefore God forbids so precisely usury of
any thing, showing that al usury is unlawful.

It is a miserable occupation to live by sin, and a great comfort to a man
when he looks upon his gold and silver, and his heart tells him; all this
is well gotten, and when he lies upon his deathbed, and must leave all to his
children, he can say unto them, I leave you mine own: but the Usurer cannot
say, I leave you mine own, but I leave you other men's; therefore the Usurer
can never die in peace, because if he die before he make restitution, he dies
in his sin.

When Christ raised Lazarus from death, after he had lain four days in the
grave, he wept so over his Sepulcher, that the standers about said one to
another: Ioh. 11. 34.
See how he loved him: As it may be said of Christ, see how he loves us, so
it should be said of us, see how they love one another. For Christ said to his
Disciples: Ioh. 13. 34.
Love one another as I have loved you: but it may be said of the Usurer, see
how he hates other, and loves himself. For when he says that he lends for
compassion, he means for compassion of himself, that he may gain by his
pity. The Usurer loves the borrower, as the Iuie loves the Oak: the Iuie
loves the Oak to grow up by it, so the usurer loves the borrower to grow
rich by him. The Iuie claspeth the Oak like a lover, but it claspeth out all
the juice and sap, that the Oak cannot thrive after: so the usurer lends like
a friend, but he couenanteth like an enemy, for he claspeth the borrower with
such bands, that ever after he diminishes, as fast as the usurer increases.

Christ expounding the commandment which forbids to steal, I Understand
that his sermon upon the mount, is an exposition of the commandments, or else
the Text will not seem to implie this.
says; Lend freely, showing that usury because she lends not freely, is a
kind of theft, and the Usurers a kind of thieves, for else this exposition were
not right. Therefore Zacheus, as though he had stolen other men's goods, when
he began to repent, he restored them again four fold, even as thieves are
enioined to restore four fold for that which they have stolen, so Zacheus
restored four fold, as though, he had stolen. Luke 19. 8.
It seems that Zacheus was no great thief, In some kind of theft.
because he restored four fold for all that he had gotten wrongfullie, Exodus
22.
for he got but the fourth port of his goods wrongfullie at the most, or else
he could not have restored four fold again. But now, if some should restore
four fold for all that they have gotten wrongfully, they should restore more
then they have, because all which usurers get, they get wrongfully: for their
occupation is a sin, and therefore one says: Because they cannot restore
four fold here, they shall suffer an hundred fold hereafter.

Amaziah is forbidden to strengthen himself with the armies of Israel, 2.
Chro. 25.
only because Israel had offended God; If Amaziah might not join the armies
of Israel with his armies to strengthen him, dare thou join the goods of the
poor with thy goods to enrich thee? When God set Adam his work, he said;
Genesis 3. 19.
In the sweat of thy brows thou shall live: not in the sweat of his brows,
but in the sweat of thy brows: but the Usurer lives in the sweat of his
brows, and her brows; that is, by the pains, and cares, and labors of
another, for he takes no pains himself, but only expects the time when
his interrest will come in, like the belly which does no work, and yet
eats all the meat.

When God had finished his Creation, he said unto man, and unto beasts, and
unto fishes, Genesis 1. 28.
Increase and multiply, but he never said unto money, increase and
multiply, because it is a dead thing, which has no seed, and therefore is not
fit to engender. Therefore he which says to his money, Increase and multiply,
begets a monstrous birth, like Anah, Genesis 36. 24
which devised a creature which God had not created before. Christ says to his
Disciples, Mat. 5. 46.
If you love but them which love you, what are you better then the Publicanes?
for they love their brethren: so I may say, if you will lend to none but to
them which will pay you usury for it, what are you better then the Jews? for
the Jews would lend for usury; and if you be no better then the Jews, then
you shall speed no better then they. Mat. 5. 29.
For as Christ said, Except your righteousness do exceed the righteousness of
the Pharisees, your reward shall not exceed the reward of the Pharisees: so
except your charity do exceed the charity of the Jews, your reward shall
not exceed the reward of the Jews. All this does show, that the Usurer is
like Esau, Mal. 1. 3.
of whom God said, Esaw have I hated. Now in the 112 Psalm, you shall see
who is like Jacob, Verse. 5.
of whom God says, Jacob have I loved: for there David says, A good man is
merciful and lends, and straight upon it he sets this crown, He shall
never be moved, but be had in perpetual remembrance: as if he should say,
this is the good man's usury, this is his increase, even a good name, and
everlasting joy. Again, in the 23. of Exodus it is said, Lend unto him which
wants without Usury, that the Lord may bless thee: Mal. 3. 10.
as if he should say, let the Lord pay the increase, fear not to be loosers
by doing good, for God has given his word to requite it himself. As he says
to them which were afraid to pay tithes and offer sacrifice, Deu. 25. 10.
Try me if I will not power down a blessing upon you: so he seems to say
unto them which are afraid to lend, Try me if I will not power down a blessing
upon you. Whom will you trust, if you do not trust your Creator, your Father,
your Redeemer, your Preserver, and your Savior?

Now you have heard the unlawfulness of Usury, The kinds of Usurers
you shall hear how many kinds there be of it. As other Crafts are called
Mysteries, so I may fitly call it, The Mystery of Usury; for they have
devised more sorts of Usury, than there be tricks at cards: I cannot reckon
half, and I am afraid to show you all, least I should teach you to be Usurers,
while I dissuade you from Usury. Yet I will bring forth some; and the same
reasons which are alleged against these, shall condemn all the rest.

Some will not take Usury, but they will have the use of your pasture, or your
land, or your orchard, or your teame, or your kine, until you pay the money
again, which in that time will grow to a greater gain to the Usurer, and a
greater loss to the borrower, than if he had paid more money than other
Usurers are wont to take.

They lie down upon the clothes which are laid to pledge: showing, that we
should not lie down upon such clothes, that is, we should not use or wear the
thing which is laid to pledge.

Thou shall not take Usury, or vauntage, As if he should say, thou shall not
take the forfeyture, for then thou take vantage, when thou take more then
thou lendest.

Some will not take Usury, but they will Let no man defraude, or circumuent
his brethren in any thing.

Some will not take Usury, but they will He which will not work, let him not
eat.

Some will not take Usury, but if he be a but the loan of money. This usury
is condemned in Luke 10. 7. where it is said, The labourer is worthy of his
hire.





gain as they would have; but if you would borrow an hundred pound, they will
give you wares worth threescore pound, and you shall answer them an hundred
pound for it. These are the Usurers general, which lurk about the City like
Rattes, and Wesels, and Fulmers, of whom may be said the same which is said
of the devils, 1. Pet. 5. 8.
They seek whom they may devour.

There be other cousins to Usurers, which Usurers cousins.
such as take money for that which they should give freely; such as take as
much for a counterfeite as for the best; such as take a fee of a Client, and do
him no pleasure: such as take money for Masses, and Dirges, and Trentals, and
Pardons, and such like drugges, which do no more good than fire out of the
chimney. This is a kind of usury and deceit beside, which one day they will
cast away, as Judas did his thirty pence.

Now have you heard the kinds of Usury, Objections made by Usurers
you shall hear the Arguments which are devised for Usury.

Sin is never complete until it be excused: this is the vantage which the
devil gets by every sin, whenever he can fasten any temptation upon
us, we give him a sin for it, and an excuse to boot, as Adam our father did.
Genesis 3.
First he sinned, and then he excused: so first we sin, and then we excuse,
first a Usurer, and then an excuser: Therefore every Usurer will defend usury
with his tongue though he condemn it with his conscience. If the Image-makers
of Ephesus had not lived by Images, Act. 19. 25.
they would have spoken for Images no more than the rest: for none stood for
Images, but the Image-makers: so if the Usurers did not live by usury, they
would speak for usury no more than the rest: for none stands for usury,
but Usurers.

It is an easy matter (if a man be disposed) to speak something for every
vice, as some defend the stews, some defend Nonresidencie, some defend
swearing by my faith, some defend bowling upon the Sabbath, Judge. 6. 31.
and some defend Usury: but, will you plead for Baal? (says Ioash) that is,
Will you plead for sin which will plead against you? A sin is a sin when
it is defended: nay, a sin is two sins when it is defended: Mat. 5. 19.
for, He which breaks one of the least Commandments, (says Christ) and
teaches others to do so, is the least in the Kingdom of Heaven. A Squire of
low degree, is a Squire of no degree: so the least in the Kingdom of Heaven,
is none of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Who then is the least in the Kingdom of Heaven? not he which breaks the
least of the Commandments, but he which teaches others to do so: that is,
he which by defending, and excusing, and mincing, and extenuating his sin,
incourageth others to sin too.

To defend Usury, they distinguish upon it, as they distinguish of lying. As
they say, there is a pernicious lie, and an officious lie, and a merry lie,
and a godly lie: so they say, there is the Merchants usury, and the
Strangers usury, and the Widows usury, and the Orphans usury, and the poor
man's usury, and the biting usury, and the charitable usury, and the
necessary usury. As God said, Ye shall dye; Genesis 2.
and the Woman said, peradventure ye shall dye; and the Serpent said, ye
shall not dye: Three opinions of usury.
so there be three opinions of usury. Some say like God, thou shall dye; they
think that Usury is utterly unlawful, because God has utterly forbid it:
some say like to the Woman, peradventure thou shall dye; they doubt whether
Usury be utterly unlawful or no, because it is so much tolerated; some
say like the Serpent, Genesis 3.
thou shall not dye; they think that Usury is lawful, because it is
gainful, as Saul thought, that the Idolaters beasts should not be killed, 1.
Sa. 15. 9.
because they were fat. But, as he was commanded to kill the fat beasts,
as well as the lean: so we are commanded to kill fat sins as well as lean
sins, gainful sins as well as prodigal sins.

They which plead for Usury, object these Obiectio^s for Usury.
for in Deuteronomy. 23. it is said, Of a stranger thou may take Usury. I perceive
no scripture speaks for Usurers. Of a stranger (says God) thou may take
Usury: but thou take usury of thy brother; therefore this condemns thee,
because thou use thy brother like a stranger. Here stranger does signify the
Jews enemies, whom they were commanded to destroy: therefore mark how much
this makes against usury, which they object for usury. God does not license
the Jews to take usury of any but their enemies, whom they might kill. They
might not be Usurers unto any, but to them of whom they might be destroyers;
whom they might slaie, of them only they might take usury: showing that
Usury is a kind of punishment, and such a kind of punishment, as if we are to
kill a man, it were a very fit punishment for him: and therefore the Jews
might take usury of none, but them whom they might kill. I hope usurers will
allege this Scripture no more.

Secondly, they say they lend for compassion,

Thirdly they say, if he gain and I gain

Fourthly they say, Usury is necessary for

Fiftlie they say, if I may not gain by the money which I lend, I will lend
no more, but keep my money to my self: nay, that is as bad to keep thy money
from them which need, as to lend thy money for usury; For Christ says, Mat.
5. 42.
From him which borrows, turn not away thy face: therefore thou art bound
to lend. As he has a curse in Pro. 11. which keeps his corn when he should
sell it to them which hunger; so he has a curse in Ezec. 18. which keeps his
money when he should lend it to them which want.



We have a law, John 19. 7.
and by our law he shall die: when they could not say by Gods law he shall
die, then they said, by our law he shall die: so when they cannot say by
Gods law we may take Usury, they say by man's law we may take usury, this
is the poorest defense of all the rest: for if Gods law forbid thee, can any
law of man excuse thee? As it would not serve Adam to say, Genesis 3.
The woman bad me, so it will not serve the usurer to say, the law does license
me: for though peradventure our law do tolerate more then should be
tolerated, yet I would have you know, that our law does not allow ten in the
hundred, nor five in the hundred, nor one in the hundred, nor any usury at
all: but there is a restraint in our law, that no usurer take above ten in the
hundred; it does not allow ten in the hundred, but punishes that tirant which
exacteth above ten in the hundred. It is much like that tolleration which we
read of divorces: for the hardness of men's hearts, Mat. 19. 7.
Christ says that Moses did suffer the man and wife to part asunder: so for
the hardness of men's hearts, our Moses, our Prince is feign to suffer as it were
a kind of usury, because otherwise no men would lend.

These are the best excuses which our usurers have to plead for themselves,
against they come before the tribunal of God, and if their reasons will not
stand before men, nor their own conscience, how will they stand before the Lord?
and yet he which speaks to these, makes himself a mock. Christ preached
many Sermons, and was never scorned at any, but when he preached against
covetousness, Luke 16. 14.
then it is said, that he was mocked: showing, that these kind of men are
most incorrigible, and wedded to their sin til death make them part. Yet (for
their greater condemnation) we are commanded to speak to them which will not
hear: Ezekiel. 2. 5.
of which number, is every reader of this Sermon, What the Usurer is like.
if he be a Usurer after.

Now you long to hear what the usurer is like. To what shall I liken this
generation? They are like a Butlers box; for as all the counters at last come
to the Butler, so all the money at last comes to the usurer: ten after ten,
and ten after ten, and ten to ten, till at last he receive not only ten for an
hundred, but an hundred for ten: this is the only difference, that the Butler
can receive no more then he delivered, but the Usurer receives more then he
delivers. They are like a Moath; even as a Moath eats a hole in cloth, so
usury eats a hole in silver. If you have a piece of silver which is as much
as an hundred pounds, in one year usury will eat a hole in it as big as ten
pounds: in two years she will eat a hole as big as twenty pounds, in three
years she will eat a hole as big as thirty pounds. Nay, now they say, he
is but a bad husband, which cannot eat a hole as big as fifty pounds in a
year: that is, which cannot gain half in half: how many holes have these
moths eaten in poor men's garments? they are like Nonresidents, that is, such
bad members, that no man speaks for but themselves: as no man stands for
nonresidencie, but he which is a Nonresident, or he which would be a
Nonresident, so no man stands for usury, but he which is an usurer, or he
which would be an usurer. They are like Iesabell, 1. Kin. 21. 7
which said, Let me alone, I have a way. If there be no way to live (says
the false Steward) I know what to do, Luke 16. 4.
I will deceive: so if there be no way to live (says the usurer) I know what
to do, I will oppress. If I cannot live by buying, nor by selling, nor by
flattering, nor by laboring, I will live by oppression. But as one in his
Comment speaks to the false Steward; Thou say, I know what to do, but do
thou know what thou shall suffer? So I say to usurers, you say you know what
to do, but do you know what you shall suffer? Indeed he knows not what to
do, which knows not to do well: and therefore Christ said of his
persecutors, Luke 23. 34.
That they knew not what they did. Here I will end the first days examination.
Now I may conclude with Paul, 1. Cor. 7. 10.
I have not spoken, but the Lord: and therefore as the Lord said unto Saul that
he persecuted him; Act. 9. 22.
so they which resist this doctrine, do contemn him, and not me.

The end of the first Sermon.
THE EXAMINATION OF VSVRIE.
THE SECOND SERMON.
IT remains that we speak of the Usurers punishment: Then, what may be
thought of them which do not take usury, but give usury. Lastly what they
should do, which have got their riches by usury.

To begin with the punishment, The punishments of usurers.
not only Gods law, but even the Cannon law, does



and will not suffer him to be buried, as though he were not worthy to lie in
the earth, but to lie in hell.

Lastly, it makes his will to be no will, as

Now you shall hear the judgment of Gods law. A Usurer does receive two
incomes, one of the borrower, and another of the revenger: of the borrower he
looks for gain, but of the revenger he looks for punishment. Therefore all
the Scripture prophecieth evil unto him, as Michaiah did to Achab. Pro. 28. 8.
Solomon says: He which increases his riches by Usury, gathers for them
which will be merciful to the poor. As if he should say, when he has laden
himself like a Cart, he shall be vnloden like a Cart again, and they shall
inherit his money, for whom he did never gather it. For he which is unmerciful
to the poor, means not to gather for them which will be merciful to the
poor. But Solomon says: That they shall be his heirs, which will be
merciful, as he was unmerciful.

Now mark whether this prophecy of Solomon be true, I know not how many in
this City do increase by usury, but this prophecy seems to be verified
of many: for it is noted, that the riches and lands of Aldermen and Merchants,
and other in London, do not last so long, nor endure so well, as the riches and
lands of other in the country, and that their children do not prove so well
as others, nor come to that place in the Common we will, which for their wealth
their parents looked that they should come to. I can give no reason for it, but
the reason of Solomon, He which increases by Usury, gathers for them which
will be merciful to the poor. That is, their riches shall go from their
heirs to Gods heirs, Pro. 13. 22.
according to that, The riches of the sinner is laid up for the righteous: that
is, the righteous shall enioie that which the wicked gathers.

All riches are uncertain, but the riches which are evil gotten, are most
uncertain: They may be called moveable goods, for they are very moveable,
like the clouds which never rest till they fall as they climed. God says,
Eze. 22. 13.
that he will smite the Usurer with his fist, not with the palm of his hand,
but with his fist, which gives a greater blow. As his hands were shut against
the poor, so Gods hands shall be shut against him, that his punishment may
be like his sin. But if you will hear their final sentence. David says
here; That they shall not dwell in Gods Temple, nor rest in his holy
mountain. Then we will seek no more punishments, for this punishment is all
punishments. If they shall not come to heaven, whose then shall those riches
be? Nay, whose then shall the honor be when that day comes? If he shall not
rest in heaven, then he shall rest in hell, where no rest is. Then, says one,
the Usurer shall cry unto his children, Note.
Cursed be you my Children, because you were the cause of these torments: for
least you should be poor I was an Usurer, and robbed other, to leave riches
unto you. To whom the children shall reply again, nay, cursed be you father,
for you were the cause of our torments, for if you had not left us other men's
goods, we had not kept other men's goods.

Thus when they are cursed of God, they shall curse one another: curse the Lord
for condemning them, curse their sins for accusing them, curse their Parents
for begetting them, and curse themselves because they cannot help themselves.
As they which are blessed do nothing but bless, so they which are accursed,
do nothing but curse.

This is the second usury which the Usurer shall receive of God, after he
has received usury of men: then the name of Usury shall be fulfilled, as it
signifies biting; so when it has bitten other, it shall bite the Usurer too,
and never rest biting; then they shall wish that they could restore again as
Zacheus did, and shall not restore, because their money is gone. Therefore if
Christ be come to your hearts, as he came to Zacheus house, restore now as
Zacheus did, Luke 19.
and escape this judgment. This is the end of the Usurer and his money, if
they stay together till death, yet at last there shall be a division. The devil
shall take his soul; Note.
the earth shall take his body, the strangers shall take his goods, and the
mourners shall rejoice under their blacks, and say, Wickedness is come to the
grave.

Therefore, if thou would not be counted an usurer then, refrain to be a
usurer now, for they which are usurers now, shall be counted Usurers then. Thus
you have heard the Usurers payment.

Now if you will know whether it be unlawful to give usury, Whether it be
unlawful to give Usury.
as it is unlawful to take usury, I wish that you could resolve your selves
that I might not speak of it: for I have heard some Preachers say, that there
be some truths which they would be loath to preach: and so there be some
truths which I would be loath to preach, because many hear by halues, and
some, for malice or ignorance, will take things otherwise then they are
spoken, yet because I have promised, I will speak something of it.

Well then, may we neither take usury, nor give usury? Ier. 15. 10.
I know that Jeremy says, I have not lent upon usury to others, neither have
others lent upon usury to me: 1. Object.
as though both were unlawful, not only to take usury, but to give usury.
Answer.
But thereby Jeremy does signify that he was no medler in the world,
whereby they should envy him like other men, and therefore he clears
himself chiefly from Usury, because Usurers were most envied. And to show
that he was not an Usurer, he says that he was not a borrower, which is more
lawful than to be a Usurer: like a man which says, I do neither hate him nor
know him. Why it was lawful to know him, but to prove that he did not hate
him, he says, he does not know him. So Jeremy, to prove that he had not
lent upon usury, does say, that he never borrowed upon Usury, which many
will do that will not lend. The best Expositors give this sense of it. I
know beside, that Christ did cast forth the buyers out of the Temple, 2.
Object.
as well as the sellers: Answer.
But that was not for buying, but for buying in the Temple, where they should
not buy, but pray: or else it was as lawful to buy any thing, as it is
lawful to use it.

I know beside, 3. Objection.
that it is a common saying, if there were no buyers, there would be no
sellers, if there were no bribe-giuers, there would be no bribe-takers. Answer.
But in this case it may be rather said, if there were no takers, there would
be no giuers: for the giver does not make the receiver to take, but the
receiver does make the giver to give, because he will not lend, unless the
other will give him for the loan: therefore as we say the receiver makes the
thief: so I may say, the receiver of Usury, makes the giver of Usury.
Therefore I would be loath to compare them which are constrained to borrow upon
usury, unto them which did buy in the Temple, and were not constrained more
then they which sold in the Temple. Much less may I compare them which give
usury, unto them which take usury: for there is as great odds between them,
as there is between giving and taking, or between covetousness and
necessity, for one is covetousness, and the other is necessity. He which
lends for usury, lends for covetousness, but he which borrows upon
usury, borrows for necessity.

Now, for necessity God has allowed many things; as, for necessity it was
lawful for Adams sons to marry with Adams daughters, because there were no
other women; 1. Sa. 21. 6.
for necessity it was lawful for David to eat the shewbread, because he
had no other food; for necessity it was lawful to work, Luke 13. 10.
and heal, and fight upon the Sabbath, which was not lawful but for
necessity: therefore for necessity why may not a man pay more then he
borrowed? seeing no scripture does forbid us to pay more then we borrowed, but
to require more then we lend. Some do think, that as God did use the ambition
of Absalon, and the malice of Pharao, and the treachery of Judas unto good; so
men may use the covetousness of Usurers unto good, that is, to help at a need
when a man is like to be undone, and his children cast away, and his lease
forfeited, and many inconveniences beside like to ensue, which you know better
then I, unless he have present money at some time to prevent a mischief. For
example hereof, I may allege how Jacob did use the sin of Laban. Laban did
evil in swearing by idols, Genesis 31. 53.
but Jacob did not evil in receiving such an oath of him, though it was an
unlawful oath: so though the Usurer do evil in taking usury, yet a man does
not evil in giving Usury. Genesis 21. 31.
Beside, I may allege the example of Abraham and Abimelech: Abraham made a
covenant with Abimelech; to confirm this covenant, Abraham swear, and
Abimelech swear: Abraham swear by the true God, but Abimelech swear by his
false Gods; and yet Abraham did receive this oath and sinned not. So, if her
Majesty and the Turk should make a covenant, the Turk would not swear as
the Queen would swear; for the Queen would swear by the Lord: but the
Turk would swear by Mahomet. If it be lawful then to receive such an oath,
though it be an unlawful oath, why may it not be lawful for me to give more
than I borrowed, though it be unlawful for the usurer to take more then he
lended? Beside, a Prince may not pardon a wilful murderer, yet I think that
no man will say in have, that he which has committed murder may not take a
pardon. As this unlawful giving does not make the taking unlawful; so the
other unlawful taking does not make the giving unlawful. Besides, it is
lawful to suffer injury, though it be unlawful to offer injury: it is
lawful to suffer injury, as Christ paid tribute, which was injury; but it
is not lawful to offer injury; Mat. 17. 17
because there are six commandments against it.

Now, to take usury, is (as it were) to offer injury; but to give Usury, is
(as it were) to suffer injury; therefore, though I may not take more than I
lended, yet I may give more than I borrowed.

Moreover, I may compare giving of usury, to swearing: if a man swear without
a cause, he sins; but if he swear as the Word teaches him to swear, he
sins not: so, if a man borrowe upon usury, and borrow without cause, he
sins, because he feeds the Usurer; but else, as a man may swear in some
case, so in some case a man may borrow upon usury that is, in case of
necessity, when a man must needs borrow, and can borrow of none but Usurers.

Lastly, I may allege, that usury and usurer, are never read in the
scripture, but they signify him that takes usury, not him which gives usury:
and therefore the scripture seems to forbid taking, but not giving.

Many reasons more are alleged, which I cannot refute, and therefore I will
not contradict them: yet I mean not to decide the question, because I will not
be mistaken. But if some should come unto me in that necessity and extremity
which I can imagine, and ask; May I borrowe money of these Usurers to save my
life, or my credit, or my living, seeing no man will lend me freely? I would
answer him as the Prophet answered Naaman: neither do, nor do not, but go
in peace. I will not forbid thee, nor I will not condemn thee, but if thy
conscience condemn thee not, I think thy sin one of the least sins: and
as Naaman prayed, Lord be merciful unto me in this, 1. Reg. 5. 18.
so I think the Lord will be merciful unto thee in this. But if thy
conscience go against it, then do it not; for it is sin to thee, though it
be free for another, because whatsoever is not done of faith, Romans 14. 23
is sin. I charge you in the fear of God, that you do not mistake that
which is said, for I know no learned Preacher, nor learned writer of other
mind. Yet least you should mistake the matter, as I distinguished of lenders, so
I will distinguish of borrowers.

If some may borrow upon Usury, Diverse kinds of borrowers
it does not follow that all may borrow upon Usury, because all have not the
like cause: therefore do not say that I teach you to borrow upon Usury, for I
think that the most in this City which borrow upon usury, should not
borrowe as they do, because they rather maintain usury, then supply their
necessity. Some I know borrow for mere necessity; if any may be allowed,
those are they: but there is a kind of borrowers in this City, which feed
usurers as the bellows kindle the fire, so they have no need to borrow but
because they would be rich, and richer, and richest of all: therefore they will
employ all the money which they can borrow, thinking to get more by the use of
it, then the usury of it does come to. This makes them sell their wares so
dear, because they must not only gain the price, but the interest beside,
and more then the interest too, or else they gain nothing. These borrowers are
in another predicament then those which borrow for necessity: and therefore if
they be not old enough to answer for themselves, I am too young to answer for
them. There are other borowers (as I have heard) which for some secret cause
would seem barer and needier then they are, either because they would not be
charged deeply with subsidies, or else because they would compound with their
Creditors for a little: therefore they will have always something for Usury,
that their Creditors may think them bare of money, or that other may pity
them in their charges. These are like those Foxes which have wealth enough to
pay their debts, and yet lie in prison because they would defraud their
Creditors. I doubt not but there be more sorts then I know, I cannot hunt
every corner, because I want experience. Note.
But this is my conclusion, I would have no man pay interest unto Usurers but
for necessity, even as a trauailer gives his purse unto a thief, because he
cannot choose. Thus you have heard what I can say of them which take usury, and
the^ which give usury.

Now you would understand the last question; What Usurers should do with their
gains.
if you have been usurers alredie, what you should do with that money which
you have gained by Usury? Surely, even as Zacheus did, restore it again. If
you cannot say as Samuel said, 1. Sam. 12. 3
Whose goods have I taken? then you must say as Zacheus said, Whose goods have
I kept? Luke 19. 8.
The best thing is to do no man wrong; but the next to that is, to make him
amends. This God signifies when he says, Josh. 6. 18.
Put away the execrable thing from you: that is, Let no unlawful thing stay
in your hands, like the wedge of Achan, which he had got by sin, the same
law serves for all which is got wrongfullie, which was instituted against
thieves, Exodus 22.
Restore it again: the reason of this law is, because the sin is not
remitted, until the debt be restored. For as humility is the repentance of
pride, and abstinence is the repentance of surfeit, and alms is the repentance
of covetousness, and forgiveness is the repentance of malice; so restitution
is the repentance of usury. As he which is not humble, does not repent his
pride; he which does not abstain, does not repent his gluttony; he which
does not forgive, does not repent his malice; so he which does not restore,
does not repent his usury: for how can he be said to repent for his Usury,
which lives by usury still? therefore Daniel says to Nabuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.
24.
Break off thy sins by righteousness, showing, that nothing but
righteousness can break unrighteousness. As diseases are healed by the
contrary, so pride is healed by humility, gluttony by abstinence, malice by
forgiveness, covetousness by alms, and usury by restoring. This Paul
calls, 2. Cor. 7. 1
The revenge of a Christian, when he takes revenge upon his sins, and
punishes his lusts, so that he makes them do contrary to that which they
would do. Therefore you must restore that which you have got by usury, or else
you do not repent of your usury.

As a Cammell when he comes home casts off his burden at the door, that he
may enter into his stable, so they which are laden with other men's goods, when
they go to Heaven, must leave their burden where they had it, least they be
too gross to get in at the narrow gate. But as the Disciples of Christ said,
John 6. 60.
This is a hard speech: so to them which have got most that they have by
unlawful means, this is a hard speech, to bid them restore it again: there
be two great rubs in the way.

First, Two objections.
the loss which they shall sustain, if they restore again all which they
have got unjustly; Then the difficulty to restore it again to the right
parties. If you ask me as Amaziah asked the prophet, How shall we do for
those hundred talents? 2. Chr. 25. 9
How shall I live when all is gone that I have got wrong fully? I can say no
more then the Prophet said to him, The Lord is able to give thee more then
this. Luke 19.
Zacheus did not fear how he should live, but Zacheus did fear to offend: so
thou should not fear to restore other men's goods, but thou should fear
to keep other men's goods: and as Zacheus lived when he had restored, so thou
shall live when thou have restored. Mal. 3. 10.
He which says, Try me if I will not power down a blessing, try him
whether he will not pour down a blessing; for he has promised to bless
the Lender as well as the Sacrificer. Deuteronomy. 15. 10
He which is the Lord of all, can give thee more wealth then thou need,
but if you cannot restore to the owner, nor to his heirs, then give it to the
poor, for they are the next heirs, and repent that thou have kept it so long:
but in no wise thou may keep it to thy self, because it is none of thine.

When Hezechia was like to die, Esaias said unto him, Esaias 38. 6.
Set thy things in order before thou die. That which he advised him, he
advises all, set your things in order before you die. What is this to set
things in order, but to restore unto every one his own? When thou bequeathest
thy body to the earth, then thy body is set in order: when thou bequeathest
thy soul to God, then thy soul is set in order: when thou bequeathest thy
goods to the owners: then thy goods are set in order: therefore if thou die
with other men's goods in thy hand, then thou die before thou have set things
in order, and then thou die in thy sins, and then no promise in all the
scripture appertains unto thee, because nothing is promised unto sinners, but
unto penitent sinners.

Therefore that you may not die in your sins, it is necessary to make
restitution before you die, or else you die in your sin, and are crossed out
of all the joys of Heaven. Wherefore as Abner said to Ioab; 2. Sa. 2. 2^.
Know thou not that it will be bitterness in the latter end? So remember
whether this course will be sweet or bitter in the end. If they be condemned
which give not their own goods to them which need, like the rich glutton, how
can they be saved which draw other men's goods from them, that have more need
of theirs?

Thus you have heard the definition of Usury, and the deriuation of it, and
the unlawfulness of it, and the kinds of it, and the punishment of it, and the
arguments which are alleged for it, and what may be thought of them which do
not take usury, but give usury, and what they should do which have got their
living by usury.

Now seeing you may not be Usurers to men, let every man hereafter be an
usurer to God, Mat. 19. 26
which promises; If thou leave father or mother, or wife, or children, or
house, or land for him; not ten in the hundred, but an hundred for ten, nay an
hundred for one, and in the world to come life everlasting: that is, a thousand
for one. That we may receive this usury, let us pray that the words which we
have heard out of this Psalm, may dwell with us till we dwell in heaven.

FINIS.
THE BENEFIT OF Contentation.
To the Reader.
HEaring how fast this Sermon has uttered, and yet how miserably it has been
abused in printing, as it were with whole limbs cut off at once, and clean
left out, I have taken a little pains (as my sickness gave me leave) both to
perfect the matter, and to correct the print. Now as the Angel said to John,
Reu. 10. 10.
Take this book and eat it, so I wish that thou had so digested this
doctrine, that all the parts of thy body and soul were strengthened by it.
But if all this will not make thee content with that thou have, sorrow that
thy covetousness is greater then others: and never love thy self until thou
can find in thy heart to be blessed. Farewell.

Thine H. Smith.

THE BENEFIT OF Contentation.
1. Tim. 6. 6. Godliness is great gain, if a man be content with that he
has.
BEcause when we preach, we know not whether we shall preach again, my care
is to choose fit and proper texts to speak that which I would speak, and that
which is necessary for you to hear. Therefore, thinking with my self what
doctrine were fittest for you, I sought for a text which speaks against
covetousness, which I may call the Londoners sin. Although God has given you
more then other, which should turn covetousness into thankfulness, yet as the
Iuie grows with the Oak, so covetousness has grown with riches, every man
wishes the Philosophers stone, and who is within these walls, that thinks he
has enough, though there be so many that have too much? As the Israelits
murmured as much when they had Manna, Exodus 16. 2.
as when they were without it, Number. 11. 4
so they which have riches, covet as much as they which are without them: that
conferring your minds and your wealth together, I may truly say, this City
is rich if it were not covetous. This is the devil which bewitcheth you, to
think that you have not enough, when you have more then you need. If you
cannot choose but covet riches, I will show you riches which you may covet,
Godliness is great riches.

In which words, Genesis 35. 4.
as Jacob craved of his wives, and his servants, to give him their Idols, that
he might bury them: so Paul craves your covetousness, that he might bury it.
And that ye might be no losers, he offers you the vantage: in stead of
gain, he proposes great gain. Godliness is great gain, as if he should
say, Will you covet little gain before great? You have found little joy in
money, you shall find great joy in the holy ghost: you have found little peace
in the world, you shall find great peace in conscience. Thus seeing the world
strive for the world, like beggars thrusting at a dole, Lawyer against Lawyer,
brother against brother, neighbor against neighbor, for the golden Apple,
that poor Naboth cannot hold his own, because so many Achabs are sick for
this vineyard: when he had found the disease, like a skillful Physician, he
goes about to pick out the greedy worm which makes men so hungry, and
sets such a glass before them, that will make a shilling seem as great as
a pound, a cottage seem as fair as a palace, and a plough seem as goodly as
a diadem, that he which has but twenty pounds shall be as merry as he which
has an hundred: and he which has an hundred, shall be as iocund as he which
has a thousand: and he which has a thousand, Dan. 1. 12.
shall be well contented as he which has a million: even as Daniel did thrive
with water and pulse, as well as the rest did with their wine and iunkets.

This is the virtue and operation of these words; If you hear them with the
same spirit that Paul wrote them, they will so work upon your hearts, that
you shall go away every man contented with that which he has, Luke 19. 8.
like Zacheus, which before he had seen Christ, knew nothing but to scrape;
but as soon as he had heard Christ, all his mind was set upon giving. This was
not the first day that Zacheus seemed rich to others, but this was the first
day that Zacheus seemed rich unto himself, when riches seemed dung, and
godliness seemed riches. Man. 19. 21
Christ does not will other to give all their goods away to the poor as he bad
the young man, to see what he would do, but he which forbad him to keep his
riches, forbids us to love riches, which makes our riches seem poverty. When
ye contemn riches ye shall seem rich, because no man has enough but he which
is contented: 1. Tim. 6. 6.
but if ye covet, and grove, and thrist, as Jacob gave Ruben a blessing, Genesis
49* 4.
but said, Thou shall not be excellent, so God may give you riches, but he
says, You shall not be satisfied: for ye will be covetous until ye be
religious. He that will have contentation, must leave his covetousness in pawn
for it. This is the spirit which we would cast out, if ye will leave but this
one sin behind, you shall depart out of the Church, like Naaman out of
Jordan, 2. Kin. 5. 14.
as if you had been washed, and all your sins swept away like the scales from
Paul's eyes. Act. 9. 18.
For what has brought Usury, simonie, briberie, cruelty, subtlety, envy,
strife, and deceit, into this City: and made every house an inn, and every
shop a market of lies and fraud, but the superfluous love of money? Name
covetousness, and thou have named the mother of all these mischiefs: other
sins are but hirelings unto this sin. Usury, and briberie, and simony, and
extortion, and deceit, and lies, and oaths, are factors to covetousness: and
serve for Potters to fetch and bring her living in. As the Receiver makes a
thief, so Covetousness makes an Usurer, and Extortioner, and Deceiuer,
because shed receives the booty which they steal. Even as Rachel cried to
her husband, Give me children or else I dye; Genesis 30. 1.
so Covetousness cries unto Usury, and Briberie, and Simonie, and Cruelty,
and Deceit, and Lies, Give me riches or else I dye: how they may save a
little, and how they may get much, and how they may prolong life, is every
man's dream, from sun to sun, so long as they have a knee to bow unto Baal:
so many vices budde out of this one, Romans 11.
that it is called The root of all evil, 1. Tim. 6. 10
as if he would say, the Spawne of all sines.

Take away covetousness, and he will sell his wares as cheap as he; he will
bring up his children as virtuously as he; he will refuse bribes as
earnestly as he; he will succor the poor as heartily as he; he will come to
the Church as lightly as he. If ye could feel the pulse of every heart,
what makes Gehezi to take the bribe which Elisha refused? 1. Kin. 5. 17.
What makes Demetrius to speak for images, Act. 19. 24.
which Paul condemned? 1. Sa. 5. 10.
What makes Naball deny David that which Abigail gave him? What makes Judas
grudge the oil which Marie tendered? Mat. 16. 9.
Nothing but Covetousness. When thou should give, she says it is too much;
when thou should receive, she says it is too little; when thou should
remitte, she says it is too great* when thou should repent, she says it is
too soon; when thou should hear, Exodus 5. 6.
she says it is too far: like Pharaoh, which found one business or other
to occupy the Jews, when they should serve God.

Thus every labor has an end, but covetousness has none; like a suter in
law, which thinks to have an end this Term and that Term, and the Lawyer
which should procure his peace, prolongeth his strife; because he has an
action to his purse, as his adversary has to his land: so he which is set on
coveting, does drink brine, which makes him thrist more, and sees no haven
till he arrive at death: when he has lied, he is ready to lie again; when
he has sworn, he is ready to swear again; when he has deceived, he is
ready to deceive again; when the day is past, he would it were to begin
again; when the Term is ended, he wishes it were to come again; and though
his house be full, and his shop full, and his coffers full, and his purse
full; yet his heart is not full, but lanke and empty, like the disease which
we call the Wolf, that is always eating, and yet keeps the body lean. The
Ant does eat the food which she finds, the Lion does refresh him self with
the pray that he takes: but the covetous man lies by his money, as a sick
man sits by his meat, and has no power to take it, 2. King. 7. 2.
but to look upon it, like the Prince to whom Elisha said, that he should
see the corn with his eyes, but none should come within his mouth. Thus the
covetous man makes a fool, of himself, he coueteth to covet, he gathers
to gather, he labors to labor, he cares to care; as though his office
were to fill a coffer full of Angels, and then to dye; like an Ass which
carries treasures on his back all day, and at night they are taken from him,
which did him no good but load him. How happy were some, if they knew not
gold from lead? Pro. 9. 12.
If thou be wise (says Solomon) thou shall be wise for thy self: but he which
is covetous, is covetous against himself. For what a plague is this (unless
one would kill himself) for a man to spend all his life in carking, and
pining, and scraping, (as though he should do nothing but gather in this
world, to spend in the next) unless he be sure that he shall come again when
he is dead, to eat those scraps which he has gotten with all this stir?
Therefore covetousness may well be called misery, and the covetous
miserable: for they are miserable indeed.

Of them which seem to be wise, there be no such fools in the world, as they
which love money better than themselves: but this is the judgment of God, that
they which deceive others deceive themselves, and live like Cain which was a
vagabond upon his own land; Genesis 4. 14.
so they are beggars in the midst of their wealth: for though they have
understanding to know riches, and a mind to seek them, and wit to find them,
and policy to keep them, and life to possess them; yet they have such a
false sight and bleare eye, that when their riches lie before them, they seem
poverty, and he which has not half so much, seems far richer than they.

Will you know how this comes to pass? To show that the covetous men
belong to Hell, they are like Hell while they live. Hell is never filled, and
they are never satisfied: Pro. 20. 15.
but as the Hors-leach cries, Give, give; so their hearts cry, Bring, bring:
and though the Tempter should say to them as he said to Christ, Mat. 4. 9.
All these I will give thee, yet all will not content them, Jude 6.
no more than heaven contentented him.

But as the Glutton in Hell desired a drop of Water, Luke 16. 14.
and yet a whole River would not satisfy him: for if a drop had been granted
him, he would have desired a drop more, and a drop more, and a drop to that;
so they will lie, and swear, and deceive, for a drop of riches. The Devil
need not offer them all, as he did to Christ, for they will serve him for
less: but if he could give them all, all would not content them, no more than
the world contented Alexander: for it is against the name and nature of
covetousness, to be content, as it is against the name and nature of
Contentation, to be covetous. Therefore one says, that no man's heart is like
the covetous man's heart, for his heart is without a bottom.

A Prentise is bound but for nine years, and then he is free: but if the
covetous might live longer than Methushelah, Genesis 5. 15.
yet they would never be freemen, but bound prentises to the world, while
they have a foot out of the grave.

It is a wonder to see: as the Devil compasses about, 1. Pe. 5. 18.
seeking whom he may deuore: so men compass about, seeking what they may
devour. Such love is between men and money, Pro. 1. 13.
that they which profess good will unto it with their hearts, will not take so
much pains for their life, as they take for gain: therefore no marvel if
they have no leisure to sanctify themselves, which have no leisure at any
time to refresh themselves.

Christ knew what he spoke when he said, Mat. 16. 24
No man can serve two masters: meaning, God and the world; because each would
have all. As the Angel and the devil strove for Moses body, Jude. 9.
not who should have a part, but who should have the whole; so they strive still
for our souls, who shall have all. Therefore the Apostle says, 1. Ioh. 2. 15.
The love of this world is enmity to God: signifying such emulation between
these two, that God cannot abide the world should have a part, and the world on
the other side cannot abide that God should have a part. Therefore the love of
the world must needs be enmity to God, and therefore the lovers of the world
must needs be enemies to God: and so no covetous man is Gods servant, but Gods
enemy.

For this cause Paul in the fifth chapter of his Epistle to the Ephesians and
fifth verse, calls covetousness Idolatry, which is the most contrary sin
to God; because as treason sets up another King in the Kings place, so
Idolatry sets up another God in Gods place. This word does signify that
the covetous make so much of money, that they even worship it in their hearts,
and would do as much for it as the Idolaters do for their Idols.

Paul seeing such sins committed, and such pains taken for gain, thought
with himself; If they could be persuaded that Godliness is gain, it is like
they would take as much pains for godliness, as they take for gain: therefore
he takes upon him to prove this strange Paradox, that Godliness is gain,
against all them in the verse before, which hold that Gain is Godliness.
These two opinions are very contrary, and here are many against one.

A man would think that Paul should be very eloquent and sharp witted, and
that he had need to use some Logic, for he has chosen a hard Text. What
Paul? will you prove that Godliness is gain? You shall have more opponents
against you then Micaiah had when he forbad Achab to fight. 1. King. 22. 17.
If you had taken the former verse, which says that Gain is Godliness, then
you should have had matters and examples enough: the Merchant, and Mercer, and
Lawyer, and Landlord, and Patron, and all, would come in and speak for gain,
Act. 19. 28
as the Ephesians cried for Diana: but if you will be cross to al, and preach,
Godliness is gain, to them which account Gain godliness, men will think of
you as Festus did, that you speak you know not what. Act. 26. 24
These lessons are for Paul himself.

As Christ says, Mat. 19. 11
All do not receive this Word, so all do not count this gain but loss. We
count him rich which has his barns full like the Churl, his coffers full like
the Glutton, his table full like Belshazzar, his stable full like Solomon, his
grounds full like Job, his purse full like Craesus. You speak against your
master, for Christ sent word unto John, that the poor receive the gospel, as
though the godly were of the poorer sort, and David calls the wicked rich,
Psalm. 73. 12.
They prosper and flourish, says he, their seed blasteth not, their Cow
casts not: as if he should say, It is not as you take it Paul, that Godliness
does make men rich; for this I have observed in my time, that the wicked be the
wealthiest, and good Lazarus is the poor man, and wicked Dives is the rich man.

Again, we read, that the Officers were asked, which of the Pharisees or of
the Rulers did follow Christ, yet these were counted rich men though they had
no godliness: and if we should examine your own self, it seems you were no
great rich man for all your Godliness, when you did work with your hands for
your living: therefore if Godliness be such gain, how happens it that your
share is no better? So they which are like Nicodemus, when Christ says, that
they must be borne again; John. 3. 4.
think that he can have no other meaning, but that they must return again
into their Mothers womb: John 6.
and when he calls himself Bread, that he must needs mean such bread as they
dine with.

As the Jews hearing the Prophet speak so often of Christ's kingdom, Mat.
20. 20
and call him a King, looked for a temporal King, that should bring them
peace, and joy, and glory, and make them like Kings themselves: so the carnal
ears, when they hear of a kingdom, and treasures, and riches, straight their
minds run upon earthly, and worldly, and transitory things, such as they
love, to whom Paul answers as Christ answered his Disciples, I have another
meat which you know not of: John 4. 3.
so there are other riches which you know not of. I said no^, that Godliness
is earthly, or worldly, or transitory gain, but great gain. He will not
only prove Godliness to be gain, but great gain: as if he should say,
more gainful then your wares and rents, and fines, and interest; as though he
would make the Lawyer, and Merchant, and Mercer, and Draper, and Patron, and
Landlord, and all the men of riches believe, that Godliness will make them
rich far sooner then Covetousness.

I fear this saying may be renewed, If a man tell you, Aba^. 1. 5.
ye will not believe it: nay if God tell you, yet you will not believe it. As
the Lord looked down upon earth, to see if any did regard him, Psalm. 14. 2^
and 43. 2.
and says, There is not one, so this sentence may go from Court to City,
from city to country, and say there is sacrce one in a town that will
subscribe unto it. Psalm. 4. 6.
Many (says David) ask who will show us any good? meaning riches, and
honor, and pleasure, which are not good. But when he came to goodness it self,
he leaves out Many, and prays in his own person, Lord lift up the light of
thy countenance upon us, as though none would join with him. Mat. 11. 19
Yet wisdom is justified of her own children, and the godly count godliness
gain.

To make us love godliness, he calls it by the name of that we love most,
that is, Gain; Luke 1. 51*
as the father calls his son which he would love more then the rest, by his
own name, to put him in mind of such a love as he bears to himself. Here we
may see, that God does not command men to be godly only because it makes
for his glory, but because godliness is profitable to us. For godliness is not
called gain, Pro. 3. 8.
in respect of God, but in respect of us: it is gain to us, but it is duty to
him. So it is not called a health in respect of us, because it is the health of
our souls: so it is not called a kingdom in respect of God, but in respect of
us, Mat. 6. 33.
because we are entitled to the kingdom by this difference from the
reprobates.

Put all the good things in the world together, and the goodness of all is found
in godliness: and therefore godliness is called by the names of those things that
men count best, to show that the godly are as well, as merry, as content with
their love toward God, and Gods love toward them, as other are with health, and
wealth, and pleasures. Therefore it is said of the godly; Esa. 35. 36.
The fear of the Lord is his treasure. Therefore says Jeremy, The Lord is my
portion, Lam. 3. 24.
as though he desired nothing else. And therefore it is said of Moses; That he
esteemed the rebuke of Christ greater riches then all the treasures of Egypt.
Heb. 11. 26.
If crosses be riches, as Moses thought, what riches are in godliness? But is
this all the harvest? shall godliness be all the godly man's riches? Nay
(says Paul) Godliness has the promises of this life, 1. Tim. 4. 8.
and of the life to come: that is, the godly shall do well in heaven and here
too. And therefore Christ says, First seek the kingdom of God, Mat. 6. 33.
and all the rest shall be cast upon you, even as the sheaues fell before Ruth:
Ruth. 2. 16.
so riches shall fall in your way, as they did to Abraham, and Lot, and Jacob,
and Job, and Joseph, riches were cast to them, they knew not how, but as if God
had said, be rich, and they were rich straight. For all good things were
created for the good, and therefore they are called good because the good God
created them for good men, to good purposes: and therefore as Jacob got the
blessing, Genesis 27. 8.
so he got the inheritance also: to show, that as the faithful have the inward
blessing, so they have the outward blessing too, when they are good for them.
For (says David) They which seek the Lord shall want nothing that is good.
Psalm. 34. 10
Now God knows better then we what is good for us: as the Nurse knows
better then the child, when the milk is ready for it. Therefore Christ says
in Matthew 6. 32, Mat. 6. 32.
Your heavenly Father knows what you have need of. He says not, that we know
what we have need of, but that our Father knows: as if he should say, When
you have need of health, your Father will send you health: when you have need
of riches, your Father will send you riches: when you have need of liberty,
your Father will send you liberty: for he says not only that his Father
knows what we have need of, Mat. 7. 11.
but that He will give us the things which we need. Matthew. 7. Verse 11.

Therefore as children take no care for their apparel, what clothes they shall
wear, nor for their victuals, what meat they shall eat, but leave this care
for their father, so says Christ, Mat. 6. 31.
Take you no care, for my father cares for you. Psalm. 55. 22


He was not content to call Godliness gain, but he calls it Great gain, as
if he would say, gain, and more then gain: riches, and better then riches,
a kingdom, and greater then a kingdom. As when the Prophets would distinguish
between the idol Gods, and the living God, they call him the Great God: so
the gain of godliness, is called Great gain. Deu. 12. 17.
The riches of the world are called earthly, Mar. 4. 7.
transitory, 1. Tim. 6. 9.
snares, thorns, dung, as though they were not worthy to be counted riches:
Phil. 3. 1.
and therefore to draw the earnest love of men from them, the Holy Ghost brings
them in with such names of disdain, to disgrace them with their lovers: but
when he comes to Godliness, Pro. 3. 15.
which is the riches of the soul, Pro. 4. 9. and 13.
he calls it great riches, heavenly riches, Pro. 8. 11. and 18.
unsearchable riches, everlasting riches, with all the names of honor, and all the names of pleasure, and all the names of happiness. As a woman trimmes and
deckes her self with an hundred ornaments, only to make her amiable, so the
Holy Ghost sets out godliness with names of honor, and names of pleasure,
Cant. 4. 1.
and names of happiness, as it were in her Jewels, with letters of commendation,
to make her to be beloved. Lest any riches should compare with godliness, he
gives it a name above other, and calls it great riches, as if he would make
a distinction between riches and riches: between the gain of covetousness,
and the gain of godliness: the peace of the world, and the peace of conscience:
the joy of riches, and the joy of the holy Ghost. The worldly men have a kind
of peace, and joy, and riches, but I cannot call it great, because they have
not enough, they are not contented as the godly are, therefore only
godliness has this honor, to be called great riches. The gain of
covetousness is nothing but wealth: but the gain of godliness is wealth, and
peace, and joy, and love of God, and the remission of sins, and everlasting
life: Therefore only godliness has this honor to be called Great gain.
Riches make bate, Genesis 13. 6.
but godliness makes peace: riches breed covetousness, but godliness brings
contentation: riches make men unwilling to dye, but godliness makes men ready
to dye: riches often hurt the owner, but godliness profits the owner and
other: Therefore only godliness has this honor, to be called great riches.
such gain, such joy, such peace is in godliness, and yet no man couets it:
for this is the quality of virtue, it seems nothing unto a man until he
has it, as Solomon says of the buyer, while he is in buying he dispraiseth
the thing which he buyeth, Pro. 20. 14.
and says; It is naught, it is not worth the price which ye ask: but when he
has bought it, so soon as he is gone he boasts of his peni worths, and
says it is better than his money. So godliness, before a man have it, he says
it is not worth his labor, and thinks every hour too much that he spends
about it: but when he has found it, he would not lose it again for all the
world, because he is now come to that which follows; To be contented with
that he has.

Here Paul shows with what a man should be contented, not with a thousand
pounds, nor a hundred pounds, nor twenty pounds, but with that he has: and
there is great reason why he should so; because no man knows what is fit for
him, so well as his Caruer. And therefore every one should esteem so
reverently of God, that he think nothing better for him (for that present
time) than that which God measures forth unto him.

For when Christ had no money, he was contented, and when he wanted money to
pay tribute, Mat. 17. 87
he sent for no more than he needed: he might have commanded twenty
pounds, as well as twenty pence. But to show that we should desire no more
than will serve our turn, he would have no more than served his turn. Now,
because Contentation is of such a nature, that it can please it self with
poverty, as well as riches. Therefore it is called the great gain, as though
it had all, which it wanted.

And this Contentment (says the Apostle Paul) we owe to Godliness, because it
is not possible for a wicked man to be contented: for as he is not satisfied
with sin, so he is satisfied with nothing. Riches come, and yet the man is
not pleased: honor comes, and yet the man is not pleased: liberty comes, and
yet the man is not pleased: pleasure comes, and yet the man is not pleased,
until God come, Psalm. 23. 6.
and then he says, My cup is full.

Show us thy Father (says Phillip) and it suffices, John 14. 7. Nay show us
thy truth, and it suffices. Now my soul (says the Churl) take thy rest:
Nay, now my soul take thy rest, for thou have laid up for many years.

The godly man has found that which all the world does seek, that is, enough.
Every word may be defined, and every thing may be measured, but enough
cannot be measured, nor defined, it changes every year: when we had
nothing, we thought it enough if we might obtain less than we have: when we
came to more, we thought of another enough: now we have more, we dream of
another enough: so enough is always to come, though too much be there
already. For as oil kindles the fire which it seems to quench, so riches
come as though they would make a man contented, and make a man more covetous.
Therefore seeing Contentation was never found in riches, the Apostle reaches
to seek it in godliness, saying; Godliness is riches: as though it did not
only make a man contented, but make a man contented with it self. He speaks
as though he had found a new kind of riches, which the world never thought
of, that are of such a nature, that they will satisfy a man like the water
that Christ spoke of, Ioh. 4. 13.
He that drinks of this water shall thirst no more: so they that taste of
these riches shall covet no more: Act. 2. 2.
but as the holy Ghost filled all the house, so the grace, and peace, and joy
of the holy Ghost fills all the heart, that as Joseph had no need of
Astronomy, Genesis 44. 15.
because he had the Spirit of prophecy; so he which has Contentation, has
little need of riches, he thinks not of the Philosophers Stone, nor the gold
of Ophyr, 1. King. 28.
nor the mines of India; but he has his quietus est, without suite of law, for
he retains a peacemaker within, which would make all lawyers preachers, if
men were so wise to take counsel of it. When the law is ended, if the man be
not content, he is in trouble still; when his disease is cured, if he be not
content, he is sick still; when his want is supplied, if he be not content,
he is in want still; when bondage is turned into liberty, if he be not
content, he is in bondage still; but though he be in law, and sickness, and
poverty, and bondage, yet if he be content, he is free, and rich, and merry,
Genesis 2. 25.
and quiet: even as Adam was warm, though he had no clothes. Such a commander
is Contentation, that wheresoever she sets foot, an hundred blessings wait
upon her: in every disease she is a Physician, in every strife she is a
Lawyer, in every doubt she is a Preacher, in every grief she is a comforter:
like a sweet perfume, which takes away the evil sent, and leaves a pleasant
sent for it. As the Unicorn dippeth his horn in the fountain, and makes the
waters which were corrupt and noisome, clear and wholesome upon the sudden:
so, whatsoever estate Godliness comes unto, it says like the Apostles, Peace be
to this house, peace be to this heart, peace be to this man.

I may liken it to the five loaves and two fishes wherewith Christ fed five
thousand persons, Luke 5. 9.
and yet there were twelve baskets full of that which was left, which could not
fill one basket when it was whole. Thus their little Feast was made a great
Feast: so the godly, though they have but little for themselves, yet they have
something for other, like the Widows Myte, Mar. 12. 42
that they may say as the Disciples said to Christ, Luke 22. 35.
they want nothing, though they have nothing.

Contentation wants nothing, and a good heart is worth all. For if she want
bread, Ioh. 4. 32.
she can say as Christ said, I have another bread: if she want riches, she can
say, I have other riches: if she want strength, she can say, I have other
strength: if she want friends, she can say, I have other friends. Thus the
godly find all within, that the godless seek without.

Therefore, if you see a man contented with that which he has, it is a great
sign that godliness is entered into him: for the heart of man was made a Temple
of God, 2. Cor. 3. 16.
and nothing can fill it but God alone. Phil. 4. 12.
Therefore Paul says after his conversion, that which he could never say
before his conversion, I have learned to be content. First he learned
godliness, then godliness taught him co^tentation. Now (says Paul) I have
learned to be content, as though this were a lesson for every Christian to
learn, to be content. For thus he must think, that as God said to Moses, when
he could not obtain leave to go to Canaan. Deu. 3. 26.
Let this suffice thee to see Canaan: so, whatsoever he gives, he gives
this charge with it, Let this suffice thee. Ier. 10. 19.
As Jeremy says, This is my sorrow, and I will bear it; so thou must say,
This is my portion, and I will take it. This is the sign whether godliness be
in a man, if he have joy of that which he has; for the things that God gives
to the righteous, 1. Tim. 6. 17
Paul says he gives the^ to enjoy, that is, if he have much, he can say with
Paul, Phil. 4. 12.
I have learned to abound: if he have little, he can say with Paul, I have
learned to want: that is, if he have much, as Abraham, and Lot, and Jacob, and
Job, and Joseph, yet it cannot corrupt his mind; but as the net was full of
fishes, Ioh. 21. 11.
and yet did not rent, because they cast it at Christ's commandment: so though
the godly be full of riches, his heart is not rent, his mind not troubled, his
countenance not changed, because he remembers, these things were given him to
do good, Hest. 4. 14.
as Hester thought of her honor: if he have little, it is like the oil which
served the widow as little as it was: 2. Kin. 4. 7.
for a little to the righteous (says David) is better than great riches to the
ungodly: Psa. 37. 16.
for when a man has found the heavenly riches, he cares not for earthly
riches, no more than he that walks in the Sun, thinks whether the Moon
shine, or no, because he has no need of her light. Mat. 5. 6.
Therefore we conclude with Christ, Blessed are they which thirst after
righteousness, for they shall be satisfied: not they which thirst after
riches, nor they which thirst after honor, nor they which thirst after
pleasure; they shall not be satisfied but thirst more, as the ambitious,
voluptuous and covetous do, but they that thirst after righteousness, shall be
satisfied, though they have no riches, nor honor, nor pleasure. If ye ask
like the Virgin, Genesis 2. 25.
How can this be? I answer, even as Adam was warm without clothes; so God
does satisfy many men without riches. Though he was naked, yet he did not
see his nakedness, so long as he was innocent: but, when he began to rebel,
than he began to want clothes; so though a man be poor, yet he does not
see his poverty, so long as he is contented: but when he begins to covet,
then he begins to want riches, and from that day the curse (in the first of
Agge. 6.) takes hold upon him, Ye eat, but you have not enough; ye drink,
but you are not satisfied; ye cloth your selves, but you are not warm.
Indeed the covetous man seems to draw the world to him with cords, his
coffers are of load-stones, his hands like nets, his fingers like lime-twigs,
here it comes, and there it comes; one would think that this man should be
happy one day. When the churles barnes were full, he bad his soul rest,
thinking to gain rest by covetousness, that he might say, Riches gain rest as
well as Godliness: but see what happened; that night when he began to take his
rest, riches, and rest, and soul, and all, were taken from him. Did he not
gain fair? would he have taken such pains if he had thought of such rest?
Covetousness may gain riches, but it cannot gain rest: ye may think like this
Churl to rest, when your barnes, and shops, and coffers are full: but ye shall
find it true which Esaias says, Esa. 48. 22.
There is no rest to the ungodly. Therefore the Wise man to prevent any hope
of rest, or honor, or profit, by sin, speaks as though he had tried, Pro.
12. 3.
A man cannot be established by iniquity: therefore he cannot be quieted nor
satisfied by the gain of deceit, or bribes, or lies, or usury, which is
iniquity; therefore blessed is the man whom godliness does make rich, For When
the blessing of the Lord makes rich (says Solomon) he does add no sorrow
to it, Pro. 10. 22.
but (says he) the revenues of the wicked is trouble; as though his money
were care. Wherefore let Patron, and Landlord, and Lawyer, and all say now,
that Paul has chosen the better riches, which thief, nor moath, nor canker
can corrupt: these are the riches at last which we must dwell with, when all
the rest which we have lied for, and sworn for, and fretted for, and couzened
for, and broken our sleep for, and lost many Sermons for, forsake us, like
servants which change their masters: then Godliness shall seem as great gain
to us as it did to Paul, and he which loved the world most, would give all
that he has for a dram of faith, that he might be sure to go to heaven when he
is dead, though he went toward hell so long as he lived. Here then is an
answer to them which ask, Mat. 3. 14.
What profit is it to serve God? 2. Sa. 19. 33.
How happy was Barzillai that would not be exalted? What quiet had the
Shunamite, 2. Kin. 4. 13.
which cared not for preferment? Luke 5. 11.
When did the Disciples seem so rich, as when they were willing to leave all?
This shall be your gain, when you are Usurers of godliness. Is not the word
gone forth yet, which has killed covetousness, that I may end my Sermon?
Either you go away contented, or else you go away condemned of your own
conscience. Before you were vexed with covetousness, but now the word shall vex
you too; for you shall never covet, nor lie, nor deceive hereafter, but a
sergeant shall arrest you upon it, and some sentence which you have heard,
shall gnaw you at the heart with a Memorandum of hell, that ye shall wish; Oh
that I could abandon this sin, or else that I had never heard that warning,
that makes it a corrosiue unto me before I can leave it. If they which are
greedy still, could see what peace, and rest, and joy go home with them which
are contented (although they may say with Peter, Act. 3. 6.
Gold and silver have I none) every man would be a suter to Godliness, that
he might have the dowry of contentation. If any here be covetous still, let
him always think why David prays, Turn my heart unto thy law, Psalm. 1. 19.
and not unto covetousness; he might have named pride, or anger, or lust: but to
show that no sin did so keep his thoughts from the law, as covetousness when
it came upon him, he says, Turn my heart unto thy law, and not unto
covetousness, as though a man could not be covetous, and have leisure to think
upon any good. Luke 3. 25.
But, as John baptized with water, so I ca^ but teach you with words. Now you
have heard what Contentation is, you must pray to another to give it you.

It is said of this City, that many Citizens of London have good wills, but bad
deeds; that is, you do no good until ye die. First, ye are ungodly, that you
may be rich, and then you part from some of your riches, to excuse for your
ungodliness. It may be, that some here have set down in their wills; When I
die, I bequeath 100 pounds to a College, and 100 pounds to an hospital, and
100 gowns to poor men. Mat. 27. 3.
I do marvel that you give no more when you are at that point, for Judas when
he died returned all again: so ye die, and think when ye are gone, that God
will take this for a quittance. Be not deceived, for God does not look upon
that which you do for fear, 2. Cor. 9. 7.
but upon that which ye do for love. If you can find in your heart to do good
while you are in health, Luke 19. 8.
as Zacheus did, then God has respect to your offering; but before God hearken
how you give your riches, first he examins how ye came by them: for a man may
be hanged for stealing the money which he gives to the poor, because if he
should count Godliness gain, much more should he care to gain by godly
means. Thus you see the fruits of Godliness, and the fruits of Covetousness,
Nu. 22. 17.
to stay Balaam posting for a bribe, and the sons of Zebede suing for
preferment, least seeking for asses, they lose a better kingdom then Saul
found. 1. Sam. 10. 1


If you be covetous you shall never have enough, though you have too much, but
when ye pray, Luke 11. 2.
Thy kingdom come, ye shall wish, my kingdom come. If ye be godly, ye shall
have enough, though ye seem to have nothing: like the Smyrnians, Revel. 2. 9.
of whom God said; I know thy poverty: but thou art rich. Therefore what
counsel shall I give you, but as Christ cou^selled his Disciples, Be not
friends to riches, but make you friends of riches, and know this, that if ye
cannot say as Paul says; Phil. 4. 12.
I have learned to be content, Godliness is not yet come to your house: for
the companion of godliness is contentation, which (when she comes) will bring you
all things. Therefore as Christ says; If the son make you free, Ioh. 8. 46.
you shall be free indeed: so I say, if godliness make you rich, ye shall be
rich indeed. The Lord Jesus make you doers of that ye have heard.

FINIS.
THE AFFINITY OF THE FAITHFVL.
Luke 8. 19 Then came to him his Mother, and his Brethren, and could not come
near him for the prease.

20 And it was told him by certain which said, thy mother and thy brethren
stand without, and would see thee.

21 But he answered, and said unto them, My Mother and my brethren are these
which hear the word of God, and do it.


HEre is Christ preaching, a great prease hearing, his mother and his friends
interrupting, and Christ again withstanding the interruption, with a
comfortable doctrine of his mercies toward them which hear the word of God,
and do it. When Christ was about a good work, and many were gathered together
to hear him, the Devil thought with him self as the Priests and Sadduces
did in the fourth of the Acts; If I let him alone thus, all the world will
follow him, and I shall be like Rachel without children: therefore devising the
likeliest policy to frustrate and disgrace but one of his Sermons, thereby to
make the people more unwilling to hear him again; Genesis 3. 6.
as he set Eve upon Adam, and made Jobs wife his instrument, Job 2. 9.
when he could not fit it himself: so he sends Christ's Mother, and puts
in the mind of his kinsmen to come unto him at that instant, when he was in
this holy exercise, and call upon him while he was preaching, to come away, and
go with them.

Christ seeing the serpents dealing, how he had made his mother his tempter,
that all his Auditorie might go away empty, and say, where they came; We heard
the man which is called Jesus, and he began to preach unto us, with such words,
as though he would carry us to Heaven; but in the midst of his Sermon came
his Mother and Brethren to him, that it might be known what a Kinsman they
had: and so soon as he heard that they were come, suddenly he brake off his
Sermon and slipped away from us, to go and make merry with them. Christ, I say,
seeing this train laid by Satan to disgrace him, (as he does all his
Ministers) did not leave off speaking, as they thought he would: but, as if God
had appointed all this to credit and renown him; that which was noysed here
to interrupt his doctrine, he takes for an occasion to teach another doctrine,
that there is a nearer Conjunction between Christ and the faithful, then
between the mother and the son, which are one flesh. Therefore, when they
say, Thy mother and thy brethren are come to speak with thee, he points to
his hearers and says; These are my mother and my brethren, which hear the
word of God and do it: as if he should say, I have a Mother indeed which
brought me forth, but in respect of them which hear the word of God, and do
it, she is like a stepmother, and these are like a natural mother.

With this wise answer he quieted the Auditors, and made them hear him better
then they did before. For now they thought with themselves, what man is this
which loves us more then his mother? his mother called him, and yet he would
not go from us: his brethren stay for him, and he makes as if he did not know
them, but says; Who is my mother? who are my brethren?

Thus Christ stood up as it were in an indignation against Satan, and said;
Satan, this Sermon was not begun for thee, neither shall it end for thee: this
work was not done for my mother, neither shall it be left for my mother. Thus
he caught the devil with his own bait, and made the people more loving and
attentive toward him, by that which Satan thought to disgrace him. He was so
armed with the Spirit, that let the devil tempt him, or the woman tempt him,
or princes tempt him, all is one.

Here are two doubts: the first is, the difference between the Evangelists:
For Matthew says that one brought this message: Mat. 12. 47
Mark and Luke attribute it to mo; Mar. 3. 31.
both may stand: Luke 8. 20.
for the word which his mother gave of calling him forth, was received of the
rest, and so passed amongst many till it came to Christ: so that one may be
said to bring this message, because one noysed it first: and many may be said
to bring this message, because many noysed it after.

The second doubt is, because Christ had no brethren, how they said; Thy
brethren would speak with thee?

You must understand, that they which are here called Christ's brethren, were
his Cosens by the mothers side: that is, her sisters children: for there were
three Mary's, and these three were sisters: Marie the virgin, Marie the mother
of James, and Marie the daughter of Cleophas, whose sons these were: their
names were James, Joseph, Judas, and Simon; and they are called the Lords
brethren, because they were kin unto him. Therefore note that in holy
Scripture there be four sorts of brethren: Brethren by nature, Genesis 27. 30.
so Esau and Jacob were called brethren, because they had one father, and one
mother: Brethren by nation, so all the Jews are called brethren, Den. 15. 12.
because they were of one Country: Brethren by consanguinitie, so all are
called brethren which are of one family, Genesis 13. 8.
and so Abraham called Lot his brother, and Sarah his sister, Genesis 12. 13.
because they were of one line: Brethren by profession, so all Christians are
called Brethren, Mat. 23.
because they are of one Religion: These were Brethren of the third order, that
is of Consanguinitie, because they were of one Family.

Now when his Mother, and his Brethren were come to see him, it is said, that
they could not come near him for the prease. Here were Auditors enough: Christ
flowed now with Disciples, that his mother could have no room to hear him,
but after a while it was low water again.

When the shepherd was stricken, Mat. 26. 31
the sheep were scattered: when he preached in the Streets, and in the
Temple, and in the Fields, then many flocked after him: but when he preached
upon the Cross, then they left him, which said they would never forsake him:
then there was as great a prease to see him dye, as there was here to hear
him preach: Mat. 27.
and many of these which seemed like Brethren, and Sisters, were his
betrayers, and his accusers, and his persecutors, so inconstant we are in our
zeal, more than in any thing else.

Thus much of their coming and calling to Christ, now to the doctrine which
lies in it.

Here be two Speakers: one says, Thy Mother and thy Brethren are come to
speak with thee: the other says, These are my Mother, and Brethren, which
hear the word of God, and do it. The scope of the Evangelist is this: First,
that Christ would not hinder his doctrine for mother, or brethren, or any
kinsman: Then, to show that there is a nearer conjunction between our Savior
Christ and the Faithful, than between the mother and the son.

The first is written for our instruction, and the latter is written for our
comfort. Touching the first, Exodus 20.
he which teaches us to honor our father and mother, does not teach us here to
contemn father and mother, because he speaks of another mother: for it is
said; That he was obedient to his parents, Luke 2. 46.
in Luke 2. This he shows, when being found in the temple among the Doctors,
he left all to go with his mother, because she sought him: so he honored
her, that he left all for her. This he showed again at his death, being upon
the cross, he was not unmindful of her: for pointing unto John, Ioh. 19. 26.
he said; Behold thy mother: and pointing unto her, he said; Woman behold thy
son: so he commended her to his beloved Disciple before he dyed.

Therefore this is not a doctrine of disobedience, but a rule how to obey. As
he taught his Disciples to give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, Mat. 22. 21
and to God that which is Gods: Luke 20. 25.
so he teaches us here, Mat. 19.
to give unto parents that which is parents, and to the Lord, that which is the
Lords. When God said, Honor thy father and thy mother, Exodus 20.
he did not give a commandment against himself: and therefore he says;
Honor me, before he says Honor them. The first commandment is Honor God,
and the fifth commandment is nour thy Parents; least you should honor your
Parents before God. 1. Kin. 2. 20.
When Solomon bad his mother ask him any thing, he signified that the mother
should be obeyed in many things; but when he denied his Mother that one thing
which she asked, he shows that the Mother should not be obeyed in all things.
When Christ said, Mat. 23. 9.
You have but one Father, and one Master, he speaks of Faith and Religion,
showing; that when it concerns our Faith and Religion, we should respect but
one Father and one master, which is the giver of our faith and the master of
our Religion.

When Paul said, Ephesians. 6. 1.
Children obey your Parents in the Lord, he means not that we should obey
them against the Lord; As when he says, Romans 13. 5.
Obey Princes for conscience sake, he means not that we should obey them
against conscience. Therefore when it comes to this, that the earthly father
commands one thing, and the heavenly Father commands another thing; then
as Peter answered the Rulers, so may thou answer thy Parents; Whether is it
meet to obey God, or you? Then these are the hands which thou must cut off,
then these are the eyes which thou must pull out: or else they should be as
dear unto thee, as thy hand or thine eye.

In the nineteenth of Matthew, A man must forsake his father and his mother, to
dwell with his wife. In the sixteenth of Luke, he must forsake father, and
mother, and wife too, to dwell with Christ: For He which forsakes father or
mother for me, shall receive more, says our Savior. Luke 14. 26.
Nay, He which does not hate father, or mother, or wife for me, can not be my
Disciple. Showing, that our love toward God should be so great, that in respect
of it, our love toward men should seem but hatred. Thus he which obeyed his
parents more than we, yet would have some rule, some sentence, some example in
Scripture of not obeying them too, because it is such a hard point, to know how
far they are to be obeyed, which are set in authority over us.

As none but God speaks always aright, so none but God must always be obeyed:
we are not called only the sons of men, but we are called the sons of God.
Genesis 6. 2.
Therefore, as Christ answered his mother, when she would have him turn water
into wine, Woman, what have I to do with thee? John 2.
so we should answer father, and mother, and brethren, and sisters, and
rulers, and masters, and wife too, when they will us to do that which is not
meet, What have I to do with you? For to leave doing good, and do evil, were
not to turn water into wine, but to turn wine into water. Peter was not
Satan, but when he tempted Christ like Satan, Christ answered him as he
answered Satan, Mat. 16. 23
Come behind me Satan: showing, that we should give no more attention unto
father, or mother, or master, or wife, when they tempt us to evil, than we
would give unto Satan, if he should tempt us himself.

Three things children receive of their parents; life, maintenance, and
instruction. For these three they owe other three: for life, they owe love; for
maintenance, they owe obedience; for instruction, they owe reverence; for life,
they must be loved as fathers; for maintenance, they must be obeyed as
masters; for instruction, they must be reverenced as Tutors. But as there is a
king of kings, which must be obeyed above kings: so there is a father of
fathers, which must be obeyed above fathers; therefore, sometime you must answer
like the son, when he was bid go into his fathers vineyard, I will go: and
sometime you must answer as Christ answered, I must go about my Fathers
business.

When two milch kine did carry the Ark of the Lord to Bethshemesh, their
calves were shut up at home, because the kine should not stay, when they heard
their calves cry after them: so when thou go about the Lords business,
thou shall hear a cry of thy Father, and thy Mother and thy brethren, and thy
Sisters, and thy Kindred, to stay thee; but then thou must think of another
father, as Christ thought of another Mother: and so as these Kine went on till
the Lord brought the^ where the Arc should rest; so thou shall go on till the
Lord bring thee where thou shall rest. It is better to fly from our friends,
as Abraham did, Genesis 11. 31 and 12. 1.
then to stay with some friends, Judge. 16. 4. etc.
as Sampson did with Dalila.

I may say, Beware of Kinsmen, as well as our Savior said, Beware of men. For
this respect of cousenage made Eli his sons Priests; 1. Sam. 2.
and this respect of cousenage has made many like Priests in England: this
respect of cousenage made Samuels sons Judges, 1. Sam. 8. 1.
and this respect of cousenage has made many like Judges in England: this
respect of cousenage brought Tobias into the Leuits chamber and this respect of
cousenage has brought many Gentlemen into Preachers liuinges, Neh. 13. 45
which will not out again. As Christ preferred his spiritual kinsmen, so we
prefer our earthly kinsmen. Many privileges, many offices, and many
benefices have stooped to this voice, Thy Mother calls thee, or thy Kinsmen
would have thee.

As this voice came to Christ while he was laboring, so many voices come to us
while we are laboring. One says, Pleasure would speak with you: another
says, profit would speak with you: another says, Ease would speak with you:
another says, a Deanrie would speak with you: another says; a Bishopric
would speak with you: another says, the Court would speak with you.

When a man is in a good way, and studieth the Scriptures, to be a teacher in
the Church; a voice comes to his ear, as this came to Christ's, and faith;
Thy friends would have thee study the Law, for by Divinity thou shall attain
to no preferment; and thine own Flock will vex thee, or the Bishop will stop
thy mouth. This wind sometime turns Jonas his sails from Niniue to Tharshish,
Jonas 1.
and makes him bury his talent.

If he be a Divine already, and preach his conscience, a voice comes unto
him again, as this did to Christ, and says; Thy friends would have thee be
quiet, or there be Spies which note what thou say, or there be fellows
which lie in wait for thy Living: so sometimes (with a little entreaty) he
begins to draw up his hand, and lay his finger on his mouth, and preach
peace when he is sent with war. Thus we are cumbred like our master, before
our Sermons, and in our Sermons, and after our Sermons, even of them sometime,
which should encourage us: (...). 14
and therefore as Christ says, Beware of men, so say I, Beware of kinsmen.

So soon as the Children be borne, their Parents bring them to the Temple,
and baptize them, and offer them to God: but so soon as they be able to serve
him, they tempt them away from him, to Law, or Physic, or Merchandise, or
Husbandry, and had rather they should be of any Tribe, tha^ of the Tribe of
Leui, Number. 3. 6. 7. 8.
which serves in the Temple. He which will be hindered, shall have blocks
enough: but we must learn to leap over all, as Christ leaped over this. If we
should leave Father, and Mother, and Wife, and Children for Christ; much less
should we care for labor, or loss, or shame, or trouble, or displeasure; for
we would adventure these for our friends. Thus much of his natural kindred:
now of his spiritual kindred.

Here is another genealogy of Christ, which Matthew and Luke never spoke of. As
Christ says. I have another bread which you know not: so he says, I have
other kinsmen which you know not.

Saint John writing to a Lady, 2. John 1. 1.
which brought up her children in the fear of God, calls her the elect
Lady: showing, that the chiefest honor of Ladies, and Lords, and Princes, is
to be elect of God. Saint Luke speaking of certain Beroeans, Act 17. 11.
which received the word of God with love, calls them More noble than the
rest: showing, that God counts none noble, but such as are of a noble
Spirit. As John calls none elect, but the virtuous; and Luke calls none
noble, but the religious: so Christ calls none his kinsmen, but the
righteous: and of those only he says, These are my Mother, and my
Brethren, which hear the word of God, and do it.

As Abraham's Children are not counted Children after the flesh, Romans 9. 8.
but Children after the spirit: so Christ's Kindred are not counted Kindred
after the flesh, but kindred after the Spirit; Genesis 1.
for the flesh was not made after the Image of God, but the spirit was made
after his Image: therefore God is not called the Father of bodies, but the
Father of Spirits.

Now, God (which is a Spirit) prefers them which are a kin to him in the
Spirit. Therefore Esau was not blessed, because he was of Isaacks flesh, but
Jacob was blessed, because he was of Isaacks Spirit. As we love in the flesh,
so Christ loves in the spirit, therefore he calls none his kinsemen, but
them which hear the word of God, and do it.

It seems that Paul thought of this saying, Gal. 4.
when he said; Till Christ be formed in you. If Christ be formed in us, as
Paul says, then we are Christ's mother: every one which will have Christ his
savior, must be Christ's mother. The virgin asked the angel how she could bear
Christ seeing she had not known a man? Luke Chapter 1. Verse 24. so you may
ask how you can bear Christ, seeing he is borne already?

As there is a second coming of Christ, so there is a second birth of Christ.
When we are borne again, then Christ is borne again: the virgin was his
mother by the flesh, Mat. 25.
and the faithful are his mother by the spirit: Luke 21.
the holy Ghost does conceive him in them: he was in her womb, and he is in
their hearts: she did bear him, and they do bear him: she did nurse him,
and they do nurse him. This is the second birth of Christ. As the soul of man
may be called, 2. Cor. 3. 16.
The Temple of the holy Ghost, which is the third person: so it may be called
the womb of the Son, which is the second person.

Before these words it is said, that Christ asked, Who are my brethren? as if
he should say, you think that I am affected to my kinsmen, as you are: but I
tell you that I count them my kinsmen, which hear the word of God and do it.
To show that Christ loves us with an everlasting Love, he shows that he
does not love us for any Temporal things, but for that which does endure for
ever.

If Christ loved us, Genesis 25. 28.
as Isaac loved Esau, for venison, then we might miss the blessing as Esau
did: But as John says; He loved in the truth, so Christ loves in the truth.
To love in the truth, is the true love: every love but this at one time or
other has turned into hatred, as the truth overcomes falsehood.

Now for this love, Christ calls them by all the names of love, his father,
and his brethren, and his sisters. In Romans 6. they are called his servants. If
that be not enough, in the fiftee^th of John they are called his friends. If
that be not enough, in the third of Mark they are called his kinsmen. If that
be not enough, in the four and twentieth of Luke they are called his brethren.
If that be not enough, in Mark 1. they are called his children. If that be not
enough, here they are called his mother. If that be not enough, in Cantic. 5.
they are called his Spouse, to show that he loved them with all loves; the
Mothers love, the Brothers love, the Sisters love, the Masters love, and the
Friends love. If all these Loves could be put together, yet the love of Christ
exceeds them all: and the Mother, and the Brother, and the Sister, and the
Child, and the kinsmen, and the Friend, and the Servant, would not do, and
suffer so much among them all, as Christ has done, and suffered for us alone.
Such a love we kindle in Christ, when we hear his word, and do it, that we
are as dear unto him, as all his kindred together.

Now as we are his Mother, so should we carry him in our hearts, as his
mother did in her arms. As we are his Brethren, so we should prefer him,
as Joseph did Benjamin, Genesis, Chapter forty three, Verse forty three. As
we are his Spouse, so should we embrace him as Isaac did Rebecca: if thou be a
kinsman, do like a kinsman.

Now we come to the marks of these kinsmen, which I may call the Arms of his
house: As Christ says; By this all men shall know my Disciples, if they love
one another, so he says; By this shall all men know my kinsmen, if they
hear the word of God, and do it.

As there is a kindred by the Fathers side, and a kindred by the Mothers side,
so there is a kindred of Hearers, and a kindred of dooers. In Matthew it is
said, He which hears the Will of my Father, and does it: Here it is said,
He which hears the word of God and does it: both are one; For his word is
his will, and therefore it is called his will. Psalm 119.

As he spoke there of doing, so he speaks here of a certain rule, which
he calls the word of God, whereby all men's works must be squared: For if I
do all the works that I can, to satisfy an others will, or mine own will; it
avails me nothing with God, because I do it not for GOD. Therefore, he
which always before followed his own will, when he was stricken down and
began to repent, Acts 9.
cried out: Lord, what will thou have me to do? as if he should say, I will
do no more as men would have me, or as the Devil would have me, or as the
flesh would have me, but as thou would have me.

So David prayed, Teach me O Lord to do thy will: not my will, for we need
not to be taught to do our own will, no more than a Cuckoe, to sing Cuckoe
her own name. Every man can go to hell without a guide.

Here is the rule now, if you live by it, then are you kin to Christ: as
other kinreds go by birth, and marriage, so this kindred goes by faith and
obedience. Hearers are but half kin, as it were in a far degree; but they
that hear and do, are called his Mother, which is the nearest kindred of all.
Therefore if you have the deed, then you are kin indeed; there is no promise
made to hearers, nor to speakers, nor to readers: but all promises are made to
believers, or doers.

If you ask God who shall dwell in the holy Mountain; Psa. 15. 2.
he says, The man which walks uprightly. Here are none but dooers: If you
ask Christ who shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 7. 21.
he says; Not they which cry Lord, Lord, (though they cry twice Lord) but
they which do the will of my father: here are none but dooers. If you ask him
again, how you may come to heaven, he says, Luke. 18.
Keep the Commandments: here are none but doers. If you ask him again, who
are blessed? Reu. 22. 7.
he says; Blessed are they that hear the word of God and do it: here are none
but doers. If you ask an Angel, who are blessed, he says; Blessed are they
which keep the words of this book: here are none but dooers. If you ask
David, who are blessed? he says; The man is blessed which keeps judgment,
Psa. 106. 3.
and does righteousness: here are none but doers. If you ask Solomon, who are
blessed? he says; The man is blessed which keeps the law: here are none but
doers. If you ask Esaias, who are blessed? Esaias 50. 2.
he says; He which does this is blessed: here are none but doers: If you
ask James who are blessed? Iam. 1. 25.
he says; The doer of the word is blessed in his deed: here are none but
dooers. Thus blessing and doing run together.

Least any man should look to be blessed without obedience, Mat. 7. 21.
Christ calls Love the greatest commandment: To. 12. 13.
but Solomon calls Obedience the end of all, as though without obedience all
were to no end.

When Michah had got a Leuite into his house, Judge. 17. 8.
Now (says he) I know the Lord will be good unto me, seeing I have a Leuite
in my house: So many think, when they have gotten a Preacher into their
parish; Now the Lord will be good unto us, now Christ will love us, now we are
good sons, seeing we maintain a Preacher amongst us. But Michah was not
blessed for a Leuite, nor you for a Preacher: but as you would have us do as we
teach, so God would have you do as you hear: for you shall be no more saved
for hearing, than we are for speaking.

When God created the Tree, Genesis 1.
he commanded it to bring forth fruit: so when he creates Faith, he
commands it to bring forth works: and therefore it is called a lively
Faith. When our Savior would prove him self unto John, to be the true
Messiah indeed, he said to his Disciples, Tell John what things you have heard
and seen: Matthew. 11. 4. not only heard, but seen: So if we will prove our
selves to be Christ's kinsmen indeed, we must work that thing which may be
seen as well as heard. John was not only called, The voice of a Crier, Luke
the seventh Chapter and two and twentieth verse, but, Aburning Lamp, Matthew
chap. 3. verse 3. which might be seen: so all which are crying voices, must be
burning Lamps.

James does not say, Let me hear thy faith, James 2. 18
but Let me see thy faith. As the Angels put on the shape of men, Genesis 18. 2.
that Abraham might see them: so faith must put on works, that the world may
see it. The works which I do (says Christ) bear witness of me: John 5. 16.
So the works which we do, should bear witness of us. Therefore Christ
linketh Faith and Repentance together. Repent and believe the Gospel. Mark
the first chapter, verse fifteen. Therefore I conclude, That which Christ has
joined, let no man separate. Mark chap. 10. ver. 9.

Thus I have showed you Christ preaching, a great prease hearing, his Friends
and Kinsfolk interrupting, and Christ again withstanding the interruption: By
this you may see what a spirit the devil has to hinder one Sermon, therefore
no marvel though he cause so many to be put to silence; no marvel though he
stand so against a learned Ministry; no marvel though he raise up such
slanders upon Preachers; no marvel though he write so many books against
the Christian Government in the Church; no marvel though he make so many
Non-residents; no marvel though he ordain so many dumb Priests; for these
make him the God of this world.

The Devil is afraid that one Sermon will convert us, and we are not moved
with twenty: So the devil thinks better of us than we are.

Again, by this you may learn how to resist and withstand temptations:
whether it be thy father which tempts thee, thy mother which tempts thee,
or thy brother which tempts thee, or thy sister which tempts, or thy
kinsman which tempts, or Rulers which tempts, or Master which tempts, or
wife which tempts. As Christ would not know his mother, against his father:
so thou should not know any father, or mother, or brother, or sister, or
friend, or kinsman, or master, or child, or wife against God. If the mothers
suit may be refused sometime, a noble man's letter may be refused too: He that
can turn his hinderance to a furtherance as Christ did here, may make use of
every thing.

Again, by this you may learn how to choose your friends. As Christ counted
none his kinsmen but such as hear the word of God and do it: so we should
make none our familiars, but such as Christ counts his kinsmen.

Again, you may see the difference between Christ and the world: Christ
calls the godly his kinsme^, be they never so poor; and we scorn to call
the poor our kinsmen, be they never so honest, so proud is the servant above
his master.

Again, by this you may see how Christ is to be loved, for when he calls us
his mother, he shows us the way to love him as a mother, for indeed he is
the mother of his mother, and his brethren too.

Again, by this all vaunting and boasting of Kindred is cut off. Glory not in
that thou have a Gentleman to thy Father, glory not that thou have a Knight to
thy Brother, but glory that thou have the Lord to thy Brother. Luke 16.
He which called Abraham his Father fried in Hell, because GOD was not his
Father. If Marie might not be proud of such a Son as our Savior Christ,
much less may you brag of any friend or Son that you have.

Again: Esaias 2.
by this you may know, whether you be kin to Christ. As those Priests were
shut out of the Temple, which could not count their Genealogy from Aaron: so
they shall be excluded out of Heaven, which cannot reckon their Pedigree from
Christ.

Here are the Arms now, whereby you may show of what House you come. If you
hear the word of God, and do it, then Christ says unto you, as he said
unto them, These are my Mother, and my Brethren, and my Sisters: You women are
his Sisters, and you men are his Brethren: and if you be Christ's Brethren,
then are you Gods Sons: and if you be Gods Sons, then are you his Heirs;
for all Gods Sons are called heirs Romans 8. 7.

Lastly, by this you may know the Devils Kinsemen: and therefore our Savior
Christ says, Ioh. 8. 44.
You are of your father the devil: Showing that the devil and the wicked are
as near kin as Christ and the faithful.

Now as David says: 1. Sa. 16. 23
Seems it a light thing unto you to be the Son of a king, seeing I am a
poor man and of small reputation? So may I say, seems it a light thing unto
you, to be the sons of the king of kings, seeing you are poor men and of
small reputation? It is counted a great honor to Abraham, Heb. 11. 16.
Isaac and Jacob that God was not ashamed, to be called their God; What an
honor then is this, that God is not ashamed to be called our Father? nay, our
brother, as though we were matched with him.

If the Israelites had such care to match with the servants of God, what a
blessing is this to marry with the son of God? Therefore if any affect rich
kinsmen or great marriages: here is a greater then Solomon, marry thou him.
This kinsman of ours is now gone up into heaven, that we may have a friend in
the Court.

Joseph desired the Butler to remember him when he stood before Pharaoh, Genesis
20. 40.
and he forgot him though he had pleasured him. Genesis 40. 14.
But a Thief desired Christ to remember him when he came into his kingdom,
Luke 13. 48.
and he received him into paradise the same day, though he had always
offended him: to show that although we have been as bad as thieves, yet we
may hope in Christ. Therefore, now I may conclude, you have heard the word, if
you go away and do it: then you are the Mother, and Brethren, and Sisters of
this heavenly King. To whom with the Father and the holy spirit, be all
praise, majesty and dominion, now and evermore, Amen.

THE CHRISTIANS SACRIFICE.
To my late Auditors, the congregation of Clement Danes: all the good will
which I can wish.
Beloved in Christ Jesus, my first fruits, I have nothing but this myte to
leave with you, which is the sum of all my Sermons: ye have heard it
already; and as the Apostle calls the Corinthians his Epistle, so ye should
be my Sermon, that is, 2. Cor. 3. 2.
my Sermon should be printed in your hearts, as this is printed in paper. If
you have not given your hearts to him which sent for them, now think that God
has sent for them again: and hear me writing, whom ye cannot hear
speaking. Take not custom for Religion, shun occasion, as well as sin,
seek the use of every thing, desire not to have your Kingdom here. And so I
leave you all with Christ, (whom I have preached) to bring forth the fruit of
that seed which is sown: beseeching you for all the love that you have of
heaven, that ye would not count any thing in this world, worthy to keep your
hearts from God, but think of the day when ye shall give account for every
lesson which ye have heard, and he which has called you in this prison, will
glorify you in his Palace: where ye shall see him to whom ye have given your
hearts, and enjoy that blessing of blessings, which makes all the world to
worship him. The Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has begun to draw you
to his kingdom, never leave you until you come unto it. Amen.

Your late unworthy servant for the Lord Henry Smith.

THE CHRISTIANS SACRIFICE.
Proverbs 23. 26. My Son give me thy heart.
TO bind all the lessons together which ye have learned since I came, this
sentence came to my mind, Job. 22. 22.
My Son, give me thy heart: Luke 2. 19.
which is the sum of all that ye have heard, Psalm. 37. 32
and shows in what chest you should lay up these treasures, Dan. 7. 28.
in your heart, and then give that heart to God, and he will keep all safe.

A supplication is come, as it were from God to man, that man would send God
his heart, penned by Solomon under the name of Wisdom, Pro. 9. 1.
and directed to her sons, Wisdom entreats her sons, that they would
give her their hearts; Romans 8. 15.
this Wisdom is God, we by adoption are his sons, Gal. 4. 24.
and our heart is that which Christ calls spirit and truth, John 4. 14.
without hypocrisy, Give me that heart, says God. He which gives any thing
to another, considers before what he loves, and gives that which he thinks
will be accepted, that he may be loved for the gift: therefore David as though
he were at a stand, and sorrowed that he could not do enough for God, breaks
forth to him self, Psa. 116. 12
What shall I give unto the Lord, for all that he has given me? The Lord
hearing as it were these sighs of his servants, which care and study what they
may do to please him, comes in their suspense, and like a friend which desires
nothing but good will, answers from heaven, My son give me thy heart. Under
which suit he taxes them beside which are suitors always to him, and look
still to receive like the Publicans, but never cast in their minds what they
should give: therefore their tribute is set down by equal measure under the
kings seal, every man must homage his heart.

He which always gave, now craves, and he which craved always, now gives:
Christ stands at the door like a poor man, and asks not bread, nor clothes,
nor lodging, which we should give to his members, but our heart, that is, even
the continent of all, and Governor of man's house, which sits on the Bench
like a Judge, to give the charge, and teach the tongue to speak, the hand to
work, the foot to walk, the ear to attend, the eye to observe, the mind to
choose, Leu. 1. 9. and 13.
and the flesh to obey. That we must present to God like a burnt Sacrifice,
wherein all is offered together, a wise tongue, a diligent hand, a wary foot,
a watchful eye, an attentive ear, an humble mind, an obedient flesh, put all
together, and it is but the heart; My son (says God) giuee me thie heart.
Here thou art the giver, God the petitioner, thy heart the gift, which he
claims by the name of a Son: should God be a suppliant unto thee and me? but
that our unthankfulness condemns us, that for all the things which he has
given us, we never considered yet what we should give unto him before he
asks. He is feign to put in his petition like a Suter, and say, Give me thy
heart.

Mark what God has chosen for himself, not that which any other shall loose
by, like the demands of them which care for none but themselves; but that,
which being given to God, mooues us to give unto every man his due, as Zacheus
when he gave his heart to Christ, Luke 19. 8.
parted his goods to the poor, and restored to all, that which he had gotten
by wrong.

Once God required offerings and sacrifices, which men were unwilling to give,
Mal. 1. 13. and 3. 18.
because it was a dear service of God: but now he says, that the heart is
more than all burnt offerings and sacrifices. Jacob loved Joseph more than all
his brethren: Mar. 12. 23
so God loves the heart more than all her fellows; Genesis 27.
this myte God will have for all his benefits, which we may best afford him;
thy alms to the poor, thy counsel to the simple, thy inheritance to thy
children, thy tribute to Caesar, but thy heart to God: John 4. 24.
he which is a spirit, requires the spirit, and delights to dwell in the
hearts of men. Here God plants himself as in a castle, which is always
besieged with the world, the flesh, and the devil. If the enemy get a
thought, or a word, or a work, yet he has but razed the walls, but if he
take the heart, then the fortress is lost. For that time all our thoughts,
words and works, are captive unto him: he bids them go, and they go, do, and
they do it.

That man is like Esau, which had an inheritance, which had a heart, Genesis 25.
23.
but now he has not possession of his own, therefore give God thy heart, that
he may keep it, not a piece of thy heart, not a room in thy heart, but thy
heart. The heart divided, dies: God is not like the mother, which would have
the child divided, but like the natural mother, which said, rather then it
should be divided, let her take all. Let the devil have all, if he which gave
it be not worthy of it: God has no copesmate, therefore he will have no
parting of stakes, but all or none, and therefore he which asks here thy
heart, in the sixth of Deuteronomie, and the fifth verse, asks all thy heart,
all thy soul, all thy strength; thrice he requires all, least we should keep
a thought behind: yet it is thy heart, that is, a vain heart, a barren heart,
a sinful heart, until thou give it unto God, and then it is the spouse of
Christ, Esa. 47. 17.
the temple of the holy Ghost, and the image of God, Eccles. 11. 9.
so changed and formed, 1. Cor. 3. 16.
and refined, 1. Cor. 6. 19.
that God calls it a new heart.

Some have a double heart, as it is in the twelfth Psalm: but God
acknowledges but one heart, Psalm. 12. 2.
saying, Give me thy heart, not give thy hearts; declaring that a single heart
is pleasing unto him, and that they which have a double heart, a heart and a
heart, have never a good heart.

God does not require the heart, as though he required no more but the heart,
like the Pope, which says, Give my thy heart, and it suffices. To maintain
his Papists pendant and crouehant, which live among Christians; he requires
nothing of such but their heart, that they may worship God with their lips, and
dissemble their religion, and forswear their opinion, and come to sermons, and
subscribe to other laws, and seem Protestants, as the devil licenseth
witches to seem Christians, so they give him their heart, he dispenceth with
them to dissemble, and give the rest as they list: but God requires the heart,
because we should not dissemble; for in the twelfth to the Romans, he
commands the body too, Romans 12. 1.
Offer up your bodies: which we can not do, unless we give heart, and hand,
and tongue, and eyes, and ears, and all; for the body is all: but the heart
is chief in request, because if there be any goodness, it lies in the heart,
and because he which gives the heart, gives all: Luke 6. 45.
for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, the hand works, the
eye looks, the ear listeneth, the foot walks to good or evil.

Therefore there is such strife for the heart, as there was for Moses body,
Iud. 9.
Give it me says the Lord, give it me says the Tempter, give it me says the
Pope, give it me says riches, give it me says pleasure, as though thou must
needs give it: now here is the choice, whether thou will give it to God or the
devil, Gods heart or the devils heart, whose will thou be?

Thus does man hang in a balance, like a young virgin which has many suitors:
some she fancieth for parentage, some for personage, some for friends, some for
wealth, some for wit, some for virtue, and after all, chooses the worst of
all; so the heart has so many suitors besides God, that sometime she marries
with one, sometimes with another, the world keeps her, the flesh keeps her, the
devil keeps her, which have no more interest in her, than Herod to his sister,
Mat. 14. 4.
but seek her spoil, like them which marry for riches, are glad when one
dies, that another may come. These suitors are like Absolon, which did not seek
the hearts of the people like David, but stole them with flattery and lies: 2.
Sam. 5. 6.
but God would have thee give thy heart.

As a man considers what he does when he gives: so God licenseth us to consider
of that which we do for him, whether he deserves it, whether we owe it, whether
he can requite it, lest it should come against our will, therefore give me,
says God: as though he would not strain upon us, or take from us, but if thou will give him thy heart, then he accepts it; it must come freely like a gift,
as his blessings come to us, and then his demand is granted.

Here is no respect of time, how long thou may stay it, or how long he will
keep it, but give it, is the present time, as though he would have it out of
hand, while he asks, before ye go out of the Church: for what can we ask of
him, while we deny him but one thing when he asks of us? therefore consider
who is a suitor to you. Now I am a Collector for God, to gather hearts, either
you must grant him, or deny him; think who shall loose by it, if thou will
not pay thy Landlord his rent. How many subjects would rejoice if they had
any thing to give to their prince, and pray her to accept it, and be glad if
she would take it, that they might but say; I have given a present to the
Queen. Mar. 14. 3.
So Mary rejoiced that she had a little Oil to sprincke upon Christ, that
she would take no money for it; yea the widow of Zareptah was so joyful that
she had a little food for the Prophet, 1. Reg. 17. 13
that she spared it from her children and her self, to serve him first: so
they which love the Lord like his disciple, which left all to follow him, Luke
5. 11.
had rather that he should have their riches, their honors, their hearts and
their lives, then they themselves.

Why is David called a man after Gods own heart; 1. Sa. 13. 14
but because when God said, Give me thy heart, his spirit answered like an
Echo, I give thee my heart? Is God so desirous of my heart? what good can my
heart do to God? It is not worthy to come under his roof, I would I had a
better gift to send unto my Lord, go my heart to thy Maker, the Bridegroom
has sent for thee, put on thy wedding garment, for the King himself will
marry thee. Who is not sorry now, that he did not give his heart before? Is
he not worthy to die which will take his heart from him that made it, from
him which redeemed it, from him which preserues it, from him which will
glorify it; to give it unto him which will infect it, torment it, condemn it?
Will a servant reach the cup to a stranger, when his Master calls for it? Or
will a man sell his coat if he have no more? What do thou reserve for God,
when thou have given Satan thy heart? Reu. 3. 20.
Christ has promised to come and dwell with thee, where shall he stay, where
shall he dine, if the chamber be taken up, and the heart let forth to another?
Thou art but a Tenant, and yet thou take his house over his head, and placest
in it whom thou will, as if thou were Landlord,

Can thou possess another man's goods but he will molest thee, and trouble
thee until he have his own? and do thou think to keep that which is
Gods, and hold it in peace? No he will never suffer thee to rest, but cry
upon thee day and night, as Moses vexed Pharaoh until he let the people go;
2. Sam. 3. 8.
so thou shall be distracted with fears* and thoughts, Exodus 8. 13. and 9. 28.
as one plague followed another, Act. 16. 14.
until thou let thy heart go, Exo. 8 and 9. and 10.
that it may serve God: for, as if a man should pull out thy heart, and take it
from thee, so grievous is it to God to keep thy heart from him.

Therefore let all Suitors have their answer, that thy heart is married
already. As Isaac answered Esau, Genesis 27.
Jacob have I blessed, and he shall be blessed: so thou may say, God has my
heart, and he shall have it; and them that crave it hereafter, send them to
Christ for it, for it is not thine to give, if thou have given it to God
already. But take heed thy heart do not lie to thy self, and say it is Gods
when it is the worlds, 1. Reg. 24. 6.
like Ieroboams Wife, which would not seem to be Ieroboams Wife. By this
thou shall know whether thou have given it to him or no; if the Heart be gone,
all will follow. As the Sun rises first, and then the beasts arise from
their dens, the Fowls from their neastes, and men from their beds: so when
the Heart sets forward to God, all the members will follow after it, the
tongue will praise him, the foot will follow him, the ear will attend him,
the eye will watch him, the hand will serve him, nothing will stay after the
heart, but every one goes like handmaydes after their mistress: Psalm. 123. 2
this Christ verifieth, saying: make clean within, Mat. 13. 26
and all will be clean: therefore the Publican did beat upon his heart, as
though he were angry with it, because it did not waken all the rest: showing
that as the Father gave us all, when he gave his son, so we give him all when
we give our hearts. Romans 8. 32.
This is the melody which Paul speaks of, Ephesians. 5. 19. Make melody in the
Lord in your hearts: showing that there is a consort of all the members, when
the heart is in tune, and that it soundes like a melody in the ears of God,
and makes us rejoice while we serve him. We have example hereof in Christ,
which said it was meat and drink unto him to do his fathers will: John 4. 34.
and in David, which daunced to see the Arc; 2. Sa. 6. 14.
and in the Israelites, of whom it is said, 1. Chro. 29. 9
that they rejoiced, when they offered from their heart unto the Lord.

Therefore Solomon pricking out the heart for God, spoke as though he would set
out the pleasantest, and fairest, and easiest way to serve him, without any
grudging, or toil, or weariness: touch but the first link, and all the rest
will follow; so set the heart a going, and it is like the poize of a clock,
which turns all the wheels one way; such an Oil is upon the heart, which
makes al nimble and current about it: therefore it is almost as easy to speak
well and do well, as to think well. If the heart indite a good matter, no
marvel though the tongue be the Pen of a ready writer: Psalm. 45. 1.
but if the heart be dull, all is like a left hand, so unapt and untoward, that
it cannot turn it self to any good.

Therefore Gods suits have so hard passage in men's counsels, judgments, and
Parliaments, because they do not give him their hearts, which should be the
first offering of all; if they would give him their hearts before they sit
down to hear his cause, they could not deny him any thing that is for his
honor, though it were against their profit: but as Christ says, Mat. 26. 39
Not my will, but thy will: so they would say, It is not our Kingdom, but thy
Kingdom; it is not our Church, but thy Church; therefore not our will, but thy
will; not our law, but thy law; not our discipline, but thy discipline reign
in it; and all that give their hearts subscribe to this: the rest say, not thy
will, but our will; not thy law, but our law; not thy discipline, but our
discipline, because as the Apostle says, They seek their own glory, and not
Christ's, Phil. 2. 21. This has been the rub ever since Antichrist was first
resisted. Mat. 2. 3.
Herod could not see how he should be King, if Christ should reign, therefore
as the Image-makers cried and stormed when Images should go down, Act. 19. 25.
alleging that they lived by that craft: so, if you mark what kind of men
they were which did preach and write, and labor so hotly against religion, it
is they that were like to loose some of their dignities, or their commodities
by it.

The Scribes and Pharisees resisted Christ more than the people, Ioh. 11. 48.
because he denounced woe to them, Mat. 23. 7.
and misliked that they should be called Rabbi: Mar. 10. 21
how hard it is to follow Christ, when he says, Leave all; nay, if he bid us
leave any thing for him, though we should leave our selves, Matt. 16. 24. The
tongue will not praise, because the heart does not love; the ear does not
hear, because the heart does not mind; the hand does not give, because the
heart does not pity; the foot will not go, because the heart does not
stir; all stay upon the heart, like the Captain that should give the onset.
Thus to show that he deserves all, the Lord requires that which brings all.

Secondly, God requires the Heart, showing that all the things of this world
are not worthy of it, nor a piece of it, nor a thought, unless it be to
contemn them, as Solomon thought of vanity: Eccl. 1. 13. and 14.
for if the heart be the Temple of God, he which gives it to any thing else,
commits Sacrilege, and breaks that Commandment, Give unto GOD that
which is Gods, Matthewe 22. 21.

Thirdly, that all should consent so with the heart, Psalm. 4. 4.
that we should speak as if our heart did speak, Job 22. 22.
pray as if our heart did pray, hear as if our heart did hear, give as if our
heart did give* remit as if our heart did remit, and counsel as if our heart
did counsel, as the Apostle says, Do all things heartely. Col. 3. 23. which
if we could keep, nothing that we do should trouble us, because nothing is
troublesome, but that which goes against the heart.

Fourthly, that we should serve God for himself, and not for our selves, as
he which gives his heart, does all for love: this Christ requires, when he
casts off that Disciple, that offered to follow him for advantage, Mat. 8. 19.
The birds have neastes, and ^he foxes have hoales (says Christ) but the
Son of man has not a place to hide his head: showing his Disciple, if he
will follow him, (...) must not look for a place to hide his head: we must
leave all to follow Christ, Mat. 4. 20.
as Peter did, and not seek all by following him, Ioh. 9. 26.
as they that went after him for bread.

Fifthly, that we should not serve God by fits, as we use to pray when the
night comes, to hear when the Sabboath comes, to fast when Lent comes, to
repent when death comes: but the service of the heart is a continual service,
1 Thessalonians. 5. 16.
like that in 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16. Rejoice evermore, pray continually, in all
things give thanks. Who is this which rejoices, and prays, and thanketh
continually? The tongue prays but sometime, the ear attends but sometime,
the hand gives but sometime; but the heart prays, and praises, and
worshippeth always; a man may serve God always with his heart and never be
weary, because the heart cannot serve him, unless it rejoice in his service:
and therefore the Israelites praised God with music, 1. Chro. 15. 16.
which did not delight God, but showed that they delighted in his service, as
they did in music. But if the tongue, or the hand, or the ear, think to
serve God without the heart, it is the irksomest occupation in the world, the
hour of tediousness, like a long sickness, he is tired before he begin, and
thinks himself in the stocks, until the Sermon be ended, and until his
Prayer be done, that he may be at liberty, and return to his old byas
again.

Lastly, this shows how God mislikes our coldness in hearing, or praying, if
we cannot say with the Virgin in Luke, the first Chapter and six and fortieth
verse, Luke 1. 46.
My heart does magnify the Lord. All that comes short of this is hypocrisy,
Genesis 4. 5.
and pleases God like the offering of Cain. Genesis 42. 15.
As Joseph charged his brethren that they should not come to him for corn
unless they brought Benjamin unto him, Mat. 15. 8.
whom they left at home: so God will not have us to speak to him, nor come to
him for any thing, unless we bring our heart unto him which we leave behind.
The tongue without the heart is a flattering tongue, the eye without the heart
is a wicked eye, the ear without the heart is a vain ear, the hand without
the heart is a false hand. Do thou think that God will accept a flattering
tongue, a wicked eye, Leu. 22. 22, 23, 24.
a vain ear, a false hand; which rejects a sacrifice if it be but lean, or
bruised? No says Paul, in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, the thirteenth
Chapter and first verse, 1. Cor. 13. 1.
If I give all that I have, and have not love, that is, give not my heart, it
auailes me nothing: he says not, that they which give not their heart, give
nothing, but that they shall have nothing for such offerings: he which brings
but a myte and brings his heart, Mar. 12. 42
brings more than he which offers a talent, and he shall go away more
justified than he which said, All these have I kept from my youth upward: Mat.
19. 20
for God is not mocked, Gal. 6. 7.
but knows how much is behind, though Ananias seem to bring all. Act. 5. 3.
He marks how I speak, and how you hear, and how we pray in this place,
and if it come not from the heart, he repelles it as fast as it goes up, like
the smoke which clymes toward Heaven, but never comes there. Man thinks when
he has the gift he has the heart too, but God when he has the gift calls for
the heart still; Psalm. 73. 1.
the Pharisees prayer, the harlots vow, the traitors kiss the Sacrifice of
Cain, the fast of Iezabel, the oblation of Ananias, the tears of Esau, are
nothing to him, but still he cries, Bring thy heart, or bring nothing, like a
jealous husband when he has a wife, yet he is jealous whether he has her
heart; so whatsoever thou do, yet God is jealous still, and respects not what
thou do, but whether thou do it from thy heart, that is, of mere love
toward him. If Pilate had washed his heart when he washed his hands, Mat. 27. 42
he had been cleaner than Naaman when he came out of Jordan; 2. Reg. 5. 13
if the Sichemites had circumcised their hearts, Genesis 34. 22.
when they circumcised their flesh, they had saved their souls when they lost
their lives; if Cain had offered his heart when he offered of the fruits,
Genesis 4. 3.
his offering had been as acceptable as Abels. Leu. 10. 7.
But as Swines flesh was like Sheep flesh, yet was not accepted, because it
came from an unclean beast: so Cains offering, Pilates washing, the Sichemites
circumcision, the Pharisees prayer, and fastes, and alms, were as fair as the
Apostles; yet they had no reward, Matthew. 23.
but Woe to you hypocrites; because they wanted the heart; which is like the
fire that kindles the Sacrifice. 1. Re. 18. 25
But will he require our prayers, and fastes, and alms, as he did theirs? Mat.
5. 20.
Yea says Christ, Except your righteousness exceed the Pharisees, that is,
Except we give our hearts beside our lips, and our ears, and our alms,
which they gave we shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; because our
righteousness does not exceed the righteousness of the Pharisees, but their
righteousness very far exceeds ours.

Christ does not bid them woe, because they were Pharisees as we are not, but
because they were hypocrites as we are. God delights him self in giving, Mica.
7. 18
and therefore he loves a cheerful giver; but he cannot give cheerfully, 1.
Cor. 9. 7.
which gives not his heart. Therefore, as Judas thought the Oil spent which
was powered upon Christ, Mat. 26. 9.
and wished the price of it in his purse: so they grutch and grieve when they
should do good, and think, Shall I give it? Can I spare it? What will it
bring? So the good work dies in the birth, like a bird which droupeth in the
hand, while the head considers whether he shall let her go, or hold her still:
as easy to wring Hercules club out of his fistes, as to wring a penitent tear
from their eyes, a faithful prayer from their lips, or a good thought from
their heart, which cannot afford the heart it self: all is too much, which
they do, and they think God more beholding to them for blurting out a Pater
noster, or staying a Sermon, or fasting a Friday, than they to him for all his
benefits: and when they have done, what is their reward? Matthew. 23.
Woe be unto you like the Scribes and Pharisees, because you give not your
hearts but your mouths, Mat. 15. 8.
therefore we do but vex our selves, and loose our labor, thinking to make
God believe that we pray, when indeed our lips do but pray: whereby it comes to
pass, as we serve him, so he serves us, our peace is not in deed but in word,
our joy is not in heart but in countenance, a false comfort, like our false
worship: for he which gives God his lips in stead of his heart, teaches God to
give him stones in stead of bread: that is, a shadow of comfort for comfort it
self.

Now when we have given God fair words, and long prayers, and solemn fastes,
and mourning countenances, he puts in but a word more to fill up the
Sacrifice, Give me thy heart, and it suffices. It is like the last suit of
Abraham when he said to God, I will speak but this once: so if thou will hear
him in this, he will ask no more, therefore now conclude, whether God shall
have thy heart or nothing: if thou consider what right he has to ask it, and
what cause thou have to give it, thou can not keep it till I end my Sermon.

Of all the suitors which come unto you, it seems there is none which has any
title to claim the heart but God, which challenges it by the name of a son:
Mal. 1. 6.
as if he should say, thou shall give it to thy Father, which gave it to thee:
art thou my son? My sons give me their hearts, and by this they know that I
am their father, if I dwell in their hearts, for the heart is the temple of
God, 1. Cor. 4. 16.
therefore if thou be his son, thou will give him thy heart, because thy
Father desires it, thy Maker desires it, thy Redeemer desires it, thy Savior
desires it, thy Lord, and thy King, and thy master desires it, Romans 8. 32.
which has given his Son for a ransom, his Spirit for a pledge, his Word
for a guide, the World for a walk, and reserues a kingdom for thine
inheritance. Can thou deny him any thing, which has given the heir for
the servant, his beloved for his enemy, the best for the worst? Can thou
deny him any thing, whose goodness created us, whose favor elected us,
whose mercy redeemed us, whose wisdom conuerteth us, whose grace preserves
us, whose glory shall glorify us? John 4. 10.
O, if thou knew (as Christ said to the woman of Samaria, when she huckt to
give him water) if thou knew who it is which says unto thee, Give me thy
heart, thou would say unto him as Peter did, when Christ would wash his
feet, John 13. 9.
Lord, not my feet only, but my hands, and my head; not my heart only, but
all my body, and my thoughts, and my words, and my works, and my goods, and my
life, take all that thou have given. For why should we not give him our hearts
as well as our lips, unless we mean to deceive him with words for deeds?

If Abraham gave Lot leave to choose what part he did like, Genesis 13. 8. 9
shall we not give God leave to choose that which he loves? If he did not love
thee, he would not require thy heart; for they which love, require the heart.
The Master requires labor, the Landlord requires service, the Captain
requires fight; but he that requires the heart, requires it for love, for the
heart is love.

We will give him little, if we will not give him that which he asks for love
toward our selves: Psalm. 31. 5.
though he say, 1. Pet. 1. 18 19.
Give it, yet indeed he has bought it, and that dearly, with the dearest
blood that ever was shed. He gave thee his heart before he desired thy heart,
but a heart for a heart, a living heart for a heart which died: thou do not
lose thy life, as he did for thee, but thou bestowest thy life to glorify him:
thou do not part from thy heart when thou give it, but he does keep it for
thee, lest the Serpent should steal it from thee, Genesis 3. 1.
as he stole Paradise from Adam when it was in his own custody. He can keep
it better than we, Psalm. 31. 5.
and he will keep it if we commit it to him, John 10. 26
and lay it in a bed of peace, and lap it with joy, and none shall take it out
of his hands. Therefore, if ye ask me, why you should give your hearts to God?
I do not answer like the disciples which went for the Ass and the Colt, Mat.
21. 3.
The Lord has need: but we have need: for unless we give our souls, how
can he have them? and unless he have them, how can he save them? Therefore we
have need. If ever the saying were true, Act. 20. 35.
( It is more blessed to give than take:) more blessed are they which do give
their hearts to God, 1. Sa. 25* 42
than they which take possession of the world. Abigail did not gain so much by
her gift to David, as we for our gift to God: for she was married unto David,
but we are married unto Christ, of whom the Church does sing in the fifth of
Canticles, that no well-beloved is like her beloved: what heart would not be
loved of him, though it do not love him? Who can assoyle this riddle? We
would have Christ our bridegroom, and yet we will not be his spouse; I would
have him take my heart, and yet I will not give it. How should he keep it, or
save it, or glorify it, if I hide it away, like the servant that buried his
talent in the earth? Mat. 26. 24
So much as I keep from God, so much I keep from heaven, and will not suffer
him to glorify it, as if I did wish one part to be saved, and another damned.
He which would have his heart sanctified, and comforted, and enlightened, and
will not give it to God which should do it, is like a woman which would have her
dough leauened, and lays her dough in one place, and the leaven in another,
where one cannot touch the other: then comes the tempter, and takes them
asunder, and seazeth upon the heart, because he finds her alone. This is his
seed time, now he enters into it, and fills it with his poison, till the temple
of God be the sink of sin, and the heart which should be the seat of
holiness, grace, and wisdom, a heart of pride, a heart of envy, a heart of
lust, more like a belly than a heart: how many things lodge in the heart, when
God is not there? It is a world to think how the divine soul, which descended
from heaven to bring forth fruit, is become a fit soil for every weed, whereby
we may see what hearts we have, before we give them to God.

Therefore now ask your hearts, whose they are, and how they are moved with
these words; how many here will give to this collection? whose heart is gone up
unto him since I began to speak? Here one and there one runs up the ladder,
Gen 28. 13.
like the Angels that Jacob saw in his dreams, and sing with David, My heart
is prepared, Psalm. 47. 47
my heart is prepared: and why not thou as well as he? Does not he send for all
alike? Will thou be the thorn or the stone, Mat. 13.
or the high way, where the seed does loose his fruit? Why, had thou
rather be compelled than invited, Mat. 22.
since thou art called to a banquet? How many hearts mo might we draw to God,
if all that be here would go to him this day? but thus it stands, God has
sent unto us for our hearts, and we answer him as the husbands of the
vineyard when he sent for fruits; Mat. 21. 23.
or as Nabal answered David, when he sent for food, 1. Sa. 25. 10
Who is David? or who is the Lord? that I should take my heart from pleasure
and sin, and give it unto him? Thus we demurre upon the cause when we should
give, whether we should give or no; and ask the flesh, and our lusts, and our
pleasures: and if the devil will not give his assent, then we return an
excuse, it is not mine to give, or if thou can get the devils good will, I
will not stand; or let sin and pleasure have it for a while, and when they
have done with it, then God shall have it.

Thus every thing which should be thrown out, has a place in our heart; and he
which should be received in, can have no room there, though he would open
the doors of heaven, if we would open the doors of our hearts, Psalm. 24. 4.
that the King of glory might come in. What shall become of those hearts, when
he which craves them now, shall judge them hereafter? Then shall they stand
like Esau, and see them blessed like Jacob which gave their hearts; Genesis 27. 36.
and cry themselves as he did to his father Isaac, Have thou not reserved a
blessing for us? What a heavy heart will it be then, when it may not joy any
longer here, and the joys of Heaven are shut against it? and he which desired
it, will not have it, because it comes like the foolish Virgins, Mat. 25. 11
when the doors of mercy are shut. Thus ye have heard what God requires for
all that he has given you, and how all your services are lost until you
bring it. What shall I wish you now before my departure? I wish you would give
all your hearts to God while I speak, that ye might have a Kingdom for them.
Send for your hearts where they are wandering, one from the Bank, another from
the Tavern, another from the Shop, another from the Theaters; call them home,
and give them all unto God, and see how he will welcome them, Luke 15. 22.
as the Father imbraceth his Son. If your hearts were with God, durst the
Devil fetch them, durst those sins come at them? Even as Dina was defloured
when she strayed from home: Genesis 34. 1.
so is the heart when it straieth from God. Therefore call the members
together, and let them fast like a quest of twelve men, until they consent
upon law, before any more Terms pass, to give God his right, and let him
take the heart which he wooeth, which he would marry, which he would endowe
with all his goods, and make it the heir of the crown. When you pray, let
your heart pray; when you hear, let your heart hear; when you give, let your
heart give; whatsoever you do, set the heart to do it: and if it be not so
perfect as it should be, Pro. 3. 1.
yet it shall be accepted for the friend that gives it. Dan. 10. 12.


Now if you cannot command your hearts to turn unto God, because the devil
pleades custom, and the flesh will not agree to leave her possessions, then
remember what Christ says, Mat. 6. 2.
When ye give alms, let not your left hand know what the right hand does: so
the flesh must not know what the spirit does. Thou must not make thy lusts of
counsel; but as Abraham when he was bid to offer his son, rose up betime and
left his wife at home, and never made Sarah privy lest she should stop him,
Genesis 22. 6.
being more tender over her child (like women) than the father is: so thou
must give thy heart to God, before the flesh hear of it: for if Abigaile had
consulted with Nabal, 1. Sa. 25. 18
whether she should have supplied David with victuals or no, when he sent; the
miser would never have given his consent, which scolded so soon as he heard of
it, therefore she went alone, and gave that which he asked, and never told
her husband what she would do, lest he should hinder her, which sought her
welfare and his too: so we should steal our hearts from the world, as the
world stole them from us, and transport them to God when the flesh is a sleep.

I have but one day more to teach you all that you must learn of me,
therefore I would hold you here until you assent to give all your hearts to
God. If ye give them not now, where have I cast the seed, and how have ye
heard all this year? If ye will give them now ye shall be adopted this day
the sons of God, and I shall leave you in the bosom of Christ, 1. Cor. 2. 16.
which will give you heaven for your hearts. The Lord Jesus grant that my
words be not the savor of death unto my soul here, but that you may go in
strength thereof, Mat. 25. 34
through prosperity and adversity, till you hear that comfort from heaven,
Come ye blessed and receive the inheritance prepared for you.

FINIS.
THE TRVE TRIAL OF THE SPIRITS.
To the Reader.
TWo things we are apt to forget, Gods benefits and our sins: for the first,
the Lord says, Mal. 12. 6.
I have loved you, and they say, Wherein have thou loved us? For the second he
says, Ye have despised me: and they say, Wherein have we despised thee?

THE TRVE TRIAL OF THE SPIRITS.
1 Thessalonians. 5. 19, etc. 19 Quench not the spirit,

20 Despise not prophesying:

21 Try all things, and keep that which is good.

22 Abstain from all appearance of evil.


AT the last time which I spoke of these words, In all things give thanks, and
Quench not the Spirit: Touching the first, I showed you that it is an easier
thing to obtain of God, than to be thankful to him: Luke 17. 17.
for more have gone away speeders, than have gone away thankers. Then how the
wicked are beholding to God, as well as the just: and therefore it is said, Mat.
5. 45.
that the Sun does shine upon the just and the unjust. Then how Jacob came
not so barely to Laban, Genesis 19. 13.
when he brought nothing with him, but his staff in his hand: as man comes
into this world without strength or staff to sustain him, which made the
Apostle to ask, 1. Cor. 4. 4.
What have you which you have not received? Therefore, to teach man to be
thankful unto his maker, he was not made in Paradise the place of joy and
happiness, Genesis 2 8.
but being made out of Paradise, he was brought into Paradise, to show how all
his joy and happiness came from God, and not from nature, that he might know
where to bestow his thanks. Therefore David to persuade all men unto
thankfulness, says, It is a good and pleasant thing to be thankful. Psalm.
147. 1
If he had said no more but good, all which love goodness were bound to be
thankful, but when he says not only good but pleasant too, all which love
pleasure are bound to be thankful, and therefore as Peter's mother in law, so
soon as Christ healed her of a fever, rose up immediately to minister unto
him, Matthew. 8.
so we so soon as Christ has done any thing for us, should rise up immediately
to serve him. 1. Sam. 1.
And as Annah when she had received a son from God, did consecrate him to God
again: so whatsoever we receive of God, we must give it to God again, that
is, use it to his glory, and make it one of our means to serve him, for all
things which we receive in this life, are given unto us, lest we should want
any means to serve God. Then because the Apostle requires Thanks for all
things, I showed you that he is not thankful before God, which thanks him
only for his benefits, but he is thankful indeed, which thanks him for his
chastisement. It may be, while the Lord gives, many will say, Blessed be the
name of the Lord. But when the Lord takes, who will say, Blessed be the name
of the Lord? When the Lord did take, Job. 1.
Job said, Blessed be the name of the Lord. There is one example then of Paul's
doctrine, which in all things gave thanks. The Prophet David says, Psa. 23.
24.
Thy staff and thy rod have comforted me, there is another example of Paul's
doctrine, which gave thanks unto God for his rod, for an obedient child does
not only kiss the hand which gives, but the rod which beats.

After speaking of these words, Quench not the Spirit; I showed you that
Spirit does signify the gifts and the motions of the Spirit. Mat. 3.
The Spirit in the third of Matthew is likened to fire, and therefore Paul
says well, Quench not the Spirit, because fire may be quenched.

Here I took occasion to speak of zeal, which is the fire of the spirit;
Matt. 3. 11.
showing you, that God is pleased with zeal, as men are pleased with love:
Mat. 3. 11.
but as Christ did baptize with fire, so John did baptize with water; and as
the holy Ghost descended with fire, Act. 2.
so he did descend with wind, that cools fire: showing that our zeal should
be a temperat zeal, Esa. 58. 1.
as our Masters was. Esaiah was commanded to cry, but not to roar; the
Jews might not gather too much Manna, Exodus 16. 18
no more than they might gather too little. As there is a measure in knowledge,
so there is a measure in zeal, Romans 12. 3.
that is, Be zealous according to discretion, as Paul says, Be wise according
to sobriety. Mar. 10. 28
The Disciples were commended for their zeal, when they left all to follow
Christ: but Christ reproved them for their zeal, when they would pray for
fire from heaven to consume the Samaritanes. Therefore zeal and discretion
united together, Luke. 9. 55.
are like unto the two lions which supported the Throane of Solomon: 1. King.
20.
and he which has them both, is like Moses for his mildness, and like
Phineas for his feruencie: therefore, as wine is tempered with water, so let
discretion temper zeal. But I need not bring water to quench that fire which
is out already, I would rather I could say of you, You are too zealous, Act.
17. 22
as Paul told the Athenians, they were too superstitious. But our sickness is
not a hot sickness, but a cold sickness, the hot body is distempered, but
the cold body is dead. Zeal was never infamous before our days: the Papists
are commended, if they be zealous; but the Protestant if he be zealous, is held
in derision.

Then I showed you how the spirit is quenched, as a man does quench his reason
with overmuch wine: and therefore we say, when the wine is in, the wit is out;
because before he seems to have reason, and now he seems to have none: so our
zeal, and our faith, and our love are quenched with sin. Every vain
thought, and every idle word, and every wicked deed, is like so many drops to
quench the Spirit of God. Some quench it with the business of this world, some
quench it with the lusts of the flesh, some quench it with the cares of the
mind, some quench it with long delays, that is, not plying the motion when it
comes, but crossing the good thought with bad thoughts, and doing a thing
when the Spirit says, Do it not; as Achab went to battle after he was
forbidden. Sometime a man shall feel him self stirred to a good work, as
though he were led to it by the hand; and again he shall be frighted from
some evil thing, as though he were reproved in his ear* then, if he resist
he shall straight feel the spirit going out of him, and hear a voice
pronouncing him guilty, and he shall hardly recover his peace again.
Therefore Paul says, Ephesians. 4. 30.
Grieve not the Spirit; showing, that the spirit is often grieved before it
be quenched: and that when a man begins to grieve, and check, and persecute
the spirit, lightly he never ceasseth until he have quenched it, that is,
until he seem to have no spirit at all, but walks like a lump of flesh.

After Quench not the Spirit, follows, Despise not prophesying. In the end
of this Epistle, Paul speaks like a father which is come to the end of his
life; who because he has but a while to speak, heapeth his Lessons together,
which he would have his sons remember when he is gone: so Paul, as though he
were set to give good counsel, and had not leisure to speak that he would,
sends the Thessalonians a brief of his mind, which their meditation should
after amplify and expound unto them.

His first advice is, Quench not the Spirit, that is, when a good motion
comes, welcome it like a friend, and cross it not with thy lusts. The second
admonition teaches how the first should be kept, Despise not prophesying, and
the spirit will not quench, because prophesying does kindle it. The third
admonition teaches how to make fruit of the second; Try the doctrines of
them which prophecy, and thou shall not believe error for truth, but hold the
best. The fourth admonition is the sum of all, and it comes last, because
it is longest in learning; that is, Abstain from all appearance of evil. This
is the sum of all, for he which can abstain not only from evil, but from
the appearance of evil, is so perfect as a man can be in this sinful life:
put all these together, and it is as if Paul should say, Quench not the
spirit by despising of prophesying; neither despise prophesying, because all
do no prophecy alike: but rather when you hear some preach one way and some
another, when you see some follow him, and others follow him, do you try the
doctrines by the Scripture, as the men of Beroea did, Act. 17. 11.
and choose that which is best, and soundest, and truest, having always such an
eye to the truth, that you abstain from all appearance of error; so jealous
the holy ghost would have us of our faith, that we set no article upon our
religion but that which is an undoubted truth. As Moses did nothing in the
Tabernacle, but that which was showed in his pattern. It seems that there
were some among the Thessalonians, as there be among us, which did forsake all
religion because the preachers did not agree, or because the lives of
professors gave some offense, therefore Paul shows that there is no cause why
they should mislike the word for the Preacher, or why they should despise
religion for the professor, because the word and the religion are not theirs
which teach it and profess it, but Gods, and therefore can not be polluted by
them no more than God. Then he concludes, that seeing it is necessary, that
there shall be always errors and heresies to try us, we should also try
them, and thereby be provoked so much the more from error, or heresy, or
superstition, that we abstain even from the appearance thereof, lest we fall
into the sin; this is the scope of these words.

Despise not prophesying. This admonition is as it were the keeper of the
former, for by prophesying the Spirit is kindled, and without prophesying the
Spirit is quenched, and therefore after Quench not the Spirit, Paul says,
Despise not prophesying; showing that as our sin does quench the Spirit, so
prophesying does kindle it. Luke 24. 32.
This you may see in the Disciples that went to Emaus, of whom it is said, when
Christ preached unto them out of the law and the Prophets, the spirit was so
kindled with his prophesying, that their hearts waxed hot within them. This you
see again in Saul's messengers, 1. Sa. 19. 20
which were sent for David, when they came among the Prophets and heard them
prophecy, their spirit was so kindled, that they could not choose but
prophecy also, insomuch that Saul came after him self, and hearing the
Prophets as they did, the Spirit came unto him likewise, and he prophesied too;
1. Sa. 19. 23
whereupon it was said, Is Saul also among the Prophets? This is no marvel,
that the spirit of man should be so kindled, and revived, and refreshed with
the word, for the word is called the Food of the soul; take away the word from
the soul, Hebr. 5.
and it has no food to eat. As if you should take food from the body, the
body would pine. And therefore Solomon says, Pro. 26. 18.
Without visions the people perish: that is, without prophesying the people
famish. Therefore he which loves his soul, had no need to despise
prophesying; for then he famisheth his own soul, and is guilty of her death;
therefore that Pastor or that Patron, which is the cause why any place does
want preaching, is guilty of their destruction, because he which takes, or
keeps away the food, does famish the body. The Apostle might have said, love
prophesying, or honor prophesying; but he says, Despise not prophesying. And
why does he forbid to despise Prophesying? Why did Christ say, Mat. 11. 5.
The poor receive the Gospel? but to show that the rich did contemn it. Why
does Paul say, Romans 1. 16.
I am not ashamed of the Gospel? but to show that many are ashamed of it. Even
so he says, Despise not prophesying; showing, that the greatest honor which
we give to Prophets, is not to despise them; and the greatest love which we
carry to the Word, is not to loath it. If we do not despise the preachers,
then we think that we honor them enough: and if we do not loath the Word,
then we think that we love it enough: therefore the Apostle says, Despise not
prophesying, for Honor prophesying. Prophesying here does signify Preaching,
as it does in Romans 1. 14. Will you know why preaching is called prophesying?
Romans 1. 14.
To add more honor and renown to the preachers of the word, to make you
receive them like Prophets, and then Christ says, Mat. 10. 41
You shall have a Prophets reward; that is, not such a reward as you give, but
such a reward as God gives.

Lastly, (if you mark) Paul says not, Despise not Prophets, but prophesying:
signifiing, that from the contempt of the Prophets, at last we come to despise
Prophesying too, Ier. 11. 27.
like the Jews, who when they were offended with the Prophet, charged him to
prophecy no more. Therefore, as Christ warned his disciples, Mat. 23. 3.
to hear the Scribes and Pharisees, although they did not as they taught; so
Paul warns the Thessalonians, that if any prophets among them do not as
they teach, and therefore seem worthy to be despised like the Scribes and
Pharisees, yet that they take heed that they do no despise prophesying for the
Prophets. Because the preachers are despised before the word be despised,
therefore we will speak first of their contempt.

Christ asked his Disciples, Mat. 16. 13
what they thought of him; so; I would ask you, what you think of Preachers?
2. Cor. 5. 20.
Is he a contemptible person, Revel. 1. 20.
which brings the message of God? which has the name of an Angel? and all
his words are messengers of life? Prophets are of such account with God, Amos
3. 7.
that it is said, God will do nothing before he reveal it unto his Prophets;
so prophets are (as it were) Gods counselors. Again, Kings and Priests, and
Prophets were figures of Christ, al these three were anointed with oil, to
show that they had greater graces than the rest: 1. Kin. 13. 1.
but especially the Prophets are called, Men of God; to show, that all which
are of God will make much of Prophets for Gods sake. Therefore women are
forbidden to take upon them to prophecy, 1. Cor. 14. 34
lest that noble calling should become vile and despised, by such unskillful
handlers of it. Therefore when the Prophet Elisha would send for Naaman the
leaper to come unto him, these were his words, 2. King. 5. 8.
Naaman shall know that there is a Prophet in Israel; as though all the glory
of Israel were chiefly in this, that they had Prophets, and other had none: as
if one Parish should triu^ph over another, because they have a preacher, and
the other have none. Therefore when this Prophet was dead, Ioash the King came
unto his coarse, and wept over his face, and cried; 2. K. 13. 14.
O my Father, my Father, the Chariot of Israel, and horsemen of the same:
showing, that the Chariots, and horses, and soldiers do not so safegarde a
City, as the Prophets which teach it, and pray for it. Therefore when God
would mark the Israelites with a name of greatest reproach, he calls them,
A people which rebuke their Priests: as if he should say, usurpers of the
Priests office: for they rebuke their Priests, which are appointed to rebuke
them.

How joyful and glad was Lydea when she could draw Paul and Sylas to her
house? Act. 16. 15.
If you think me to be faithful (says she) come to my house: showing, that
never any guests were so welcome to her house before. How tender was the
Shunamite over Elisha, that she built an house to welcome him, 2. Kin. 4. 10
and to keep him with her; thinking all the places in her house too bad for
him, she built him a new room, to make him stay with her. How much did the
Galatians make of Paul, Gal. 4. 15.
that he says, they would pull out their own eyes to do him good: So once a
Prophet was esteemed like a Prophet. And has he bid you despise them now,
which bad you to honor them before? No, Paul charge us to receive our
teachers, as he was received himself: saying, He which labors in the word,
is worthy of double honor; 1. Tim. 5. 14
that is, the Preacher (after a sort) is more to be honored than the Ruler:
for Aaron was the elder brother, but Moses was the younger brother; and
therefore if there be any appendix, the Magistrate is the appendix: Exo. 28. 30.
for if Aarons Vrim and Thumi would have served, Moses rod and staff should
not have needed; but when the tongue could not persuade, the rod did compel,
and so came in the Magistrate. As Paul shows the Thessalonians how the
Preachers of the Word should be honored: so he teaches the Philippians how
to honor their teachers; Phil. 2. 29.
saying, Receive him in the Lord with great gladness, and make much of such;
that is, show your selves so glad of him, that he may be glad of you. Have
you need to be taught why Paul would have you make much of such? Because
they are like Lamps, which consume themselves to give light to other; so they
consume themselves to give light to you: because they are like a Hen, which
clocketh her Chickens together from the Kite; so they clock you together from
the Serpent: because they are like the showte which did beat down the walls
of Jericho; Joshua 6. 20.
so they beat down the walls of sin: because they are like the fiery
pillar which went before the Israelites to the Land of Promise; Exo. 13. 21.
so they go before you to the Land of Promise: because they are like good
Andrewe, which called his brother to see the Messiah; Ioh. 1. 41.
so they call you to see the Messiah: and therefore make much of such.

If we should make much of Prophets, how much should we make of
Prophesying? If we should love our Instructors, how much should we love
instruction? Luke 2. 28.
Symeon keeping in the Temple, met with Christ; so many hearing the Word,
have met with knowledge, have met with comfort, have met with peace, have met
with salvation: but without the Word never any was converted to GOD. Therefore
whenever the Word is preached, every one may say to himself, as the
Disciples said to the blind man, Mar. 10. 49.
Be of good comfort he calls thee: Be of good comfort, the Lord calls
thee: but when the word is not preached, then every man may say to himself;
beware, the devil calls thee. When the Prophets went from Jerusalem, then
sword, and famine, and pestilence, and all the plagues of God rained upon them,
even as fire came upon Sodom, so soon as Lot was gone out: Genesis 19. 24.
therefore what may those Lands fear, which use their Prophets, as the Jews
used them which sent them? Amos calls it an evil time, wherein the prudent
keep silence, Chapt. 5. verse 13. therefore this is an evil time, wherein the
prudent are silent.

There be two trades in this Land, without which the Realm cannot stand; and
one is the Queens soldiers, and the other is the Lords soldiers, and the
Lords soldiers are handled like the Queens soldiers, for from the Merchant
to the porter, no calling is so despised, so contemned, so derided, that they
may beg for their service; for their living is turned into an alms. One says,
that Moses is Quis, that is, the Magistrate is some body: but Aaron is Quasi
quis, that is, the Minister is no body, because no body is despised like him.
Receive a Prophet in the name of a Prophet: nay, Receive a Prophet in the
name of an enemy, as Ahab received Elias; 1. King. 21. 20.
Art thou here mine enemy? If Paul had lived in our days he would not have
said, Despise not the Prophets, but persecute not the Prophets, for he should
have seen not only despisers of the Prophets, but mockers of them, not only
mockers, but slanderers of them, not only slanderers, but hunters and biters,
Genesis 37 4.
and smiters of them. Joseph was troubled so soon as he began to feed his
Fathers sheep, so the Pastors are troubled so soon as they begin to feed
their fathers sheep, every man thinks to find friends against them, and
though there be no law to hurt them, yet no man fears to accuse them, because
authority does disfavor them, they cannot tell how to preach, nor what to
say, because there be so many Ahabs which would have them say that which
pleases them, 1. Kin. 22. 13
though it be not true. Charm the charmer never so sweetly, let his song be
never so pleasant, yet many adders are ready to stop their ears, and stop his
mouth, like a bird which was smitten in her song, of the Archer whom she
sings unto, 1. Sa. 19. 20
even as Saul let his spear fly at David, while he played upon his harp to
solace and comfort* and drive the evil spirit from him: so while we play upon
David's harp to solace and comfort, and drive the evil spirit from you, many
let the darts of reproach, and the arrows of slander fly at us; 1. King.
17. 18.
saying, as the woman said to Eliah, If thou had not been, my child had not
dyed: If we had not been, their peace had not dyed; if we had not been, their
sports had not dyed; if we had not been, their customs, and their titles, and
their honors had not dyed. And why should not Herod and Archelaus dye, Mat. 2.
15.
which sought the death of the child? Why should not any custom, or honor,
or pleasure dye, which seeks the death of religion? Alas (says Jeremiah)
what have I done, Ier. 15. 10.
that all men should curse me? If we do but preach the truth, you should not
hate us for the truth. Now Obadiah had need to hide the Prophets again to save
them out of prison, 1. K. 18. 3. 4
where is Rahab that she might convey away the servants of God? Joshua 2. 1.
Once Baals prophets were punished, 2. K. 10. 19.
but now Christ's Prophets are punished: 1. Sam. 9. 9.
once they did ask, Where is the Seer that he may teach us? but now they ask,
where is the Seer, that we may take him? once they did build houses for the
prophets, like the Shunamite; 2. Kin. 4. 10
but now they take their houses from them, and think they do God service,
when they make them, and their wives, and their children, and their servants
beggars; once Paul said to Timothy, 1. Tim. 4. 12
Let no man despise thy youth; showing that preachers should not be despised
for their youth* but now they despise the young prophets and the old too. How is
the double honor turned to single honor? nay, how is our honor turned to
dishonor. Mal. 1. 3.
If I be a Master (says God) where is my fear? so, if we be prophets, where
is our reverence? does not the contempt of prophets cry unto God, as well as
the blood of Abel? Genesis 4. 10.
When the messengers which were sent unto the vineyard for fruit, were beaten
of them which should have laden them; then it is said that the Lord of the
vineyard waxed wroth, Mat. 21. 43
and said that he would let the vineyarde unto others, which should yield him
the fruits thereof. The meaning hereof is this, that when the preachers and
teachers which Christ sends to his Church for fruits, are abused and
persecuted of them whom they call to the banquet, then he will remove their
light and his Gospel to other which will yield him the fruits thereof.
Therefore what may this Land fear, which has used Christ's ambassadors as
Ammon used David's ambassadors? 2. Chro. 10. 4
Jerusalem is left without one prophet because she despised them, Sodom was
burned because she despised Lot, and the whole world was drowned because it
despised Noah; and are not these examples written for our warning? 1. Sam. 28. 6
The time came that Saul sought for a Prophet, and God would not answer him by
Prophets, because he had despised his Prophets before: so the time comes when
you shall ask where is the seer? and they shall say, 2. Kin. 2. 11.
he is rapt away like Elias: a Prophet was amongst us, but when he was
despised in Jerusalem, he was sent to Nineueh. Is not judgment begun already?
Does not the Gospel stand at the door, as if she were ready to take her
leave? Are we not come from despising of Prophets almost to the despising of
Prophesying too? Do not many run unto the rulers, as young Joshua ran to
Moses, and cry master, forbid them to prophecy? Do not many walk in the
streets while we preach in the Temple? Genesis 7 9.
The beasts came to the arc (...) save themselves, and men will not come to
the Church to save themselves: but we may cry unto them as the Children did
to their fellows in the market; Mat. 11. 17
We have piped unto you and you would not dance, we have lamented unto you,
and you would not mourn. Some come to hear us, as Naaman came to Elisha,
when the Prophet had told him what he should do, he mocked him for it, he
thought that he knew a better way than that himself. 2. Kin. 5. 11.
So they come to hear us: but they think they can teach us, but they must
remember that Paul says, 1. Cor. 1. 27.
God has chosen the foolish to confound the wise; therefore if they think
them selves wise, let them think us those fools whom God has chosen to
confound them. For although at all other times we are plain and simple as
Jacob, yet at this time we have a promise, and it is given to us for your sake,
to speak sometime that which we conceive not our selves, because the hour is
come wherein God has appointed to call some of you, as he has done some of
you before, therefore as the princely Spirit came upon Saul when he should
reign, 1. Sa. 11. 6.
to teach him how he should rule, so the prophetical spirit comes upon
Preachers when they should teach, to teach them how they should speak: Mat. 3.
18.
therefore as Christ was content to be baptized of John, so be you content to
be instructed of us, that (if we be more simple than you) the glory of God
may appear more in converting you by us.

Has not this despising of the Preachers, almost made the preachers despise
preaching? the peoples neglect of the prophets has made the Prophets neglect
prophesying? the Nonresident keeps himself away, because he thinks the
people like him better, because dee does not trouble them. And the droane
never studieth to preach, for he says, that an Homely is better liked of
than a Sermon: and they which would study Divinity above all, when they look
upon our contempt, and beggerie, and vexation, turn to Law, to Physic, or
trades, or any thing, rather than they will enter this contemptible calling.
And is not the Arc then ready to depart from Israel?

Now if you will know what makes Prophets and prophesying so despised, you may
see first in Ieroboams Priests. It is said, that Jeroboam made Israel to sin;
^. Kin. 15. 26
that is, Jeroboam made Israel to contemn Religion, because he made Priests
of the basest of the people; 1. Kin. 13. 33.
therefore they which make Priests like Ieroboams Priests, make the people
contemn the Priests and religion too. Why might none carry the Arc but the
Levites? Deu. 10. 18.
Was it not least the Arc (which was a sign of God) should be despised?
Therefore none should meddle with the Word (which is the law of God) but they
which are fit, least they make it despised. Anna said, I will not offer the
child to God, 1. Sam. 1. 22
before he be weaned, that is, before he be taken from the dugge: but now they
offer their children to God, before they be weaned, before they can go, before
they can speak; and send them to fight the Lords battles, before they have
one stone in their hand to fling at Goliath; Mat. 4.
that is, one Scripture to resist the Tempter. This is either because the
Patrones, or the Bishops have lime upon their fingers; which makes them like
blind Isaac, Genesis 27. 11.
that they take no heed whom they bless.

The second thing which makes Prophets and prophesying despised, is the
lewdness and negligence of them that are able to do well in their Ministry,
and yet do contrary. It is said of Hophni and Phineas, 1. Sa. 2. 17.
that by their corrupt sacrificing, they made the people abhor the
sacrifices; so, many by their slubbering of the Word, (for want of study and
meditation) do make men think, that there is no more wisdom in the word of
God, than they show out of it: and therefore they stay at home, and say, they
know as much as the preacher can teach them.

There is a kind of Preachers risen up but of late, which shrowde and cover
every rusticall and unsavory, and childish, and absurd Sermon, under the name
of the simple kind of teaching, like the Popish Priests, which make ignorance
the mother of devotion: but indeed to preach simply, is not to preach
rudely, nor unlearnedly, nor confusedly, but to preach plainly and
perspicuously, that the simplest man may understand what is taught as if he did
hear his name. Therefore if you will know what makes many Preachers preach
so barely, and loosely, and simply, it is your own simplicity, which makes
them think that if they go on and say some thing, all is one, and no fault
will be found because you are not able to judge in or out; and so because they
give no attendance to doctrine, as Paul teaches them, 1. Tim 4. 16
it is almost come to pass that in a whole Sermon the hearer can not pick out
one note more than he could gather him self. Wheat is good, but they which
sell the refuse of wheat are reproved, Amos the eight Chapter and sixth verse:
so preaching is good, but this refuse of preaching is but like swearing, for
one takes the name of God in vain, and the other takes the word of God in
vain. As every sound is not music, so every Sermon is not preaching, but
worse than if he should read an Homely. In the eight and fortieth of
Jeremiah, there is a curse upon them which do the business of the Lord
negligently. If this curse do not touch them which do the chiefest business
of the Lord negligently, truly I can not tell whom the Prophet means. These
would not have prophesying despised, and yet they make it despised themselves.

The last thing which makes Prophets and prophesying despised, is the diversity
of minds, while one holds one way, and another another way, some leave all,
and will be of no Religion, until both parties agree: as if a patient should
pine himself and eat no meat at all, because one Physician says, that this
meat will hurt him, and another says, that meat will hurt him. These are the
three enemies, which make us and our labors despised.

Now what shall we answer to our despisers? Rejoice not against me, O mine
enemy! (says the Church) for I shall be raised: Micah. 7.
so, Despise not the Prophets, O ye Ismaelites, for they shall be honored. Act.
5. 3.
Peter says to Ananias and Saphira, You have not lied unto men, but unto God:
so, you have not despised man but God; Luke 10. 16
for Christ says, He which despises you, despises me. When Satan slew
Jobs servants, his malice was agaiust Job: Job 1. 16.
so, when you despise Gods servants, your presumption is against God; Mat. 10.
for That which you do unto them (says Christ) you do unto me. Why then if
they despise Christ, Christ will despise them, for he told Saul that he spurned
against the prick; that is, he spurned against that which would spurn against
him. Therefore, if you give unto Christ when you give unto the poor; and if
you honor Christ when you honor his Prophets: as you give unto the poor for
Christ's sake, so despise not the prophets for Christ's sake. If for all this we
must be despised still, then this is our remedy, Paul says, 2. Cor. 2. 15.
Whatsoever we are to you: yet we are a sweet savor to God, both in them
which are saved, and them which perish: that is, though we bring him word that
you will not come to the banquet, yet we shall be welcome without you. And so
much of that.

After Despise not Prophesying, follows* Try all things: as if he should
say, Despise not prophesying, but for all that try prophesying, lest you
believe error for truth: for as among Rulers, there be bad Rulers: so among
Prophets therebe false Prophets. This made Christ warn his Disciples to beware
of the leaven of the Pharisees, Mar. 8. 25.
that is, of their false doctrine. This made John say, Try the Spirits. 1.
John 4. 1.
And therefore we read in the seventeenth Chapter of the Acts of the
Apostles and the eleventh verse, how the men of Beroea would not receive Paul's
doctrine before they had tried it, and how did they try it? It is said, that
they searched the Scripture. This is the way which Paul would teach you to
try other whereby he was tried him self: whereby you may see, that if you use
to read the Scripture, you shall be able to try all doctrines: for the word of
God is the touchstone of every thing, Genesis 1. 2.
like the light which God made to behold all his creatures; so is the Scripture
to decide all questions, every doubt must come to the Word, and all
controversies must be ended at this Tribunal, the Scripture must speak which
is right, and which is wrong, which is truth, and which is error, and all
tongues must keep silence to hear it: so God has appointed that the Judge of
our controversies, which he says in the twelfth chapter of John and the eight
and fortieth verse, shall judge us in the last day. Here a man may ask, If it
be so that God would have us to try all our Religion by the Scripture, and not
by Fathers, nor by Doctors, nor by Councels, nor by Angel, nor by Pope; how
then do the Papists say, we must believe as the Church believes? and never
look into the Scripture, whether our teachers say as God says, but take it
upon their credit, as a blind man eats his meat.

A man tries his horse which must bear him, and shall he not try his faith
which must save him? Paul says, Let every one be able to give a reason of
his faith. Is this a reason of our faith to say, I believe so, because Rome
believes so? or rather because that the word does teach me so. It will not
answer for them which die in heresy, to say, the Priests taught us so; no more
than it would excuse Eve to say, Genesis 3. 13.
the Serpent taught her so: for God says, Be not deceived, neither by serpent,
nor by Prophet, nor by Angel. Therefore I conclude with Paul, Despise not
Prophesying, lest the Gospel be taken from you; and yet try prophesying, lest
you receive error for truth.

As we are to try doctrines, so Paul would have us to try our thoughts, and
our speeches, and our actions: therefore he says, Try all things. He does not
bid us take a taste of all sins and vanities, as Solomon did to try them; for
they are tried already: but that we should set the word of God always before us
like a rule, and believe nothing but that which it teaches, love nothing but
that which it prescribes, hate nothing but that which it forbids, do
nothing but that which it commands; and then we try all things by the word.
As the Eunuch said, How should I understand without an Interpreter? Act. 8. 31.
so thou may say: How should I try without the word, which is the
touchstone of good and evil?

Now, when we have tried by the word which is truth, and which is error; what
should we do then? Mat. 2. 2.
Keep that which is best: that is, stay at the truth, as the wise men stayed
when they came to Christ. We must keep and hold the truth, as a man gripeth a
thing with both his hands; that is, defend it with thy tongue, maintain it
with thy purse, further it with thy labor, in danger, and trouble, and loss,
and displeasure, come life, come death; think, as Christ did seal the truth
with his blood, so thou must seal it with thy blood, or else thou do not
keep it, but let it go. Well does Paul put Try before Choose, for he which
tries may choose the best; but he which chooses before he try, takes the worst
sooner than the best: and therefore the Popes priests because the people should
take superstition before religion, will never let them have the Touchstone, but
keep them from the Scripture, and lock it up in an unknown tongue, which they
cannot skill of, least they should try their doctrines, Act. 17.
like the men of Boerea, making religion a craft, as men call their trades.
Therefore, as Josiah rejoiced that the book of God was found again; so we may
rejoice that the book of God is found again: for when the people might not
read it, it was all one as if they had lost it.

After Try all things, and keep the best: follows, Abstain from all
appearance of evil: As if he should say, That is like to be best which is so
far from evil, that it has not the appearance of evil; and that is like to
be the truth which is so far from error, that it has not the show of
error; whereby he shows, that nothing should be brought into the Church, or
added to our Religion, but that which is an undoubted truth without suspicion
of error. It is not enough to be persuaded of our faith, but we must be
assured of it; for Religion is not built upon doubts, but upon knowledge.
Here we may marvel why Paul bids us Abstain from all appearance of evil:
because sin, and heresy, and superstition are hypocrites; that is, Sin
has the appearance of Virtue and heresy has the appearance of Truth, and
Superstition has the appearance of Religion: but by this the Apostle does
note, that there is no Sin, nor Heresy, nor Superstition, but if the visor
be taken away from it, it will appear to be a Sin, and Heresy, and
Superstition, though at the first sight the visor do make it seem none,
because it covers the evil, like a painted Sepulcher upon worms and rotten
bones.

Hereby we are taught to judge of all things as they are, and not as they
seem to be. As we draw aside the curtain before we behold the picture: so
we must remove our prudence and all surmises, and then behold the thing naked
as it is, if we will know it indeed.

Here I might admonish them which separate themselves from our Church: As Paul
says, Examine whether you be in the faith: so examine whether you have the
show of error. Has it not the show of error, to broach a Religion which
was never heard of before? Has it not the show of error, to retain an
opinion, which the Author himself has recanted? as though ye would suck up
that which the Dog has vomited? Has it not the show of error, to affirm,
that those preachers may not be heard, which (by their own confessions) have
converted them to the Knowledge of God, and daily convert other? Has it not
the show of error, to affirm that the Lords prayer may not be used for a
prayer, which for any thing that we or they can read, was so used from the
beginning?

Has it not the show of error, to say that no man may use any set prayer?
seeing there be many prayers, and psalms, and blessings in the holy
Scripture, which were used in the same form? Has it not the show of error, to
affirm that we have no Church; and yet to grant that our Martyrs which died
in Popery, were true members of the Church? Has it not the show of error to
affirm that two or three may excommunicate all the rest without a Minister,
seeing the Pastor is the mouth of the church? has it not the show of error to
affirm, that the church of Christ was ever invisible before this age, and that
it is such a small flock as their number is? and that it has set foot no
where but in England? Has it not the show of error to hold that for sound and
good religion, which is altered every day, adding and detracting, as though a
man should make a Religion of his own invention, so fast as new conceits come
into his brain? Let them think that Paul says unto them, Romans 12. 3.
Be wise unto sobriety, and suspect that construction which your selves
devised; Pro. 4. 27.
for Solomon says, There is an error upon the right hand, as well as upon the
left, that is, (as I may call it) the zealous error, and if this be not it, I
know none within this Land.

Yet, shall I say that we have not the show of error? Nay, I would that we
were but in the show of error. I may not call evil good, no more then I may
call good evil; and therefore let us pull out the beam out of our own eyes, as
we would pull the moate out of their eyes. If Paul would have us abstain from
every appearance of evil, sure he would have us abstain from heresy and
from idolatry; for these are the greatest evils. But if we be not idolaters,
yet we have the show of idolatry; if we be not of Antichrists religion, yet
we are of Antichrists fashion, so long as we have the same vestures, and the
same orders, and the same titles that Antichrist knows his ministers by. It
is said, that the Serpents sting is in his tail, and so it seems: Nu. 33. 55.
for this tail of Antichrist (which the Pope has left behind him, like an
evil savor) is unto us as the remnants of the Chanaanites were unto the
Jews: they should have destroyed all the Chanaanites, but because they spared
some, therefore they whom they left were goades in their sides, and pricks in
their eyes, that they could never be quiet for them; so we should have
expelled the head and the tail too of Antichrist, but because we did not,
therefore the remnants of Popery are goades in our sides, and pricks in our
eyes, that we cannot yet be quiet for them. Therefore let us pray that he
which has taken away the evil, will take away the show of evil too.

FINIS.
To the Reader.
TO control those false copies of this Sermon, which were Printed without my
knowledge, patched (as it seems) out of some borrowed notes; and to stop the
Printing of it again without my corrections, as it was intended, because they
had got it licensed before, although utterly unwilling (for some respects) to
have it published: which made me withstand their importunity so long, yet
seeing more inconvenience than I thought of, I suffered that which I could not
hinder. And now hoping that it is Gods will to profit some by it, Genesis 43. 11.
as Jacob parted from Benjamin: so that which must be, let be: and the Lord
give thee a blessing with it.

THE WEDDING GARMENT.
Romans 13. 14. Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ.
I Have chose a Text which is the sum of the Bible. For all Scripture runs
upon Christ like the Title of a book, because he is Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the end of man's salvation: Reave. 1. 8.
therefore he is figured in the Law, foretold in the Prophets, and fulfilled in
the Gospel. Some places point to his Divinity, some to his humanity, some to
his Kingdom, some to his Priesthood, some to his Prophecy, some to his
Conception, some to his Birth, some to his life, some to his miracles, some to
his Passion, some to his Resurrection, some to his Ascension, some to his
Glorification; all point to the Savior, like John Baptist, Ioh. 1. 29.
when he said, This is the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the
world. Therefore learn Christ, and learn all. Now to teach us how we should
hear, and how we should love, and how we should fear, and how we should
believe, and how we should follow Christ, that we may know when we have
learned him: the Apostle says, Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ: as though this
word did contain all our duties unto Christ, to put him on: (which seems to
be the level of this phrase, if you mark how it comes in) for before Paul
says, Cast away the works of darkness, Verse 12.
and put on the armor of light: then he names the works of darkness which we
should cast off, that is, Verse 13.
gluttony, drunkenness, strife, envy, chambering, wantonness; after he
names the armor of light, Verse 14.
which we should put on, and calls it by the name of the giver, The Lord
Jesus Christ. In stead of gluttony, and drunkenness, and strife, and
chambering, and wantonness, and other patches of the Devil, wherewith man
cloatheth himself as with a Garment; the Apostle gives him an other Garment,
Psa. 109. 18
which he calls Jesus Christ: he does not oppose virtue to vice, as one
would think when he had said, Cast off gluttony, he should have said, Put on
sobriety: when he had said, Cast off wantonness, he should have said, Put on
continency: when he said, Cast off envy, he should have said, Put on love:
But in stead of all virtues, he commends the example of Christ for every
virtue, and opposes it to every vice: as if he should say, He which thinks
only to follow Christ, needs not be led by the hand from virtue to virtue,
but his example will teach him what he shall follow, and what he shall fly,
better than all precepts in the world. Therefore this is the best thought in
every action for a man to think, what Christ would do, which was made not
only redemption and salvation to save us, 1. Cor. 1. 30
(...) wisdom and example to guide us. Therefore he says, Mat. 11. 20
Learn of me, and follow me: as though we should think before we speak
whether he would speak so, Mar. 10. 21
and consider before we do, whether he would do so; and do all by his example
as the Scholar writes by his coppie: or else we do not learn of him, but of
our selves; and then we go awrie, like a child which scribleth without a rule.
If thou resoluest to speak and do no otherwise than Christ would speak and
do himself, thou shall be sure to do al things well, because thou followest a
straight pattern: therefore study what this means, To put on Christ. It is
a strange speech, and a strange Garment. They which cannot tell (like
Nicodemus) what Christ means when he says, John 3. 4.
that we must be borne again, cannot tell what Paul means when he says, Put
on Christ: as if one man should put on another, I think many here may go to
the Apostle, as the Apostles went to Christ, and ask of him, Master, expound
to us, what is the parable?

This phrase is read in none but Paul, which has written most of justification
by Christ: and therefore he uses all fit phrases, Gal. 3. 27.
to express how we should apply Christ unto us; and in no terms he has
showed it more lively than in this phrase, Put on Christ: for it signifies
that Christ does cover us like a Garment, and defend us also safely like an
armor. ^om. 4. 7.
He hides our unrighteousness with his righteousness, he covers our
disobedience with his obedience, he shadoweth our death with his death, that
the wrath of God can not find us, judgment can not spy us, the curse can not
see us, Genesis 37. 29.
for the Garment which covers and hides us. But, as Jacob got the blessing
in the name and apparel of Esau his elder brother: so in the name and apparel
of Christ our elder brother, we receive the blessing, and are received into
favor like Christ him self. For God says not, This is my beloved Son,
which pleases me, Mat. 3. 17.
but, In whom I am pleased; meaning, that not only Christ pleases God, 1.
Cor. 11. 3.
but we please God in Christ; for Christ is our head.

Therefore, as one looking in the face of a man, does like him straight if he
like his face: Ephesians. 5. 23.
so, God beholding us in the face of Christ, does love us straight, because the
face does please him. But Christ is not our head unless we be his members,
Christ is not our garment unless we put him on: as Christ did put on our
Garment when he clothed himself with our flesh; and took our infirmities and
bore our curse: so we must put on his Garment, that is, his righteousness,
his merits, Reu. 3. 4.
and his death, which is as strange a vesture to us, as our flesh was to him,
and much a do we have to put it on, and when it is on, there is great cunning
to wear it cleanly and comely from soyling and renting, that such a precious
Garment be not taken from us again. Mat. 22. 11


Therefore many seem to wear this Garment which shall be thrust from the
banquet, Mat. 7. 23.
because they wear it not: as those which will say, when the Lord shall come
to judgment, We have seen thee in our streets, Luke 13. 26.
we have heard thee in our Sinagogues, we have prophesied, we have cast out
Devils, we have wrought miracles by thy name: as though if any had put him on,
or borne his marks, they were the men which were marked like his servants:
therefore who but they shall enter into Heaven? Luke. 13. 27
Yet Christ says, I know you not: there is their reward, I know you not: as if
he should answer, You wear not my liuerie, you bear not my cognizance for
all your shows, therefore depart from me: so he put them off, because they had
not put him on: for though they had seen his person, and heard of his virtues,
yet they had no faith to apply his mercies, his merits, his death and his
righteousness unto them, without which no man can put on Christ nor wear him.
Faith is the hand which puts him on, Faith takes first his righteousness
and covers her unrighteousness, then she takes his obedience and covers her
disobedience, then she takes his patience, and covers her impatiencie, then
she takes his temperancie, and covers her intemperancie, then she takes his
continency, and covers her incontinencie, then she takes his costancie, and
covers her inconstancy, then she takes his faith, and covers her
diffidence: then she takes his humility, and covers her pride: then she
takes his love, and covers her rancour: and so takes one robe after
another, and tricketh her self, until she have put on Jesus Christ, that is,
until she appear in the sight of God, like Jesus Christ, clothed with his
merits and graces: that God has no power to be angry with her, because she
comes so like his son. This is to put on Jesus Christ, as you shall see
more lively, when you have taken a view of the Garment, for we are to speak of
Christ the Garment, and of our putting it on. There be many fashions of
apparel, but they are too light, or too heavy, or too sad, or too course, or
too stale, and all wear out. At last the Apostle found a fashion that
surpasses them all: it is never out of fashion, meet for all seasons, fit for
all persons, and such a profitable weed, that the more it is worn, the fresher
it is. What fashion have you seen comparable to this? 2. Sa. 10. 4.
It is not like the clothes of David's Ambassadors, which covered their upper
parts; nor like Saul's armor, 1. Sa. 17. 29
which tired David when he should fight with it: 2. Kin. 14. 2.
nor like the counterfeit of Ieroboams wife, which disguised her self to go
unknown: nor like the old rags of the Gibeonites, Ioshu. 9. 4. 5
which deceived Joshua: nor like the paultrie suit of Micah, Iud. 17. 10.
which he gave once a year to his Leuite: Mat. 11. 8.
nor like the gluttons flaunt which ietted in purple every day: nor like the
light clothes which Christ said are in kings Courts, and make them lighter that
wear them. But it is like the garment of the high Priest, Exodus 28. 21
which had all the names of the Tribes of Israel written upon his breast: so
all the names of the faithful are written in the breast of Christ, Mal. 3. 16.
and registered in the book of his merits: 2. Kings 2. 8
it is like Elias mantle, which divided the waters: So he divides our sins
and punishments, that they which are clothed with Christ, are armed both
against sin and death. Deuteronomy. 26. 5.
It is like the garments of the Israelites in the wilderness, which did not
wear; forty years together they wandered in the desert, and yet says Moses,
their shoes were not worn, but their aparell was as when they came out of
Egypt: So the righteousness of Christ does last for ever, and his mercies are
never worn out. Hest. 6. 11.
As Mardocheus shined in the kings roabes before the people: so and more
glorious are the faithful in the roabes of Christ before God. Mat. 17. 2.
When Christ was transfigured upon the mount, Matthew says that his face shined
like the Sun, and his clothes were as white as the light: Psalm. 136. 1
So when we are transfigured into the image of Christ, we shall shine before
other men like lights, and therefore Christ's disciples are called Lights,
because they were clothed with light, Mat. 5. 14.
and shined to the world. Mat. 6. 29.
Salomo^ was not so glorious in all his royalty, nor the Lillies which are
brauer than Solomon, as he which is clothed with Christ, because the apparel
upon him is better than all the world about him. Therefore if David said, 2. Sa.
1. 14.
Weep ye daughters of Israel, for Saul which clothed you in purple: I may say,
rejoice ye daughters of Israel, for Christ which has clothed you with
righteousness, as it were with a vesture, before you come to yt banquet.

This is the Wedding Garment, Mat. 22. 12.
without which no man can feast with the Lord. This Garment is called an
Armor, Ephesians. 6. 11.
because it defends us from all the assaults of the devil, the flesh, the
world, the heat of persecution, and the cold of defection. This Garment is
called Light, Romans 13. 2.
because it is the beauty and glory of them which wear it. This Garment is
called a Kingdom, because none but Kings do wear it, Mat. 6. 3.
that is, they are inthroned in the kingdom of Christ, and made kings over the
world, the flesh, and Satan: which wear this Garment like the hair of
Sampson, which while he wore he was like a king, Iud. 16. 6.
and all his enemies had no power to hurt him.

This Garment Paul has sent unto you, to go before the king of heaven and
earth, a holy Garment, a royal Garment, an immaculate garment, an everlasting
garment: a garment whereof every hem is peace of conscience, every pleate is
joy in the holy Ghost, every stitch is the remission of some sin, and saves
him which wears it. If she which touched the hemme of Christ's garment was
healed, he which wears the Garment, nay, he which wears Christ him self,
shall not he be healed of all his sores, though he were wounded from head to
foot? You need not cloth him now which says, Mat. 25. 43
When I was naked ye did not cloth me, Mat. 21. 8.
nor cast your garments in the way, Genesis 9. 23.
as they did, Luke 10. 34
when he came to Jerusalem, but take his Garments, and suffer your selves to be
clothed, as Noah did, to cover your nakedness. This Samaritane does not
signify Christ, but yet may be resembled to Christ.
As the good Samaritane put him upon his own beast which was spoiled with
thieves, and bound up his sores, when he was wounded: So Christ Jesus mounteth
the faithful upon his righteousness, and heals their sins, as though he
should cover them with his garments, whom the world, Genesis 3. 1.
the flesh, and the devil have robbed of their garments, that is, the
righteousness which they had in Paradise before the serpent came: so if we put
on Christ, we are clothed with his obedience, whereby our wickedness is covered:
we are clothed with his merits, whereby our sins are forgiven: we are clothed
with his spirit, whereby our hearts are mollified and sanctified, and renewed,
til we resemble Christ himself. This is the Apostles meaning, to put on
Christ, as it is unfolded in Col. 3. 12. Where he brings forth all the robes of
Christ, Vers^ 10.
and sorts them, and says, put on mercy, put on meeknes, put on humility,
put on patience, put on love, all which before he called the new man. So that
to put on Christ, is to put on the new man with all his virtues, until we be
renewed to the Image of Christ, which is like a new man amongst men. They which
labor to be righteous, and yet believe that Christ's righteousness shall save
them, have put on Christ as Paul would have them. We are not taught to put on
Angels, nor Saints, nor the virgin Mary, nor Paul himself, to cover our sins
with their righteousness, as the Papists do: but we are commanded to put on
Christ, and cover our sins with his righteousness. The body has many
Garments, but the soul has one Garment. Every clout will cover our sores, but
the finest silk will not cover our sins. Therefore when we seem brave to
others, we seem foul to God, because his eye is upon our sins, which lie
naked when all the rest is covered, until we put on Christ, and then we hear yt
voice, Mat. 9. ^.
Thy sins are covered, and the^ we have that blessing, Psalm. 32. 1.
Blessed is the man whose sin is covered: so we are clothed and blessed
together. Yet this garment is out of request, too rough for some, too grave for
others, too base for others. And therefore in stead of putting on Christ, Luke
11. 37.
they put him off, in stead of welcomming him, Mat. 8. 34.
they discharge him, like the Gadarens, that they may keep their swine, that
is their beastly pleasures, which he would cast into the sea. Ma. 27.
These are like the foolish soldiers which should have made Christ their
Garment, and they cast lots upon his Garments, and divided them, and so spoiled
them. So do the Papists deal with this Garment, they say it is not fit for
them, and therefore they break it, and mangle it, and piece it with rags of
their own inventions: they say it is too light, and not able to bear off the
storms of death and heat of hell, and therefore choose rather to make
themselves garments of their merits, and their masses, and their penance, and
their pardons, and their pilgrimages: like Adam and Eve, Genesis 3. 7. 31
which made themselves coats of fig leaves, which God destroyed again, to
show that when men have patched all their leaves of masses, of pardons, of
pilgrimages, and satisfactions together, yet they will not cover their
nakedness, nor keep off the heat of Gods wrath, but are like the curtall
skirtes of David's Ambassadors, 2. Sa. 29. 4.
which hid not their shame. Therefore when we may go in our masters attire,
shall we scrubbe like beggars patched in our rags? Job. 9. 31.
Mine own garments defile me, says Job: Our own Garments, our own
righteousness defiles us, for what garment, what righteousness have we of our
own, Esa. 64. 6.
but that which is like a menstruous cloth, which had more need to be washed
it self, tha^ to wipe that which is foul? Therefore Christ must make us
Garments, or else when our backs flaunt it like Courtiers, our souls shall
strip like beggars. And the devils will sport themselves like Cham, Genesis 9. 22.
to see our nakedness.

First, the Father made us Garments in Paradise, Gen 3. 21.
now the Son makes us Garments in the Wilderness, nay, the Son is made our
Garment, as Paul says, Christ is made unto us righteousness: 1. Cor. 1. 30.
that is, Christ's righteousness must be our Garment, or else we shall be
ashamed when our righteousness does not reach to cover our nakedness, but
still some part will peep bare until he cast his righteousness upon it, 1.
Sa. 17. 42.
and then all is covered. As David needed no other armor against the Giant
than a sling: so we need no other Garment against sin than Christ. There
wants nothing but this, to put it on.

Now let us see how to put this Garment on. Many fumble about it, like children
which had need of one to put on their clothes. Some put on Christ like a
precious head tire, which all day is worn, beautified with jewels, and beset
with gemmes, to make the face seem more amiable: but at night, that riches is
laid aside, and the head muffled with some regardlesse tire. Thus do our
curious women put on Christ, who when they hear the messengers of grace
offering this Garment, and preparing to make the body fit to be garnished
with so glorious a vesture, as Paul did the Romans, first washing away
drunkenness and gluttony, then chambring and wantonness, then strife and envy,
and so sin after sin, they seem like the stony ground to receive it with
joy, and think to beautify their head with this precious ornament: but when
he tells them there is no communion between Christ and Belial, that if this
Garment be put on, all other vanities must be put off; they then turn their
day into darkness, and reject Christ, that would be an eternal crown of
beauty to their heads, and wrap their temples in the uncomely rags and refuse
of every Nations pride: and in these toys they cause their servants to spend
many hours on every day in the week, but especially on the Sabbath day to
deck their bodies, as if they were but little children, which had need of one
to put on their clothes. Some put on Christ as a cloak, which hangs upon
their shoulders, and covers them: when they go abroad to be seen of men,
they can cast on the cloak of holiness, and seem for a while as holy as the
best; but so soon as they come home, the cloak goes off, and the man is as
he was, whose vizard was better than his face. Thus Hypocrites put on Christ,
as many retain unto Noble men, not to do them any service, but to have their
countenance. Many put on Christ like a hat which goes off to every one which
meets them: so every temptation which meets them, makes them forget what
they heard, what they promised, what they resolved, and change their way, as
though they had not repented at all. So the common people (like your selves)
put on Christ, they are zealous so long as they are in the Church, and beat
their breasts, Luk 18. 11.
and cast up their eyes like the Publican, when they hear a sentence which
mooues them, as though they would do no more against that saying while they
live: but the next business puts all out of mind, till they come to the
Church again. Some put on Christ as a glove, which covers but the hand; so
they put on the face of Christ, or the tongue of Christ: but their hands work,
and their feet walk, as they did before: So many professors of Religion put
on Christ, which call but for discipline and reformation, that they might get a
name of zeal and sincerity, to cover some fault, which they would not be
suspected of. Thus every man would cover himself with Christ, but they have
not the skill, or they have not the will to put him on. What will you do then?
Though the Garment be never so good, yet it is not good to them that do not
wear it: for what profit have we of the Garments which we do not wear? they
neither keep us from heat, nor cold. Therefore Paul does not bring you a
Garment to lay by you for the moaths, but he bids you put it on. Here is the
cunning now in putting it on. If Paul had taught us this, then you would
hearken unto him. Well, you shall hear what Paul says to the putting it on.

First (says Paul) you must cast away the works of darkness, Verse 12.
and then put on the armor of light: first you must put off, and then put on.
As the Eagles feathers will not lie with any others feathers, but consume them
which lie with them: so the Wedding Garment will not be worn with filthy
Garments, 1. Sam. 5. 8.
but scorns like the Arc that Dagon should stand by it. If any man may not
wear women's apparel for lightness; may he wear the devils apparel, and
cloth himself with pride, with covetousness, with envy, with hypocrisy, with
uncleanness, and when he is like the devil, Matt. 2. 21
sit at Gods table? No man (says Christ) patcheth a new piece to an old
Garment, and will thou patch an old piece to a new Garment? God forbad the
people to wear linsey wolsey, Leu. 19. 15.
because it was a sign of inconstancy: but this is inco^stancie it self.

He does not put on Christ, but puts off Christ and puts on Belial, Ioh.
19. 23.
which fashions himself to God, ^eu. 3. 15.
and the World too. As Christ's coat was without seame, so they must be
without stayne that wear it. For when a man puts on fair clothes, he
makes himself fair too, and auoydeth every foul thing, lest it should
foul his clothes: so must he which puts on Christ; for the finest Garment
is soonest stained. Therefore when thou have put on this Garment, thou must
wash thy self, and pick thy way, and choose thy works, and handle nothing
that is foul for marring thy clothes, that is, thou must not think as thou
did, nor speak as thou did, nor live as thou did, but remember
that thou have changed thy master, Jude 3.
and serve him with whom thou art bound. For if God and the devil could not
agree upon Moses body, for one to have one part, and the other another part,
but God would have all: much less will God agree that the devil should have
part of the soul, which would not yield him part of the body. Thus have you
heard what you must put off: now hear how Christ must be put on. As the Angel
taught John to read the Book, Revel. 10. 9.
when he bad him eat it: so we must put on Christ, as if we did eat him, not
as the Papists do in their Mass, but as the meat is turned into the
substance of the body, and goes through every part of man: so Christ and his
Word should go from part of part, from ear to heart, from heart to mouth,
from mouth to hand, til we be of one nature with them, that they be the very
substance of our thoughts, and speeches, and actions, as the meat is of our
body. This is to eat Christ and his Word, Ephe. 3. 30.
or else we do not eat them, but chew them, and when our taste is satisfied,
spue them out again. Thus we must put on Christ: for the Word signifies so
to put him on: as if thou would put him in, that he may be one with thee,
and thou with him, as it were in a body together. As he has put on all our
infirmities, so we must put on all his graces, not half on, but all on, and
claspe him to us, and gird him about us, and wear him, even as we wear our
skin, which is always about us. Then there shall be no need of Wyres, nor
curles, nor perriwigs: the husbands shall not be forced to rack their rents,
nor inhaunce their fines, nor sell their lands, to deck their wives; 2. Kin.
2. 13.
but as the poor mantle of Eliah seemed better to Elisha than all the roabes
of Solomon: so the Wedding Garment shall seem better than all the flaunts of
vanity; and put every fashion out of fashion, which is not modest and comely
like it self. If you will know farther how to put on Christ, you shall see how
your Text will Catechize you in his three names, Lord, Jesus, Christ. The
Apostle seems to spell out the way unto us, how we should wear this Garment:
First we must put him on as Lord; then we must put him on as Jesus; lastly, we
must put him on as Christ. Thou must put him on as Lord, that is, thy ruler to
command thee, thy tutor to govern thee, and thy master to direct thee: thou
must be no man's servant but his, take no man's part against him, Acts. 4. 19.
but say with the Apostle, Whether is it meet to obey God, Joshua has the like
name, but not from God, nor to that end.
or you? Thou must put him on as Jesus, that is, thy Savior in whom thou
trustest, thy protector on whom thou dependest, thy redeemer in whom thou
beleeuest: thou must not look for thy salvation from Angel, nor Saint, nor any
thing beside him. For the name of Jesus signifies a Savior, and is given to
none but him; and he is not only called the Savior, but the Salvation, Luke
1. 69.
in the Song of Simeon; to show that he is the only Savior; for there may be
many Saviors, Judge. 3. 9.
but there can be but one salvation: as there may be many tortures, and yet but
one death. Therefore, when he is called the Salvation, it implies that there
is no Savior beside him. Luke 3. 35.
Thou must put him on as Christ, that is, Act. 3. 22.
a King to rule, a Prophet to teach, a Priest to pray and sacrifice, Heb. 8. 3.
and pacify the wrath of God for thee. Mat. 1. 16.
For this name Christ does signify that he was anointed a King, a Priest,
Heb. 1. 8.
and a Prophet for man: a King to rule him, a Priest to offer sacrifice for
him, a Prophet to teach him. So that he puts on Christ as Lord, which
worshippeth none but him, he puts on Christ as Jesus, which believes in
none but him; Gal. 3. 17.
and he puts on Christ as Christ, which worshippeth none but him, believes
in none but him, and hears none but him.

You put on Christ first, when you are baptized: then you were sealed and
consecrated to his service: so soon as you came into the world, you vowed to
renounce the world and follow God. How many have put on Christ thus, and since
have put him off again? which have broken the first promise that ever they
made, Romans 6. 3.
and were never faithful to God since. You put on Christ again, Ephesians. 4. 22.
when you are called and sanctified; that is, when you cast off the old man,
which is corrupt with the lusts of the flesh, the pride of life, and the cares
of this world; and put on the new man, which is regenerate in righteousness
and holiness, to the Image of Christ, or likeness of Adam in his innocence:
Romans 12. 2.
for to put on the new man, is to become a new man, as if thou were borne
again, and conceived of the holy Ghost. Of this Job speaks when he says,
Job. 29. 14.
I put on Justice, 1. Cor. 10. 16
and it covered me. You put on Christ again, when you receive his holy
Sacrament, and are partakers of his body and blood, that is, the merits of
his obedience and passion by Faith, which hears him as if she did see him,
and sees him as if she did feel him* and feels him as if she did taste him,
and tastes him as if she did digest him, then Christ is become yours, and
dwells in you, and feeds you with his grace to eternal life, as the bread
and wine sustaineth the life present. Lastly, when you have put on Christ in
these three sorts, Phil. 3. 21.
which is your Garment for this world; 1. Cor. 15. 49*
after you shall put on Christ in heaven, and be clothed with his glory, and
that shall be your last vesture, which shall never wear out.

Thus have you heard what is meant by putting on Christ: first to cloth our
selves with righteousness and holiness like Christ; and then because our own
righteousness is too short to cover our arms, and legs, and thighs of sin,
but still some bare place will peer out and shame us in the sight of God,
therefore we must borrow Christ's Garments, Genesis 27. 15.
as Jacob did his brothers; and cover our selves with his righteousness, that
is, believe that his righteousness shall supply our unrighteousness, and his
sufferings shall stand for our sufferings, because he came to fulfill the law,
and bear the curse, and satisfy his Father for us, that all which believe in
him might not die, John 3. 16.
but have life everlasting.

Now I have showed you this goodly Garment, you must go to another to help you
to put it on; and none can put this Garment upon you, but he which is the
Garment, the Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore to him let us pray.

FINIS
THE WAY TO WALK IN.
Romans 13. 13. Let us walk honestly, as in the day, not in gluttony and
drunkenness, neither in chambering and wantonness, nor in strife and envying,
etc.
Having already showed you a kingdom, now I will show you wherein this
kingdom consists, and in what it does not consist, as in the fourteenth of
the Romans, he shows that it consists not in meats and drinks, etc. but
in righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. But because I am to
speak of some vices which this text calls me unto, I will first proceed in
them, beseeching you, as you can hear them to be condemned, so speedily to
proceed in execution, to put them to death, and so to go forward with the rest
of your sins.

Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in gluttony and drunkenness, etc.
As if he should say, know you that I bid you put away from you the works of
darkness, he names not all the works of darkness, but chiefly those that
do reign and are cause of more wickedness, that is, gluttony, drunkenness,
strife and envying, etc. three monsters come out of hell, and trouble the whole
world, therefore cast off these, and you have cast off all.

Now to speak of them, I will begin where the vices begin, and as I point them
out unto you, so I pray you to slay them, as if you had marshall law in your
hands to put them to death. By this narration the Apostle shows the chain
of sin, how one sin will draw on another after it, for no sin is so base,
that it will go alone, wherefore resist all sins or none, for if you
entertain one sin, it will presently draw another after it, and so the
whole house will be full of thieves, as Gehezi his pride made him to lie, and
Adams fall made him to excuse himself, and Peter's denial made him swear, and
after his swearing, made him curse himself, etc. for the sinner cannot stay
after he has committed one sin, to commit another, nor till he has come to
the bottom, even to the bottom of hell. If I should stand to anatomize and
paint out all vices in their kind, I should crave a longer time than is
allotted to me, therefore I will briefly touch them.

As huge as the sea is, yet one may taste the saltness of it in a drop, so
in one sin you may see how ill favored all the rest be, for there is no
sin but weakeneth the body, shorteneth the life, corrupts and consumes
the goods, preuenteth grace, and makes us odious to GOD and to Angels. You are
given to hate your enemies, these are they, therefore hate them: they keep you
from repentance, least you should be saved, wherefore I will show you what is
in this box, lest the same go to your eyes and so blind you.

Walk not in gluttony, drunkenness, and strife, etc. These come like fair
Ladies, with presents in their hands to woo the unstable soul of man,
Gluttony comes with the pleasure of the flesh, Drunkenness with the
satisfying of the thirst, Strife with the revenge of the enemy.

And first what gluttony and drunkenness offers, and how many have been
deceived with their sweet meats and strong drinks, till all have been turned
into a belly, and so turned the body into sin, daily experience teaches us.

Now by the way, the Apostle (we must note) does approve sobriety and virtue,
that as a man may drink and not be drunken, so he may eat that he loves, and
not glut himself; for he forbids not to eat meat, but not to eat too
much, lest thou surfeit, for the golden mean is good for all things. Solomon
does not forbid to eat honey, but eat not too much, lest thou surfeit. As the
body may not offend the soul, so the soul may not injury the body, lest it
be unfit to serve the soul.

Many there be that think they have not sinned in gluttony til they surfeit,
but this is gluttony in excess, and punishes it self with many diseases, as
dulnes of wit, want of memory, and shortness of life. Now that you may sin in
gluttony, and not to surfeit, appears by the rich man in the sixteenth of
Luke, who fared deliciouslie every day, and never surfeted, yet for all that
he is called a glutton, to teach us that there be gluttons which do not
surfeit. This kind of sin much displeases God, when men eat and drink and
rise up to play, and remember not the afflictions of Joseph and Lazarus lying
at the door: many be such banquets, where none do come with a Wedding garment,
and where Christ is never invited. Many things may persuade us to temperance,
and we may learn it of the beasts, who desire no change, nor hoord not, and
are content. God provided meat for all creatures, as herbs, roots, and
grass, before he provided any for man, to teach us, what little care we
should have of our belly, for we live not by bread only, but by every word
that proceeds out of the mouth of God. Christ has taught us to fast, when he
prepared himself thereunto in the wilderness, but he never by any example
taught us to feast: some there be which think he did never eat flesh but in
the paschall Lamb, which although it does not teach, or debar us from eating
flesh, which Peter was willed to eat in the vision, yet it teaches us to tame
the flesh, lest Hagar should get the upper hand of her mistress.

When the belly is full, the flesh lusts, the tongue prateth, the wit
sleeps, and Satan carries away the mind when the understanding is away: As
the moist and waterish grounds bring forth nothing but frogs and toades, so
the belly and watrie stomach that is stuffed like a tun, brings forth
nothing but a drousie mind, foggie thoughts, filthy speeches, and corrupt
affections: therefore the Physician says, nothing better for the body then
abstinence, the Divine says, nothing better for the soul then abstinence, the
Lawyer says, nothing better for the wits then abstinence; but because there is
no law for this vice, therefore it breaks out so mightily. Whoredom has a
law, Theft has a law, Murder has a law, but this sin is without law.

Now to the second sin, which is Drunkenness: these are two sisters, betwixt
whom there is little difference: in this sin some are mad, some are merry,
some do vomit, some do sleep, and some do reele, and then there is no
difference between a man and a beast, saving that the one can stand, and the
other cannot.

As every Scripture that makes against Theft, makes against Nonresidencie;
so every reason which makes against gluttony, makes against drunkenness.

Now after these comes chambering and wantonness, and no marvel says one,
though the impes do follow, when the devil goes before: for fullness of
bread went before the sin of the Sodomites. So when David had dined and was
full, walking upon his palace, his eyes glaunced, his flesh lusted, his heart
consented, the fire burned, and there was no water to quench it. And therefore
in that so great a champion as David did fall, let him that stands take heed
lest he fall. And seeing that thou in thy self art no stronger, or mightier,
imitate and follow the example of those that are cunning wrastlers, who to
cast down another will first fall down themselves: so we to overthrow our
enemies must subject our selves, and humble our selves first by fasting and
prayer.

Sodom was burned, but the sins have escaped. Sweet words, soft attire,
wanton behavior, and such like, have conspired and agreed all together to
set honesty to sale. And we use daily to pray that we be not led into
temptation: and yet we do lead our selves into temptation. For our fair
words, wanton gestures and dainty fare: with many other pleasures, do
becken unto sin: and if there be no wine why hanges the bushes? and if there
be no wantonness, why is there any wanton, or unseemly, or ungodly attire?

Let us not walk in gluttony and drunkenness, neither in chambering and
wantonnesses, nor in strife and envying. It is hard to say which of these sins
is most in the world; happily some will say, I have been no glutton, no
drunkard, no whoremonger, no murderer, no false image worshipper, etc. but who
can come forth and say, he is free from strife, for strife has compassed the
whole world, strife in Country, strife in City, strife in the Court, strife
in the Commonweal, strife in the Church, who can say that he is free from
strife, or that he has not injured his brother? surely that man shall stand
alone, for it will light upon none but Christ.

I can but exhort you with the Apostle, that you would not walk in strife and
envying, therefore put away these among the rest, for he that has not put off
these has not put on Christ, and if he has not put on Christ, he is then no
Christian. Envy is a sin, and it punishes it self like gluttony, for it
fretteth the heart, shortneth the life, and eats the flesh, as a fire
consumes the wood, it is the mother of strife, and a great worker in the
Court, this is it which brought labor and sickness, and death into the
world, even the envy of the serpent, and the devil, and it will condemn
thee in thy conscience if thou be an envious man. Nothing resembles God more
than love; for GOD is love: so if thou have love, thou resemblest God. But if
thou have envy, and art an adversary, thou resemblest the devil: for thou
can not come nearer the devil any way, than to be envious. As the dust
comes with the wind, so the devil comes with envy; and he that is
possessed with envy; is possessed with the devil. Why does the Apostle say in
the third chapter of his Epistle to the Colossians, Above all things put on
love? Because love is best of all. Why does he call love the band of
perfection? Because it binds all virtues together. If love be the band of
perfection, to bind al virtues together: then envy is the band of impiety, to
bind all sins together: therefore if we must cast off all but love, we must
cast off envy. Thou can not come to the kingdom of peace, without love. The
kingdom of Satan is at peace, and shall not Gods kingdom be at peace? Shall
we be at peace with the flesh, the world, and the devil, and be at variance
with God, and at strife one with another? Fire is cruel, wrath is raging: but
who can stand before envy? Proverbs 27. And if none can stand before envy,
how can envy stand before God?

If thou can not forgive him that does offend thee, thou prayest against thy
self, and ask vengeance upon thee, therefore the Apostle exhorts thee not
to let the Sun go down upon thy wrath, Ephesians. 5. 26. Charity enuieth not
(says Paul) therefore see thou have charity, lest thou be counted an envious
person.

The beasts of the field are armed with horns, with hoofes, with tuskes, and
such like to take revenge: but nature has left nothing for man to put him in
mind of revenge; and yet man above al other creatures, is most desirous of
reuengment, for he hates his own life, therefore it is against nature to
envy. John says, he that hates his brother is a manslaier and loves not
God, neither knows God: if an envious man (says he) say he loves God, he is
a liar, because he hates his image: if he say he knows God, he is a liar,
how can thou love God, and hate good men? and how can thou love learning,
when thou hate the learned? so does the envious man all both good and bad:
therefore this is the worst sin, because it comes nearest the sin against
the holy Ghost.

Consider therefore whom thou hate, even thy image. The devil was appointed
to hate man, and not man to hate man; and if thou hate a good man, thou
hate God: if thou hate an evil man, thou hate one like thy self; and if
thou hate one like thy self, thou hate thine own soul: therefore as S.
Paul says, Have peace with all men. Can thou not hate the sin, and love
the person? as the Physician hates the disease, and yet loves the diseased.

As a great many of Bees can lodge together in a hiue: so a legion of devils
can nestle together in one man, but many although they cannot live asunder, yet
they cannot live together.

Wherefore now consider the pedigree of peace; God is the God of peace, the
holy Ghost is the Spirit of peace, the Angels are the messengers of peace, the
ministers are the preachers of peace, and the Magistrate is the defender of
peace; shall we then that have the God of peace, the Spirit of peace, the
messengers of peace, the preachers of peace, the magistrates of peace, and (as
I may say) the Queen of peace, be at envy and war one with another?
Marvel not though I am so long upon this sin; for there is none of you that
hear me this day, but you can give me sufficient matter to speak hereof.
Then can I want words when ye bring matter? Shall I not wrestle, and seek to
overthrow this giant, which challenges every man?

As no man finding a Serpent leaves him before he be dead; so let us
slaughter this monster while he is under the axe, that he never rise any more.
Consider of the wrong thou do to thy self when thou enuiest another, for the
stroke of envy redounds unto thee. It were better thou did gratulate them
with good things, as good men have done and do daily: but in stead of
imitating their virtues, or commending their gifts, we envy them and malign
them, and so their joy is our sorrow. But the envious man does pay for his
spite, for it requoyles upon himself; and envy is punished with envy, and
hatred also with hatred: for he which hates all, shall be hated of all. Thus
he is tormented for another, as Herod tormented himself for Christ, and the
Jews troubled themselves for Paul: for envy is as gall to the heart, as
pricks to the stomach, and as a canker in the mouth, and ever vexes thee, as
the evil spirit of Saul vexed him.

Love is so contrary to envy, as that it has more joy of others welfare, then
envy has of his own. Therefore an envious man may be compared to Cain, who
when he killed his brother Abel, was so troubled, that he said, Whosoever
finds me shall kill me.

The covetous man, though he will not communicate his own goods, yet he would
have others to communicate their goods: the proud man although he be proud
himself, yet he would have others to be humble: but the envious man cares not
who does any good.

As the Eagle does account them bastards that cannot abide to look upon the
Sun: so Christ does account them bastards which will not take him to be an
example of lowliness.

Every creature does impart his good unto man: but the envious man he has
separated himself from doing good to any, even as an Apostata.

Every vice is the contrary of some virtue, as intemperance to moderation,
incontinence to chastity, pride to humility, but envy is contrary to all.
This is the cognizance of the devil: for God says, By this shall men know that
you are my disciples, if you love one another: so the Devil he says, By this
shall men know that you are my Disciples if you envy and hate one another.
The proud, the prodigal, the covetous, the lascivious, they are loved of some,
but the envious man is hated of all. And this sin is so loathsome unto him,
that he cannot abide it in any but in himself.

Therefore, if we love our selves, let us love our neighbors; for nothing
does more please God than love: so that if the black Moore could be clean,
here is water enough to wash him. But the flesh of man is more strong then all
these reasons.

God has put enmity between us and the Serpent, and the Serpent has put
enmity between man and man.

When Joseph had laden his brethren full of corn, and sent them away, he bade
them not to fall out by the way: so I would this lesson, when we have plenty
of all things, and are full, had deep impression in our hear is that we forget
it not, Fall not out by the way.

FINIS.
To the Reader.
WHereas these Sermons of Nabuchadnezzar have heretofore been printed by an
imperfect Copy, and by means thereof have passed through the hands of
diverse; having in some places the mind of the Author obscured, in other some
the sentences unskillfully patched together: whereby the Authors discredit might
be furthered, and the sale of the Sermons have been hindered. Now as I have
caused them to be examined by the best Copies, and to be corrected
accordingly: so I thought good to certify thee of the same, that the wants
which were in the first impression, might not cause thee to suspect this
impression also, and so discourage thee from acquainting thy self with the
excellent Instructions, offered in these Treatises.

THE PRIDE OF Nabuchadnezzar.
Dan. 4. 26. 26 At the end of twelve months he walked in the royal palace of
Babel,

27 And the king spoke and said, Is not this great Babel, that I have built for
the house of my kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the honor of my
majesty?


I Have chosen this story of Nabuchadnezzar, wherein is laid down his Pride,
his Fall, and his Restitution. This Nabuchadnezzar was a wicked King, and
therefore God warned him by a dream, and by Daniel, to amend his life, but all
would not serve, he made many shows, but he revolted again, therefore at
the last GOD gave him over for a time, and he became like a beast, until he
acknowledged his power to come from God. A warning to all rulers, to put them
in remembrance that one ruler is above, which must be served of them all, or
else all their buildings and treasures, and guard, will not shield them from
judgment when the stroke comes, no more than they could save
Nabuchadaezzar. At the end of twelve months (says Daniel) this king walked in
his royal palace. The Prophet shows that he had deserved this punishment
before, and that his dream which he had, did tell him that his kingdom should
depart from him for his Pride, yet this respite of twelve months was granted
him, like the forty days which were granted to the Ninevites, to try what
he would do upon his warnings, and whether he would repent as the Ninevites
did, therefore the holy Ghost shows how the time ran, and how he lived
after: as if he should say, If he will return yet, and be warned by the
dreams, or by the Prophets which I sent him, I will stay my hand, and his
kingdom shall not depart from him. But here he shows, that he forgot his
dream like a dream, and was more desirous to know what it meant, than to be
warned by it. The twelve months ran month after month, yet Nabuchadnezzar
is all one. Now his dreams are gone, he thinks that all is ended, therefore
he gets him up into his palace amiddest his delights, to beak himself,
as it were, in the sun of all his pleasures, where indeed he hastened God
to take away all his pleasures and delights from him, when he should have
repented, as the Prophet Daniel willed him, and ripped up his sins, and
bewailed his wicked life, and poured forth tears, and prevented his judgment
with prayer upon his knees, then was he stalking in his galleries, and
thinking what sin should be next, to fill up the number of his rebellions,
that GOD might not spare him when he judged: so the wicked will not suffer the
prophesies of God against them to be in vain, but they will put GOD in mind
of their punishments, and sin till the punishment do come upon them to
fulfill the threatenings due unto them.

Some think that Nabuchadnezzar walked upon the roof of his palace, from
whence he might see all parts of the City round about him, like the
mountain whither the tempter led our Savior Christ, to show him the beauty of
the world.

This the Prophet Daniel would signify, that the King lived in ease as he
lived before, and pleased himself in vanity still for all his warnings, and
turned his time of repentance to sin again.

Therefore God would defer the time no longer, but cut him down, like the
barren and fruitless fig tree, to teach us to take mercy when it is
offered, and repent while we have time and space, and that if GOD speak unto
us but once, to lay it up in our hearts for ever, not looking or expecting to
be spoken to again, because GOD is not bound to admonish or give us any
warning at all.

One would have thought that Nabuchadnezzar would have remembered his warning
while he had lived, which had such a strange and fearful Dream, and after
that another dream, being no less strange and fearful than the former
dream to confirm it, and after such a Prophet to expound it, and the
exposition of it threatening such a miserable ruin and downfall unto himself.

One would have thought and believed that he could never have forgotten it, or
put it out of his remembrance although he had lived unto this day. But like a
wonder which lasts not above nine days: so is the repentance of them which
sin by custom, for when sin is rooted it sticks fast, and will hardly be
weeded out, though GOD should send us dreams, though he should show us
visions, though he should raise up Prophets, Daniel himself cannot make this
black Moore white, which always has been black before. And this we may see
in our selves, for why have we need to hear so often of repentance, more then
of anything else, but that it is such a thing as we cannot frame our selves
unto? If we be warned of any thing but of sin, one warning will serve. But
we are so incorporate and inured to sin, that a thousand sermons will not
serve: so custom has made sin stronger in many than the word of God. Well,
remember, or consider, or apply it how he will, after twelve months God will
come and take account of his dreams and of his Prophets, which he sent him, to
see what he has profited by them. Although he has leaden feet which are long
in coming, yet he has iron hands, which when he comes, will strike home.

Now the twelve months are expired, God comes and finds Nabuchadnezzar upon
his towers, when he should have cast himself down to the ground, and thought
upon his dream, and Daniel, and so have humbled his pride; he was pearched
upon his roost, and there he begins to crow of his wealth; Is not this great
Babel which I have built for the house of my kingdom, by the might of my
power, and for the honor of my majesty? See how the man stands in
admiration of his vanity, like a usurer which doateth of his money, as though
he had deserved immortal fame for spending his money vainly. Is not this
great Babel, etc. he should rather have said, Is not this Nabuchadnezzars
folly, which he has built for a mock to his name, and an impeachment to his
wisdom, for men to say when they pass by, look how our King has bestowed his
revenues, here lie our subsidies and tributes in this stone wall? But
Nabuchadnezzar thinks that every one will praise him for his folly.
Therefore like a woman when she is pricked up in her bravery, thinks that
all do admyre her, and has as goodly an opinion of her self as the Pecocke
has of his feathers, and frames all her looks, and gestures, and speeches
accordingly: so when Nabuchadnezzar sat in his Palace, and saw such shows
about him, now says Pride thou must frame thy looks, and gestures, and
speeches, accordingly, or else the Kings Palace will be brauer than the King
himself: so he begins to exalt his mind higher than his palace, and to
look and speak stouter than he did before. The temptation was no sooner in
his heart, but the words were in his mouth, and he pleased himself therein so
well, that he could not refrain being alone, but as a fool admyres himself
in a glass, so when he was alone and no body with him, he strouted alone
and bragged by himself, to think what a jolly fellow he was, and how men
began to talk of his buildings. By this we may see how wealth and honors
change manners, and how a gay coat, or a great band, or a gold ring can brave
a man's mind, and make him look and speak after another manner then he is
accustomed, when they are from him.

It is a wonderful thing to see what power these petty vain toys have over
the mind, to alter and change a man suddenly, to make him think better of
himself that day he wears them, than any other day besides.

Is not this great Babel, which I have built for the house of the kingdom, by
the might of my power, for the honor of my majesty. Before the holy Ghost
lays down Nabuchadnezzars words, mark how he comes unto them, The King
spoke and said. Spoke and said, was not one enough, but he must say spoke and
said? This doubling of the words shows, that he spoke with a premeditate
pride from his heart root, which passed not whether it were a sin or no, come
what will come of it. The holy Ghost does bring other speeches with He said,
and no more: but here he says, Spoke and said, as though he spoke twice, not
as he spoke at other times, but like a man at defiance, which would not recall
any word, but if he could say more he would say more to anger.

Did I call it great Babel? I may call it great Babel? Did I say that I built
it? I will say that I built it. Did I add, for the honor of my majesty? let
it go, for the honor of my majesty. Thus he spoke and said, as though he
would be constant in his pride, although he were constant in no other thing.

Is not this great Babel, which I have built for the house of the kingdom, by
the might of my power, and for the honor of my majesty?

Three things I note in this saying. First, what a glorious opinion
Nabuchadnezzar had of his vain building, out of these words, Is not this great
Babel? The second out of these words, which I have built by the might of my
power; wherein he terms himself the founder of it, as if he had done all
without a helper. The third is, that in all his work, he sought nothing but
vainglory, out of these words; for the honor of my Majesty. These three
sins Nabuchadnezzar does bewraie in one brag, and in all these three we are
so like, that the beasts were not so like him when (...) became like a beast.

First we have not so wonderful an opinion of GOD, or of his word, or of
heaven, as we have of our own acts, although we be never able to do half
that Nabuchadnezzar did. Secondly, this is our manner, to attribute all to our
selves whatsoever it be, riches, honor, health, or knowledge; as though all
came by labor, or policy, or art, or literature: if we cannot draw it to
one of these, then we think it fortune, although we understand not what fortune
is. If we did count our selves beholding unto God for them, then we would
find some time to be thankful unto him.

Lastly, when we ouer-view these matters, this is our solace and comfort, to
think these are the things which make me famous and spoken of, and pointed
at, and then we end, as though it were enough to be poynted at. Is not this
great Babel? That which one loves, seems greater and more precious above all
which he loves not, although they be better than it: so did these buildings
seem to Nabuchadnezzar.

One would not think that a house were a matter to make a king proud,
although it were never so fair; stone walls are not so precious, that he should
repose al his honor upon lime and mortar. But this is a just thing with God,
that vain hope, vain prosperity, vain comfort, and vain glory, that may
deceive them when they trust unto it: therefore as the faithful soul looks
up to GOD, or upon the word, or up to heaven, and says to it self, is not
this my hope, is not this my joy, is not this my inheritance? So the carnal
man when he looks upon his buildings, or his grounds, or his money, says to
himself, is not this my joy, is not this my life, is not this my comfort? So
while he poares and gapes upon it, by little and little the love of it grows
more and more in his heart, until at last he have mind on nothing else.

This was the first dotage of Nabuchadnezzar: the second was, which I have
built by the might of my power. What a vaunt was this to say, that he built
Babylon, when al histories accord, that it was built by Semyramis before
Nabuchadnezzar was borne, therefore why does he boast of that which an other did?

The answer is easy, why do other men so now, we see that every one does
labor to obscure the fame of others, that they may shine alone, and bear the
names themselves, especially in great buildings: for if they do but add or
alter any thing in Schools, or Hospitals, or Colleges, they look straight to
be counted the founders of them, and so the founders of many places are
forgotten. So it is like that Nabuchadnezzar did add or alter some thing in
this City, and therefore he took all to himself, as the fashion has bin
ever since: but if none had built it, but he had been the founder of it (as
some would seem) yet this had been a proud and arrogant speech to say, which
I have built by the might of my power: for it was not he which could build
Babel, no more then Nemrod could finish Babel, but unless the Lord build the
house the builders build in vain. Therefore when he says, By the might of my
power, he should have said, by the might of Gods power.

But by this you plainly discern, how hard and difficult a thing it is to hit
upon a right word or a good work, which has not a good thought to bring it
forth. Therefore make the root sweet, or the fruit will be sower,
counterfaite as cunningly as you can.

Lastly, when he puts in for the honor of my majesty, he shows that he
was of Absoloms humor, who although he had deserved shame, yet he would have
fame, because he had no children to keep his name in remembrance, therefore
he erected a pillar, which he called Absoloms place: so many stately houses
and places in England, bear their names of those Lords or others that do
possess or owe them, for the like vanity.

Here Absalom thought to be buried, as Nabuchadnezzar thought to dwell in his
palace, but he was cast into a pit as Nabuchadnezzar was turned into the
wilderness: So Shebna made his sepulcher in one Country, and was buried in
another: for why should pride have the reward of humility? Humility (says
Solomon) goes before honor, that is to say, honor is the reward of
humility: and yet Nabuchadnezzar would be honored for his pride. What had
he, or Shebna, or Absalom done, that they should erect such monuments, to be
praised after death, which were not worthy to be praised in their life? before
the building Nabuchadnezzar had done nothing worth speaking of, for because he
lived always like a beast, therefore GOD punished him like a beast, and did
he deserve now to be spoken of in all ages, for heaping stones together? We
may see that great men are proud of a small matter, and they look to be
praised for every thing they do. But look how GOD ouerthwarteth them: for
oftentimes in that they look to make their greatest glory, they shame
themselves most of all, and that which they practice to exalt them does
disgrace them, and that which they do to win them love, gets them hatred,
sin so deceives them like the blind Aramites, that they take a clean
contrary way to their desires, as we may see in the eleauenth of Genesis,
they which built Babel, said they would build it to get them a name, but they
got shame, for they could not finish it when they had begun it, but were
confounded in such sort, that they knew not what they did, so suddenly they
understood not what one another said. So when Nabuchadnezzar came to himself
again, he showed that when he sought his own honor, honor departed from
him, and he was made like a beast: but when he sought Gods honor, honor
came to him again, and he was made a King.

This would pull away many toys from women's backs, if they did consider how
God makes them ridiculous by that they wear, to make themselves amiable, if
they did think that the apparel which they clogge on to please the world, by
the secret judgment of God did not please but displease, they would be ashamed
of their attire, as Eve was of her nakedness: would they wear such gardes and
paint their faces but to please? See now how God does mock them, for they are
not liked but disliked, and worse thought of for it than they which go in
russet coats, and seek no praise at all; they think, am I not brave, others
think, is she not proud? they think, am I not sweet? others think, is she
not light? yet they dream that every man praises them for their bravery: as
Nabuchadnezzar thought that every one would honor him for his palace. If their
bravery condemn them before men, how will it condemn them before God?
Therefore when Nabuchadnezzar says, For the honor of my Majesty, he should
have said, for the honor of Gods Majesty, and then this had been recorded
for his honor indeed, and his house had bin the house of God: for as we should
speak, and study, and labor to Gods glory: so we should build also to Gods
glory, that our houses may be like temples, as Obadiahs was. But few seek
glory that way, they had rather pull down than build in such sort.

Thus you have heard what Nabuchadnezzar spoke in secret, as though GOD would
display the thoughts and pride of such builders. These are the meditations of
Princes and noble men, when they behold their buildings, or open their coffers,
or lookvpon their train swinging after them, they think as Nabuchadnezzar
thought, Is not this great Babel? is not this great glory? is not this the
train that makes me reverenced in the streets? are not these the things which
shall make my children rich? is not this the house that shall keep my name,
and cause me to be remembered, and make them which are children now speak of me
hereafter, when they shall pass by and look up, and see these antikes and
knackes over their heads, they will say; oh he which built this was a great
man, he bare a sway both in court and country, who but he while he lived?

Although this king be dead and buried, yet his pride is escaped and come to
us. Nabuchadnezzar has children yet alive, which build as high as he, look as
high as he, go as brave as he, spend as vainly as he, and are as proud as he,
although they be not Kings nor Dukes, nor Earls, nor Knights, nor yet good
Squires: look upon their palaces, and think whether they be of
Nabuchadnezzars brood; Is not this great Babel? and is not Nabuchadnezzar Lord
of it? Oh if they might live to walk in these galleries still, they would
desire no other heaven, but Nabuchadnezzar has showed the way before them, and
they must all dance after him, though they were as mighty, though they were
mightier the^ he, death will not take his kingdom for a ransom. Now what is
Babel, and what is Nabuchadnezzar the King thereof? Now Babel is destroyed, and
the King that built it laid in the dust, had it not been better to have built
an house in heaven, which might have received him, when he dyed?

The name of these palaces may well be called Babel, that is confusion,
because they prophecy confusion to them that build them, because their
foundation is Pride, their walls extortion, their roof ambition, and all within
them usury, briberie, and cruelty. If this be the best that Nabuchadnezzar
has to vaunt of, what is the worst which he may be ashamed of?

When I see how earnest this King was about his dream, and how loose he sat
after in his palace, me thinks I see the image of the world in one man: how
lively does Nabuchadnezzar resemble the dreamers of our time? He could not rest
till he knew the interpretation of his dream: such inquiry, such diligence to
know Gods will, that a man would have thought, now if the King meet with a
Prophet that can tell him the truth, and instruct him from God, that his
dream warned him to amend his life, he will then reclayme himself, and
reform his realm, and become such a King as was never in the land before.

But behold, no sooner resolved of his doubt, but he is ready to be warned
again, and was not so attentive to the Prophet, as he was to his dream,
although he cared for neither: for when he understood that his dream went
about to change the course of his life, he went away like Naaman in a chafe,
and cared no more for his dream after. Before the dream came, all would have
said, that such a dream would have humbled his heart for ever. Before the
Prophet came, all would have said, that such a Prophet would have converted
him with a word: but Nabuchadnezzar is Nabuchadnezzar; and if another dream
come more fearful than this, yet Nabuchadnezzar would be Nabuchadnezzar, and
love his Palace better than Paradise.

So we think, if God would send a famine upon this land, that would make us
fear him: but God has sent a famine, and yet we do not fear him. If God
would send an earthquake upon this land, that would make us fear him: but God
has sent an earthquake, and yet we do not fear him. If God would send a
pestilence upon this land, that would make us fear him: but God has sent a
pestilence, and yet we do not fear him. If God would send war upon this
land, that would make us fear him: but God has sent war, and yet we do
not fear him; therefore what will make us fear him?

There be many which dream upon religion, as Nabuchadnezzar dreamed upon his
dream; and as he desired only to know what it meant, so they desire only
to know. Master, (says the young man to Christ) what shall I do to come into
heaven? He would feign know the way to heaven, but when Christ showed him the
way, he would not take it: So they will go from Preacher to Preacher, as
Nabuchadnezzar sent from one wise man to another to be resolved in points of
Religion: such a scrutinie, such attention, such heed, as though they would
run out of the world, and go beyond all, that a man would think they would
do any thing, as the Jews came unto Moses, and this young man unto Christ: But
when they have heard what they came for, they do like Nabuchadnezzar, as they
did before; now they say it was but a dream, because the meaning does not
answer according to their will. So Achab enquired of the Prophet, to hear
what he would say, but it appears that he never meant to follow him, except he
would answer as he would have him.

When it comes to the act, which is every man's trial, then you shall see
who are like Nabuchadnezzar, that is, which affect only to know; and who are
like Zacheus, that is, which practice as they know: for as the truth is
revealed, so it must be witnessed, or else the fall of Nabuchadnezzar shows,
what judgment will follow upon such neglecting.

Because he would not do as his dream warned him, and as the Prophet
counseled him, therefore GOD forsook him, and his Kingdom departed from him,
and he was thrust out of his Palace, and ^urned like an Ox into the
wilderness, there he lived like a beast until seven years were ended. A
warning to all to take warning by the word, for it is the gentle warner, the
next will be harder, the third and the fourth harder then it, like to the nine
plagues of Egypt, which did exceed one another: for what is he can weigh the
wrath of GOD, or the grieuousnes of sin?

Some men would think, that Nabuchadnezzar might have spoken all this without
any such great offense as was taken at it: for he said no more, but that it
was a fair house, and that he builded it: and that he erected it for his
honor: seeing many under Princes delight in worse vanities than fair
buildings, and speak vayner often in a week.

Therefore, when you see how it displeases God, to vaunt of these earthly
things, or to impute any thing to our selves, think what shall be the doom
of great sins: if Nabuchadnezzar became like a Beast, and lodged in the
wilderness for his pride; they which bear pride, and covetousness, and lust,
and wrath, and malice in one breast, shall lodge in hell, and become like
Devils, because they are like beasts already. Therefore let this be in stead
of Daniels warning, if God did take such a straight account of Nabuchadnezzar
for his dream, what he had profited by it: what account will he take of us,
what profit we have made by Nabuchadnezzars fall and punishment?

Thus you have heard what the voice spoke from earth, now you shall hear what
the voice spoke from Heaven: for it follows, While the word was in the kings
mouth, a voice came from heaven, and said; O King to thee be it spoken, thy
kingdom shall be taken from thee, etc. God will warn him no more by dreams,
nor by Prophets, as he did: but his Judgments shall speak. Here is fulfilled
that which Elihu says to Job, God speaks once and twice by dreams and
visions in the night, and man sees it not: at the last God opens his eyes,
by the corrections which he had sealed: so God spoke unto Nabuchadnezzar first
by dreams, and after by his Prophet; and Nabuchadnezzar regarded it not: at
last God opens his eyes by corrections, which he had sealed up, that they
should not touch him if any other messenger could bring him.

As the holy Ghost does note the time when Nabuchadnezzar spoke in his palace:
so he notes the time when God spoke from heaven, Even while the words were in
the Kings mouth: as though he should say, God answered before he looked for it,
when he thought God had been as far from him, as he was all the year before.
Thus God lay (as it were in the skowte) to watch when he spoke treason, and to
apprehend him upon it: O Nabuchadnezzar, thou have vanted this twelve months
since I warned thee: I made as though I heard not, but suffered thee to do and
speak thy pleasure: and vauntest thou still? Surely thou shall escape me no
longer, I will not hear one word more against my honor. So he cutteth him off
while the words were in his mouth, and pronounces the word of judgment
against him.

The first note in this verse, is the time when God spoke from Heaven. Pride
(says Solomon) goes before the fall: so when pride had spoken, then Judgment
spoke even while the proud word was in his mouth. See how God shows that these
brags offended him, and therefore he judges while he speaks. How short is the
triumph of the wicked? When they begin to crow, God stops their breath,
and judgment seaseth upon them, when they think no danger near them: So when
Baltazar was in his mirth with his Nobles, the fearful hand wrote his doom
upon the wall, and presently his mirth was changed into sadness, that he
became as one that was strooken with a palsy: so while Herod vanted himself,
and the people honored him like a God, the Angel of God smote him upon his
throane, and immediately he was devoured of worms in the face of them which
honored him: while the Philistines were triumphing and banqueting, Sampson
pulled the Temple upon their head; so while the men of Ziklag were feasting and
dancing, David came upon them and slew them: when the Israelites were at their
Manna and Quails, even while the meat (says David) was yet in their mouths,
God took away their lives: when Jobs children were making merry one with
another, the wind came and blew down the house: while the old world was
marrying, and giving in marriage, the flood came and drowned them: while the
Steward was recounting with himself, and thinking that his Master Knew not
what policy was in his heart, suddenly his Lord called him to account: while
the churl was musing of his barnes full of corn, and saying to himself, be
merry my soul, that night his soul was taken from him: so while we sin and
think nothing of it, our sins mount up to heaven, and stand at the bar, and
call for vengeance against us: how soon Abels blood cried for vengeance of
Cain? We cannot sin so quickly, but God sees us as quickly. How many have
been strooken while the oath has been in their mouths, as Jeroboam was
stricken while he stroke, that they might see why they were strooken? and yet all this will not keep us from swearing. Though a man sin often, and steal his
sins (as it were) without punishment, yet at last he is taken napping, even
while the wickedness is in his hand, and his day is set when he shall pay for
all, whether it be after twelve months or twelve years, when it comes, it
will seem too soon. Therefore once again let this be in stead of Daniels
warning, if God did take so straight account of Nabuchadnezzar how he had
profited by his dream, what account will he take of us how we have profited
by Nabuchadnezzars punishment? Here I end.

THE FALL OF KING Nabuchadnezzar.
DAN. 4. 28. etc. 28 While the word was in his mouth, a voice came from heaven
saying, O King Nabuchadnezzar, to thee be it spoken, thy Kingdom is departed
from thee.

29 And they shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the
b^astes of the field, they shall make thee to eat grass with the Oxen, and
seven times shall pass over thee, until thou know that the most highest
God bears rule over the kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will.

30 The very same hour was this thing fulfilled upon Nabuchadnezzar, and he
was driven from men, and did eat grass as the Oxen, and his body was wet with
the deawe of heaven, till his hairs were grown as Egles feathers, and his
nails as birds claws.


FRom the 26. verse to the end of this Chapter, is laid down the pride, fall,
and restitution of Nabuchadnezzar. The two first verses are like a banner of
his Pride, which show him in his ruffling as it were in the air, before he
knew God, or himself. The three next verses are the discovery of his shame,
which show him in his misery, as it were groueling on the ground after God
had cooled his courage. The four last verses are the celebration of his
recovery, which show him in holiness as it were rapt into heaven, and singing
with the Saints for joy, that GOD had brought him unto his knowledge, though
it were through shame and trouble, and loss of all that he had seven years
together. Of his pride we have heard already: yet because we are friends to
vices as we are to me^, so long as they prosper and flourish; but when they
decay and fall, then we shrink away, and are ashamed of the^: so it may be, if
ye could see pride take a fall, though ye love her well, yet ye would forsake
her, like a banquerout, when ye see that she can pleasure you no longer.

Therefore ye shall see Nabuchadnezzar upon his feet again: before you beheld
him upon his knees, that when ye see what a king he was in his galleries, and
after find his servants in his palace, and his subjects in his throane, and
himself like a beast in the wilderness, God may give you hearts to think a
little of this sin, what it is which cost so dear, and is so common, now in
every house, as it was then in the kings court.

After twelve months (says Daniel) that is, twelve months after God had
warned this king by dreams and by Daniel, to repent his sins, he was
strouting in his galleries, and thought what sin should be next, as though he
had never heard of dream or Prophet.

By this computation of sin, wherein the months are observed so exactly, how
long Nabuchadnezzar rebelled after he was warned, Daniel shows what reckoning
GOD keeps of our months, and weeks, and days, which he gives us to repent,
as he did Nabuchadnezzar, and what an account we shall make of the^, as
Nabuchadnezzar did, though we count no more of our age then the child does of
his youth, and have done no more of our task at twenty, then when we were
but ten, nor at thirty, then when we were but twenty, nor at forty, then
when we were thirty, yet we shall give account of mo hours in the day of
judgment, and it shall be heavier to the old then to the young, to you which
have the word, then to them which want it: and there is great ods between
Nabuchadnezzar and us for he which challenged Nabuchadnezzar for twelve months
since he was warned, may challenge us of twelve years since we were warned,
and yet we look not for so great punishment as fell upon Nabuchadnezzar for
twelve months. Daniel names there twelve months, as though he would speak
of a great matter, and shows how worthy Nabuchadnezzar was to be punished,
because he might have reformed his life since he was warned: for there were 12.
months between his dreams and his punishment. But that year wherein he had
so many warnings and teachings was as vain as the rest, and vainer then the
years before: for now he should have been a mourner like the King of Niniuie,
when Jonas threatened destruction unto them. But like a victor of a country
returned from battle to solemnize his triu^ph, first he decked his palace as
brave as himself, and then he walks his stations in it, and when he has set
al things before him, which might make him forget God, and like a serpent that
would burst, unless he discharged some of his poison, he breaks out and said,
Is not this great Babel, which I have built by the might of my power, for the
honor of my majesty? wherein observe first what a glorious opinion this vain
King had of his vain buildings. Secondly, how that he names himself the
founder of them, as though he had done all without an help. Thirdly, that in
all his works he sought nothing but vain-glorie, as he witnesses against
himself, saying; which I have built for the honor of my majesty? not for the
honor of Gods majesty, but for the honor of my majesty. So first that which
he should have contemned, as Christ did the beauty of the Temple; Mat. 24. 2.
he admired it, and nothing seemed so glorious to him, as that which made him
shameful to God. Secondly, that city which was built by Semiramis, he
arrogateth to himself, and never joined the chief workmaster with him, but
says, which I have built by the might of my power, when he should have said,
by the might of Gods power: for unless God build the house, the builder (says
David) builds but in vain. Psalm. 127. 1
Lastly, that which he should have built for the honor of GOD, 2. Kin. 4. 10
as the man built a chamber for the Prophet, he builded for his honor, as our
Nabuchadnezzars do. Therefore when all his pleasures were prepared like a
feast, and he came to sit down at the b^ket, it happened to him as to the churl
in the Gospel, after he had filled his barnes, when he came to sing in his
heart, Be merry my soul; that night his soul was taken from him, and the
devils made merry with it in hell: so he had fethered his neast, and began to
crow upon his roost, Is not this great Babel, etc. As if he should say, Now
Nabuchadnezzar make thee merry; that hour his honor was taken from him, for a
voice came down from heaven, like the terrible hand which wrote upon the wall
when Baltasar sat at his banquet, and dashed his pride upon such a rock, that
within an hour all his pomp, and pleasures, and treasures, suffered such a
shipwreck, that his fall was more admired of all, than his glory and
buildings were admired of himself. Thus all the joy, and pleasures, and glory
of pride are spoken with a breath, and stopped with another.

You have heard what the voice spoke from earth, now ye shall hear what the
voice sou^ds from heaven. These three verses following declare this Kings fall,
when and how, and from whom it was. While the words were yet, etc. there is
the time. A voice, etc. there is the Judge O king, etc. there is the
arraignement. Thy kingdom, etc. there is the judgment. He was driven from men,
and lived with beasts in che wilderness, till his hairs were grown like Eagles
feathers. There is the execution and manner of his punishment. First of the time,
while, etc.

As Daniel observed the time when Nabuchadnezzar sinned, so he observes the
time when Nabuchadnezzar is punished: as if God had lien in wait to catch him
in his words, and take him at the trippe, even as he watched Lots wife when
she looked back, and transformed her into a pillar of os salt, so soon as
she looked behind her: So now the Lord lay as it were in the scout, to watch
when Nabuchadnezzar spoke treason, and to apprehend him upon it, O
Nabuchadnezzar thou have vanted these twelve months since I warned thee, and I
made as though I heard not, but suffered thee to do and speak thy pleasure,
and vauntest thou still? Surely thou shall escape me no longer, I will not
hear a word more against mine honor. So he cut him off while the words were
in his mouth, and propounds the words of judgment against him. If you mark
the time when the voice spoke from heaven, you may see three wisdoms of God.
First God takes him in his fault, 1 Kin 13. 4
that he might see his fault, as Jeroboam was stricken when he stroke the
Prophet, that he might know why he was stricken. Then he takes him suddenly,
because he contemns his warning, Genesis 19. 24.
as the fire came upon Sodom while they contemned Lots warning. Thirdly, God
takes him where he is pleasantest and lustiest, and safest, in his palace,
which was like a Castle, Act. 12. 23.
as he took Herod when his guard stood by him, that he might see that nothing
can guard him from God, but God must guard him from danger, or else Princes be
no safer than subjects: so though a man sin often, and steal his sins as it
were without punishment, yet at the last he is took napping, while the
wickedness is in his hand; as the Jews were, while the quails were in their
mouths, and his day is set when he shall pay for all, Nu^. 11. 33.
whether it be after 12. months, or 12. years, whenever it comes it will
seem too soon. Vengeance does stay till sin be ripe, and watch the time when
they are most occupied, then judgment steps forth, like the Angel to stop
Balaam in his way, Nu^. 22. 22.
because the punishment is more grievous and terrible when they look not for it
(for the worst that is, wish like Balaam, to die the death of the righteous)
therefore God will cross them in that: though they prosper always before, yet
their ends shall be a kind of judgment upon all their life, and a prophecy
of torment, for all men to see what become of the wicked after death, that they
may fear to be like unto them: As when we see some fall down under the table
while they sit swilling at the Wine: some stricken dumb in the pulpit, while
they preach untruths: Act. 12. 23.
eue^ as the Philistines were slain while they feasted, 1. Kin. 13. 4
and as Herod was shamed while he vanted, and as Jeroboam was stricken while he
stroke. What does this teach us, but that our sins depart from us so soon as
they are done unto the Judge, and there they accuse us, as Cains murder cried
out against him, so soon as he slew his brother. Gen 4.
I know thy works says God: Reu. 3. 15.
he may say I know thy works and thy thoughts too: Mat. 26. 14 16, 1^.
for Judas could not go so closely about his treachery, but that Christ did
know when the thought entered into his heart, and heard when he conferred also
with the Scribes, and saw likewise when he took the bribe, though he kept a
time to punish him, as he says Psalm. 37. ver. 2. When I see a convenient
time, then will I execute judgment.

Now the time was come, when this King should be made an example unto all
other Kings after him, to amend their lives, and reform their Realms, when as
the Prophet comes from God unto them, to tell them what they should do. When
Dream and Daniel had done what they could; now God calls forth his Judgments,
and bids them see what they can do, and commands them to chase Nabuchadnezzar,
until he have lost his kingdom, until he be driven out of his palace,
until he be fled into the wilderness, until he be degenerate like a beast,
until his subjects, and servants, and pages make their sport, and gaze and
wonder at him, like a fool which goes unto the stocks, or a trespasser,
which is gazed at upon the pillorie: so the king was debased, when God heard
him but vaunt of his buildings.

Therefore let us take heed and be careful, after what sort we speak, and
what words slip from us, lest GOD take us in our lies, or oaths, or slanders,
or ribauldrie, as he took Nabuchadnezzar, when his tongue walked without a
bit: for if he had supposed that God had been so near, and that he would have
answered him as he did, he would have held his peace, and laid his hand upon
his mouth, rather than pay so dear for a vain word, which did him no good when
it was spoken.

The second note is of the Judge, A voice came down from heaven: the
controuling voice came down from heaven, God is most offended with our sin:
for Nabuchadnezzar might have spoken more than this, before any other man, and
no man could control him because he was king, and kings delight in greater
vanities than buildings, yet no man says, Why do thou so? because Solomon
says, He which repeateth a matter separateth the Prince, that is, he which
tells Princes their faults, makes them his enemies: therefore since John
Baptist dyed, only God is left to reprove almost all that sin by
authority, yet there is one in heaven has an ear and a tongue, and checketh
the king as boldly as ever the king checketh his subjects. When the voice from
earth spoke vainly, the voice from heaven spoke judgment. Here is the king of
heaven against the king of earth, the voice of GOD against the voice of man: a
divine wrath, warring with a humane pride: the fire is kindled, woe to the
stubble. The Lord of hoasts is in arms against the Lord of Babel, and
begins to lay hands on him and to thrust him out of his throane. First, he
rattles him like a thunder, O King Nabuchadnezzar: as if he should say, for all
thou art a king, thou shall see whether another be above thee. Now guard thy
person, now defend thy honor, for he whom thou have despised, threatens to
take thy kingdom from thee; go now and walk in thy galleries, fetch one
turn more before thou be turned out of door, and walk with the beasts in
the forest.

Now he comes to the arraignement, and calls him to the bar, O king
Nabuchadnezzar to thee be it spoken. He was never called king with less
reverence, nor had such pay for sin in all his reign. God gives him his
title, and he tells him his lot, he calls him king but without a kingdom: as if
he said, late king of Babel, hold up thy hand. Here a king is arraigned in
his own kingdom, and no evidence given against him, but as though he had
witnessed against himself, as all sinners do, God condemns him out of his
own mouth, and to open his ears, he calls him by his own name, O king
Nabuchadnezzar, as the prisoner is called when he holds up his hand at the
bar. Then he pronounces the judgment, To thee be it spoken, to thee which
aduancest thy self like God, to thee which would not take heed by thy
dream, to thee which would not be warned by the Prophet, to thee which
did all for thine own honor. Now hearken to thy judgment, Thy kingdom is
departed from thee, thou shall be driven out of thy palace, they which should
honor thee shall expulse thee, thou shall reign with the beasts in the
desarte, there shall be thy dwelling seven years, go now and stalk in the
woods as thou did in thy palaces, and when thou art among the Lions and
Wolves, and Bears, look unto Babel which thou have built.

How does this speech differ from Nabuchadnezzars speech? his words were but
words, but Gods words were, He spoke, and it was done. For in the same hour
that which was spoken was done (says Daniel) and whatsoever the voice
threatens unto our sins, or unto the sinner, shall be done at first or last.
To Nabuchadnezzar it was said, Thy kingdom shall be taken from thee. To us it
is said, Thy life shall be taken from thee. To him it was said, Thou shall be
thrust forth into the desert. To us it is said, Thou shall be thrown forth
into darkness. To him it was said, Thou shall be like beasts. To us it is said,
Thou shall be like the damned. Shall not the voice spoken to us be remembered
with God, as well as the threatening menaced to him?

This voice came from heaven, and therefore it spoke home, not like them which
glide by the faults of Princes, and whisper behind their backs, as though
they would reprove them if they durst, but for fear lest the prince or
counselor, or judge, or magistrate, should take it as he means it, and think
that he aims at them, which makes them speak in parables, as though they
would cast a veil over their reproof, and eat their message before they have
spoken it. The holy Ghost teaches us here to reprove, so that whosoever
sins may know that thou speak to him. He which speaks from Heaven (as
the voice did) must speak like John Baptist among the Publicans and harlots,
and soldiers, as though he went from one to another, and said, this is spoken
to thee, this is spoken to thee, this is spoken to thee. For unless we come
near these mortal Gods and proud Nabuchadnezzars, as near as Elias came to
Achab, when he said, It is thou that troublest Israel, they will poast it over
and think that thou speak not to them until thou speak plainly, as the
voice spoke from heaven, To thee be it spoken. And they will reform the
matter, or else God show some judgment upon them, as he did here upon this
great king Nabuchadnezzar.

Now the decree goes forth, that Nabuchadnezzar shall be King no more, Thy
kingdom is departed from thee. This is such a saying, as if Nabuchadnezzar had
thought of it before, he would have wept when he vanted, to think that his
honor was going from him, when he thought it was coming to him: and yet his
kingdom was departed from him, and yet God says, Thy kingdom is departed from
thee, because the decree was past, which should as surely come to pass, as if
it were past already. Therefore because we care not so long as the Prophet
says, we shall die, we shall suffer, we shall answer, he leaves Shall, and
says Now, as God said to Abimelec: Thou art a dead man, not thou shall dye,
but thou art dead, which roused him more, then if he had threatened him an
hundred deaths, because he thought that he should die presently: So the holy
Ghost is forced as it were to exceed, and speak more then we think he
should speak, for the hardness of our hearts, which hear like stones, and
go like snayles. If we have but a week to repent we will defer it to the
last day, that we may sin all the rest.

Therefore it was meet to say, Thy kingdom is departed from thee. That seeing
his judgment should not stay, he should not stay his repentance. If this voice
had said, Thy Babell shall sink, as Nemrods Babel did, it seems he would
have thought his honor buried, but when he was stripped, not only of his
palace, but also of his kingdom, what heavy news was this unto him, which
thought him self equal with GOD, and now may not be a King? But when he was
thrust among beasts to eat grass with oxen, what a downfall was this to be
brought under all his subjects, which spoke even now as though there were
none but he: and now his servants servant would not be like unto him? So the
king of kings will be honored of kings, as they are of their subjects, or else
he will tread upon their crowns, and they shall hear the same at last, Thy
kingdom shall depart from thee.

Now follows the execution of his judgment, for Daniell says, The same
hour all this was fulfilled. So he shows the order of it: as a prisoner is
brought to the bar, and lead to a gybbet, so this King was drawn from his
throne, and turned into the wilderness, where he aboade among wild beasts so
long, Till his hairs were grown like Eagles feathers, and his nails like
birds claws.

When God began, he made have, as it was long before he spoke, but when he
spoke, he did it, and effected in an hour all that the dream and the Prophet
had foretold.

Then was fulfilled, The pride of man shall bring him low: Even in that hour
that Nabuchadnezzar advanced himself more than before, in the same hour he
was brought under all his subjects, all his servants and pages; so he which
sets up can pull down, he which gave can take, he which made can destroy.

Therefore let no man vaunt though he were a king of his house or land, or
farm or children, but know that he should have nothing, if GOD did not
regard him more than other, and think when thou do read this story,
whether thou be not as proud of thy wealth, as Nabuchadnezzar was of his
palace: whether thou be not as proud of thy children, as Nabuchadnezzar was of
his kingdom: whether thou be not as proud of thy parentage, as Nabuchadnezzar
was of his honor: whether thou be not so proud of thy lerning, as
Nabuchadnezzar was of his train. If thou be not so proud, the^ God does say no
more, O King, to thee be it spoken, O subject to thee be it spoken, these
blessings shall be taken from thee. For, has God taken no man's kingdom from him
but Nabuchadnezzars? has he taken no man's office from him but Judas? has he
taken no man's riches from him but Jobs? how did Antiochus, and Julian, and
Herod, and Saul, and Athalia, and Iezabel, and Richard the third go from their
thrones, as if God had pulled the^ out by the ears? he had no respect unto
their persons, but used them like beasts as he did Nabuchadnezzar, and
fulfilled his threatening: The candle of the wicked shall be put out. Therefore
as Christ says unto them which turn back: Remember Lots wife: so I may say
to them which bear high minds, and proud looks, and stout words, remember
King Nabuchadnezzar, how God resisted the proud. Now if any man long to be
resolved, how this king was changed to a beast, he must not imagine any strange
metamorphosis, or popish transubstantiation, as though his shape were altered,
or his manhood removed, or that he put on horns and hoof, as the Poets feign
of Acteon, for the voice does not say that he should become a beast, but that
he should dwell with the beasts. Daniel does not say that his head or arms,
or legs were transformed: but that the hair of his head and the nails of
his fingers did grow like Eagles feathers, and like birds claws, as every
man's hair and nails will do, if he do not pare them.

Lastly, Nabuchadnezzar says not, that his shape was restored unto him, but
that his understanding was restored unto him: all which declare, that he was
not changed in body, but in mind: not in shape, but in quality. A savage
mind came on him, like that which drove Cain from the company of men, Genesis 4.
12.
and he became like a Satyr or wild man, which differs not from a beast,
but in shape: though he was not turned to a beast, yet this was a strange
alteration, to be so changed in an hour, that his Nobles abhorred him, his
subjects despised him, his servants forsook him, none would company with him
but the beasts. Consider this all that advance themselves against GOD and
despise his word, as Nabuchadnezzar did. Take warning by a King, which even now
walked in his galleries, and his Nobles served him in his palace, with all
dishes that the air, or sea, or land, could afford: now he is turned to grase
and feed like an ox with the beasts in the wilderness. This was to show
that God makes no more account of the wicked then of beasts, and therefore the
holy Ghost calls them often by the name of beasts: showing how that sin and
pleasure make men like beasts: when they have abused their wits often, and
perverted their reason, at last God takes their understanding from them, and
they become like beasts, loathsome to themselves and others: many such beasts
we have still like Nabuchadnezzar, who were fitter to live in the desert among
lions, where they might not anoy others, then in towns amongst men, where they
infect more then the plague. Thus if you have not considered the beastlines of
sin, look upon Nabuchadnezzar like a beast. If you would see the guilt of
it, Genesis 4. 12.
look upon wandering Cain. If thou would see the frenzy of it, 1. Sa. 16.
14
look upon frantike Saul. If thou would see the fear of it, look upon
trembling Baltazar. Dan. 5. 6.
If thou will see the shame of it, Hest. 7. 10.
look upon Haman, hanging upon his own gallows. If thou will see the end of
it, look upon the Glutton frying in hell. Luke 16. 23.
These are the pictures of sin, which GOD has set for a terror before us:
Genesis 19. 26.
like the pillar of salt, or Achans Sepulcher to speak to us. Joshua. 7. 26.
Take heed by those, when I have warned you, as I warned them, I will punish
you, as I punished them. This is the Epitaph, as it were, which God ingraueth
upon Nabuchadnezzars Sepulcher:

Be thou an example to Kings and Rulers, for all the children of pride, to
beware how they set themselves against him who advanced them.

Thus he which sets up, can pull down. Did not I send thee dreams to warn
thee? Did not I send a Prophet to warn thee? If either of them would have
served, thou might have ruled still, and walked in thy galleries, and
feasted in thy palace, and judged upon thy throane, and dyed a King: but now
thy kingdom is departed from thee. Who would be like Nabuchadnezzar, now he
is like a beast? If this heathen was thus challenged for his warning, which had
heard but one Prophet, we may tremble to think what we shall answer for our
warnings, which have been threatened as often as the Israelites, and yet
provoked the Lord while he serves us, like those which curse the sun while
it shines upon them.

Thus have you seen the fall of pride. Even now he said, Is not this great
Babel? Now he may say: Is not this unhappy Babel? even he said, which I have
built by the might of my power: and now he may say, which I have built by the
vanity of my pride: even now he said, for the honor of my majesty: now he
may say, for the ruin of my kingdom: yet after this he rose again, and came
to himself, and received his kingdom, and honored him which punished him so:
but the time will prevent me to speak of his restitution, therefore here I end.

FINIS.
THE RESTITVTION OF NABVCHADNEZZAR.
Dan. 4. 31. etc. 31 And at the end of these days, I Nabuchadnezzar lift up
mine eyes unto heaven, and mine understanding was restored unto me, and I gave
thanks unto the most high, and I praised and honored him that lives for
ever, whose power is an everlasting power, and his kingdom is from generation
to generation.

32 And all the inhabitants are reputed as nothing: and according to his will
he works in the army of heaven, and in the inhabitants of the earth, and
none can stay his hand, or say unto him, Why do thou so?

33 At the same time I had my understanding restored unto me, and I returned
to the honor of my kingdom, my glory, and my beauty was restored unto me,
and my counselors and my Princes sought unto me, and I was established in my
kingdom, and my glory was augmented toward me.

34 Now therefore I Nabuchadnezzar praise and extol and magnify the king of
heaven, whose works are all truth, and his ways judgment, and those that
walk in pride he is able to abase.


NOw we are come to his Restitution: first Nabuchadnezzar was humbled, as God
humbles his enemies, now he is humbled as GOD humbles his children, that
although he had more honor than he had before, yet he is not proud of it as he
was before, but cries with the Prophet David, Psalm 115. 1
Not unto me O Lord, not unto me, but unto thy name give the glory. So he
which said, not only with heart, but almost with mouth too, Psalm. 14 1.
there is no God: now with heart and mouth honors none but God. His pride
and his fall Daniel declared, but when he came to his restitution, he makes
Nabuchadnezzar to speak himself, and give thanks in his own person, like a
witness brought in to testify the truth of this wonderful story.

When the Prophet had showed how this King vaunted, and how he was debased for
it, presently after he had spoken it, he calls in as it were the King
himself, to witness his report, and declare how he was raised again, like a
man which having received grace from a Prince or great person, is brought in
before him to give thanks for his favor received, and then is dismissed.

In these verses two things show themselves at the first view, that is,
Nabuchadnezzars Restitution, and his thankfulness in his Restitution. First,
he shows the time when he was restored in these words, At the end of these
days, then he shows the manner how he was restored in these words, I
Nabuchadnezzar lift up mine eyes to heaven, and mine understanding was restored
to me. In his thankfulness, first he extolleth Gods power, in setting him up and
pulling him down, and raising him again: then he comme^deth Gods justice and
truth, which deserves to be praised for his judgments, as much as for his
mercy, as though he rejoiced that God had made him like a beast, that he might
dye like a man.

At the end of these days. As Daniel noted the time of his pride, when he
walked in his palace, to show how pride grows out of buildings, and wealth,
and apparel, and such roots: so he notes the time of his fall, while the
words were in his mouth, to show that he was punished for his pride and
ignorance, that he might know where to begin his conversion, and abate his
pride, and when he had taken away the cause, then God would take away the
punishment: so likewise he notes the time of his Restitution, At the end of
these days, that is, after seven years were expired; to show how long the
sickness of pride is in curing, and to show how every thing was fulfilled
which was prophesied, even to the point of time, for it was told him by Daniel
that he should be like a beast seven years, therefore Nabuchadnezzar is prompt
as it were to confess the truth, and says as the Prophet says, At the end
of these days, that is, at the end of seven years, I Nabuchadnezzar was
restored to my kingdom, as Daniel told me. Yet another note is set upon this
beast, least we should think that God only regarded the season, and think
seven years punishment enough for such a sin: He says not barely, that his
understanding and honor were restored unto him, when seven years were ended:
but that they were restored unto him when he began to lift up his eyes unto
heaven: to show that this blessing came from above, and that he which had
humbled him, had restored him again, as if he should say to all that are
cast down with sickness, or poverty, or infamy, or any trouble whatsoever in
body or mind, he which has humbled you will raise you, as he has done
me, but you must look up unto heaven, and lift up your hearts unto him, and
then your understanding, and comfort, and wealth, and pleasure, and health, and
liberty, and good name, and all shall return unto you again: like Jobs
sheep, and cammels, and oxen, in greater number than he had before, as all the
blessings of God returned to Nabuchadnezzar when he looked up to heaven: so
they shall come back like a river upon you, when your eyes can go by these
vanities, and look upon him which looks upon you, or else seven and seven
years shall pass over you, and you shall be never the better, but worse and
worse; like Saul which was vexed more and more, till he had killed himself.

Therefore as the Jews looked up to the brazen Serpent, which was a figure of
Christ, when they would be healed, Numb. 21. 8: so all that would recover
that which they have lost, or obtain that which they want, Nabuchadnezzar does
teach them here to lift up their eyes to heaven, from whence (says Christ)
comes every blessing of man. At the end of these days, I Nabuchadnezzar
lift up mine eyes, etc. Like a man which is wakened out of a long trance, now
he began to stir and lift up his eyes: when the heart is once lift up, it will
lift up the eyes, and the hand and voice, and all to heaven: he which never
looked up to heaven so long as his comfort was upon the earth; now his mind
is changed, his looks, and iestures, and speeches, and all are changed with
it: As though God would show a visible difference between the spiritual and
the carnal, even in their looks and iestures: as there is between a child
and an old man. The spiritual minds are heavenly, and look up, because
their joy is above. The carnal minds are earthly, and look down like
beasts, because their treasure is below. Genesis 3. 14.
As the serpent grouels upon the ground, so does the serpents seed, and has
not so much as the countenance of grace.

Therefore by lifting up his eyes to heaven, is signified that the time was
come, which the Lord had set down, that he should be like a beast, until he
had learned that lesson, That the most high bears rule over the sons of men.
Therefore Nabuchadnezzar shows that he had learned his lesson, for he looked
not up to heaven to behold the Sun, the moon or the stars, like an
Astronomer, but thinking how he had set himself against Heaven, from whence
came all his honor, in a godly shame and holy anger, toward himself, he
turns his face from earth to heaven, to magnify him, which had humbled him;
that so contemns him, which advanced him. Now he talks no more of his
Palace, nor his power, nor his Majesty, though it be greater then it was, but
he looked above his own palace, to another Palace, from whence that
terrible voice came down unto him, Thy kingdom is departed from thee. Which
expresses his contrite heart, and wounded spirit, how many passions batled
within, as if he should chide himself, and say: Unthankful man, my power
ever descended from above, and I ever looked upon the earth, and mine honor
came down from heaven, and I never lift up mine eyes before: But now says
he, go up my voice, and my hands, and my eyes, how long will ye pore upon the
earth like a beast? so he lifted up his eyes unto heaven. After he had lifted
up his eyes, he begins to pray, and praise, and give thanks to God, which
shows that he did not only lift up his eyes, but his heart too: for unless
we can say with David, I lift up my heart. Psalm. 25. 1. it is in vain to lift up
eyes, or hands, or voice, as the hypocrites do, because he which is a spirit,
will be worshipped in spirit. John 4. Therefore Marie says, My heart does
magnify the Lord. Luke 11. 46. As for the Infidels and Idolaters, they have no
hearty service, but their religion is like an occupation, which is done with
the body. For when we read of the sacrifice or prayers of the Idolaters and
Infidels, we do not find, that they lift up their hearts to their Idols, but
their hands, or their eyes, or their voice, as the Baalites roared to Baal, 1.
King. 18. 28. and the Mariners cried to their Seagods, 1. Jonas. 5. and the
Ephesians showted to Diana, Act. 19. 28. But the lifting up of the heart is the
holy service, and always appropriate unto God, which says, My son, give me
thy heart. Pro. 23. 26. Therefore now Nabuchadnezzar lifts up his heart to God,
showing that he had learned that lesson which GOD gave him 7. years to study,
that The most high bears rule over the sons of men, etc.

Now God thinks the time long enough: and as he reformed the ground after the
flood, with fruit, and herbs, and flowers again; so he reformeth
Nabuchadnezzar with understanding, and beauty, and honor again. As when he
repented himself, and said, I will drown the earth no more, Genesis 8. 21. so I
will chase Nabuchadnezzar no more: now he knows a king above him, he shall be
king again now he seeks my honor, I will give him honor; now he magnifieth
him which debased him, I will return to exalt him. So the voice which thundered
from heaven, Thy kingdom is departed from thee: sounds again, Thy kingdom is
restored to thee. For it was not told that he should be like a beast until he
dyed, but until he knew that the most high bears rule over the sons of
men. Therefore when he knew this, nothing could stay him from his kingdom, no
more then they could stay him in it before. Thus the displeasure of God is but
an interim, until we know some thing that we should know, and then
Nabuchadnezzar shall be king again, then the sick man shall be whole again, then
the bondsman shall be free again, then the poor man shall be rich again. His
mercies are called everlasting, because they endure for ever. Psalm. 136. 1, 2.
But his anger is compared to the clouds, because it lasts but a season, whom
he loves he loves to the end, but whom he scourges he scourges to
repent; as Hezekias was sick until he wept, Nabuchadnezzar was banished but
until he repented. Now the first cure of the Kings restitution was of his
mind, Mine understanding (says Nabuchadnezzar) was restored unto me. To show
what an inestimable gift our understanding and reason is, whereby we differ
from beasts, for which we cannot be thankful enough, therefore he records it
twice, as though his heart did flow with gladness, and his tongue could not
choose but speak often of it, as a man thinks and speaks of that which he
loves.

Mine understanding was restored unto me, etc. That which was first taken away,
was first restored again, which so soon as it was gone, he was counted a man
no more, but a beast. As David says, Like Horse and Mule which have no
understanding. Psalm 32. 9. counting them which are void of understanding to
better then horse and mule. Therefore they which have lost their understanding
at the Tauerns, as many here have done sometimes, and they which understand not
yet what is the book of God, are but horse and mule, though they bear the
visors of men.

After he had said, Mine understanding was restored to me, he annexeth, Mine
honor was restored to me, so he grew to a king again: as he was wont to put
on one roabe after another when he was a King, so when GOD would make him a
king again, first he puts upon him the roabe of understanding as it were the
foundation of a king, like the principal spirit which came upon Saul, the
first of Samuel 10. 9. And when he had a princes heart, then GOD gave him a
Princes power, and proclaimed like a voice from Heaven, Nabuchadnezzar king of
Babel: so gloriously he rose again like the Sun, with a triumph of his
restitution, and welcome of his subjects, like the shoute which went before
Solomon. 1. King. 1. 34. One would think when Nabuchadnezzar was a King, GOD
would never have made him like a beast, nor after made him again a king: for
who would suffer a beast to rule over the^, seeing such stomachs are in men,
that they will hardly endure any rulers. Therefore it is strange that these men
would suffer one to rule over them that had been 7. years like a beast; it is
even as if one had lien 7. years in the grave, and after come to challenge his
house and goods from them which have it in possession, and count it their own:
I think such a one should have so cold a suite, that unless it were some few
that loved him, while he lived he might go again to his grave for a house
to dwell in: so no body looks now for Nabuchadnezzar to come out of the
wilderness, he was the vnlikelyest man in the world to be King after such a
change: but see what God can do, though all be against it; he which made a
king like a beast, raised a king of a beast.

Mine understanding (says Nabuchadnezzar was restored to me, and more than
that, mine honor was augmented, more than it was when I was so proud of it. As
God turned his heart, so he turned the hearts of his Nobles and people, that
they received him for their King again, and sought unto him, and reverenced
him, for all the disgrace which they had seen, which made them before to
contemn him like a beast.

Here a wise man may study and wonder like Elisha when his master was rapt to
heaven. For as though a snuff had been taken from the ground, and set in the
candlestick again, and shined brighter than it did before: So Nabuchadnezzar
was raised from the dust, and set in the throan: even now no man cared for him,
and now no man dare displease him: that which Solomon says in Prou. 16. 17.
When the ways of a man please the Lord, he will make all his enemies at peace
with him: so when Nabuchadnezzar pleased the Lord God gave him grace with men,
and his glory was augmented. My glory was increased, etc. that is, he received
not only his kingdom, and power, and honor again, but he received usury of
them. For his seven years banishment, they had been put out seven years to
the Bank, for him to receive more when he came again, so when he sought his
own honor, honor departed from him, his palace could not hold it, his
treasures could not redeem it, his guard could not stay it, but pride chased it
away, whilst he followed after it. But when he sought Gods honor, and cared
not for his own, honor was increased, according to that, I will honor them
that honor me.

What would Nabuchadnezzar say to our Nabuchadnezzars (if he were living)
which think it against their honor to seek Christ's honor, and that if his
kingdom went up, their kingdom should go down, like Herod which thought he
could not be King, if Christ should reign; and the Pharisees, which thought
they should be despised if Christ were regarded.

If Nabuchadnezzars honor came unto him for the honor which he gave to GOD:
how long will their honor last, which eat and drink, give and take, set up
and pull down, and do all that they do to honor themselves? as
Nabuchadnezzar built Babel until that voice came thundering from heaven, Thy
kingdom is departed from thee, thy office is departed from thee, thy life is
departed from thee. Some have exalted themselves like Nabuchadnezzar, and are
not fallen yet: some mounted up have fallen low, and lower, like Balaam, but
they are not yet at the ground: they have ruled like beasts, longer then
Nabuchadnezzar, and yet look not up to heaven, that they may be changed. Thus
Nabuchadnezzar is welcome to his throne again.

Now he has received grace, let us examine his thankfulness. If you mark how
every thing comes in his order, you shall see a marvelous consequence observed
both in his Fall and Restitution. When he looked upon his palace, then he
waxed proud; when he waxed proud, then God threatened him; when he was
threatened, then God banished him; when he was banished, then he lift up his
eyes to heaven; when he lift up his eyes to heaven, his understanding came unto
him; when his understanding came unto him, then he gave thanks to God: showing
us the use of our understanding, why God has given reason unto men, viz. to
serve him and praise him upon earth: as Nabuchadnezzar worshipped God so soon
as he came to understanding; so, so soon as we come to years of discretion,
and begin to understand, we should begin a new life, and serve him whom all
creatures do serve with us, or else our understanding is vain, and we are
beasts still: for by this Nabuchadnezzar shows that he had understanding, and
was like a man, because he gave praise to God, and was moved in heart to
worship him which made him, according to that definition that David makes of
understanding, in the tenth verse of the one hundred and eleventh Psalm. They
which observe them have a good understanding: they which observe the
Commandments have a good understanding; not they which speak of the
Commandments, nor they which write of the Commandments, nor they which preach
of the Commandments, but they which keep the Commandments, have a good
understanding. The rest have a false understanding, a vain understanding, an
understanding, like that of the Scribes and Pharisees which was enough to
condemn them, but not to save them.

By this every man should try his wisdom: for so soon as understanding
comes to him as it came to Nabuchadnezzar, it will extort prayer and
obedience from him, whether he will or no: therefore our Nabuchadnezzars are
beasts still, for this is no part of their understanding.

But he which can go beyond all in shifts and policy, is counted the wisest
man in Court and City. Oh, if Machauil had lived in our country, what a
Monarch should be be? to what honor, and wealth, and power, and credit, might
he have risen unto in short time, whether he had been a Lawyer, or a Courtier,
or a Prelate? me thinks I see how many fingers would point at him in the
streets, as they do at his apes, and say, there goes a deep fellow, he
has more wit in his little finger then the rest in their whole body. You
talk of Sectaries how fast they grow, and how fast they breed; I warrant you
where any Sectary has one son, Machauil has a score, and those not the
brats, but the fatlings of the Land, which if they had but a dram of religion
for an ounce of their policy, they might go like Saints among men. But we
speak to the belly that has no ears.

Now let us see the parts of this kings confession, that we may see how his
thankfulness did answer to his sin: before he had robbed God of his honor:
now, as though he came to make restitution, he brings praise, and thanks and
glory in his mouth. First, he aduanceth Gods power, and says, that his
kingdom is an everlasting kingdom: in which words he confesses that God was
above him, because that his kingdom was not an everlasting Kingdom, but a
momentanie Kingdom, like a spark which rises from the fire, and falls to
the fire again. Therefore he shows what a fool he was to vaunt of his
Kingdom, as though it were like Gods Kingdom, which lasts for ever.

Secondly, he magnifieth the power of God, and says, that God does what he
lists both in heaven and in earth, and nothing can hinder him, or say unto
him, what do thou? Under which words, he confesieth again, that God was
above him, because he could not reign as he listed, for when he thought to
live at his pleasure, he was thrust out at doors, and God said not to him,
what do thou? but Thy kingdom shall depart from thee: therefore he shows
what a fool he was to vaunt of his power, as though it had been like Gods
power, which cannot be checked.

Thirdly he commends the justice of God, and says, that his works were all
truth, and his ways were all judgment. Under which words, he confesses
again, that God was above him: for his ways were all errors, and his works
were all sins, as the end proved. Therefore he shows what a fool he was,
to vaunt of his works, as though they had been like Gods works, which cannot
be blamed: therefore he concludes, I Nabuchadnezzar praise, and extol, and
magnify the King of heaven. When he lighted upon the right string, mark how
he harpes upon it, and doubles it, and trebles it, like a bond which is
ratified with many words of like sense; so he ratifieth his bond to God with
many words of like meaning, I will praise and extol and magnify the King of
Heaven: as if he would praise him, and more than praise him. They which love
with the heart, and repent from the bottom, praise and praise, pray and pray,
give and give, serve and serve, that is, when they have served him, they are
ready to serve him again.

Here is a glass for all the children of pride. First look upon
Nabuchadnezzar, you that are great men like Nabuchadnezzar. For thus will GOD
make his example of great men, because they should be examples to others. Many
wicked men died in Jury, and scarce a man was by to see their end; but Herod
was stricken before the people, that all might see, because he was a wicked
King. There were many in Babel as proud as Nabuchadnezzar, but none but
Nabuchadnezzar was made like a beast, because he was a proud King: so God does
stomach sin in those that bear his own person. As Princes use to pick
those that are principal and chief in rebellion to make them examples of
terror to others, which were ringleaders in the treason: so God does bend his
shot against the captains of his enemies, like the King of Aram, which charged
his soldiers, that they should fight with none but against Achab the King, as
it is written in the second Book of Chronicles, the eighteenth chapter and
thirtieth verse. For as Solomon says in the nineteenth Chapter of his
Proverbs and five and twentieth verse, Strike the strong, and the rest will
beware: so Justice showed upon a Ruler, or great personage, does terrify
many.

If we could see but one of our Nabuchadnezzars so degraded, it would make all
the rest better in their office, and think when they sit in their majesty's,
as Queen Hester did, that their power is given them for the Church and not
against the Church.

Paul being before Festus and Agrippa, wishes not unto the King Agrippa, more
wealth, or more honor, or more riches, but more religion, which is the greatest
want of Princes and Magistrates. They sit in Gods chair, and are called
Gods, but are not like God, but like Mammon, except their names and their
crowns: peradventure a David, or a Solomon, or a Joshua, that is, a few that
remember whose person they bear: the rest are like Saul, and Herod, and
Nabuchadnezzar, which know not from whom their kingdoms come. Nabuchadnezzar
built for his honor, and they built for their honor: Nabuchadnezzar gathered
for his wealth, and they gather for their wealth: Nabuchadnezzar sought after
his pleasure, and they seek after their pleasure: Nabuchadnezzar vaunted of
his power, and they vaunt of their power: what did Nabuchadnezzar which they do
not, but repent which they do not? I cannot wish them beasts to do them
good, like Nabuchadnezzar, because it is a question, whether they are worse
than beasts already, but if we could drive them out of their palaces to live
like beasts in the wilderness, it were a good riddance, for there they should
do less harm: where now their proud horns do gore others, and their hoof
is up to strike every one that is better than themselves, which makes many
fly into the wilderness, from their house, and church, and calling, lest they
should fall into their clutches: The Lord which restored Nabuchadnezzar from
the likeness of a beast, restore them to the likeness of men, or else fright
them like Nabuchadnezzar, to run from their rooms, that better may have
their places.

Thus you see Nabuchadnezzar was made like a beast that he might die like a
man, for he could never learn from whence his kingdom came, until he had
been apprentice seven years unto the cross, and when he perceived who took
his kingdom from him, then he perceived also who gave his Kingdom to him, and
learned his thankfulness in the wilderness, when all the blessings were gone,
which he should have been thankful for, he thought that God was no body,
until he became like no body himself, and then who but God, no power but of
him, no honor but from him, his first honor came from God, as well as his last:
but when he was like a beast which knew not his owner, like a babe which knew
not his Father, like an Image which knows not his maker, but now he knows
from whom Kings reign, and has learned to say thy Kingdom, as well as my
Kingdom, and is like the elders in the Revelation which cast down their
crowns before the Lamb.

Such a schoolmaster is affliction, to teach that, which Prophets and Angels
cannot teach. For the Prophet and his dream had told him as much before, yet
he could never say, the Lord has given, before he did see how the Lord had
taken: they say a friend is never known before he be lost: so when God fled,
then Nabuchadnezzar followed: but when God called, then Nabuchadnezzar
contemned; when he has all things he is unthankful, and when he has nothing
he begins to be thankful.

So we must learn Gods love out of his wrath, and spel his goodness out of his
justice: therefore we preach judgment unto you, to make you fly unto mercy,
we denounce the law against you, to make you love the gospel, we show you
hell, to make you seek heaven. Because we are all like Pharaoh his sorcerers,
though we receive never so much, yet we never say, the finger of GOD has done
this: but when he begins to plague us, then we cry the finger of God has done
this: therefore if we will not be invited, it is good to be compelled: to
conclude, he which made Nabuchadnezzar a King when he was like a beast, is he
which makes them rich which were poor, and he which makes them free which were
bounden, and he which makes them beloved which were hated, and he which makes
them wise, which were rude, and he which makes them whole which were sick:
they must stay a time, seven days, or seven weeks, or seven months, or
seven years, as Nabuchadnezzar did, and when they are ready for it, it will
come suddenly, as the Angels came to refresh Christ so soon as he was hungry:
yet a little while, a little longer, comfort is on foot, and that goodness
which is coming, will come, as the sun which was rising is risen: for as
Nabuchadnezzar said, mine honor was restored to me, so I am sure many here
may say, my right was restored to me, my liberty was restored to me, my
health was restored to me, my good name was restored to me, in less time than
Nabuchadnezzars honor was, and what then? Therefore I Nabuchadnezzar, praise,
and extol, and magnify the King of heaven, whose works are all truth, and
his ways judgment, and those that walk in pride, he is able to abase. This
is the conclusion of all Gods benefits, they which do not praise and extol
the King of heaven are worse than Nabuchadnezzar.

Therefore let all which said in their hearts, like Nabuchadnezzar: is not this
the house which I have built, is not this the land which I have purchased, is
not this the money which I have gathered, are not these the children which I
have be gotten, say now with Nabuchadnezzar for all, I praise, and extol, and
magnify the King of heaven, which can take all again, as he did from
Nabuchadnezzar.

Thus you have seen pride and humility, one pulling Nabuchadnezzar out of his
throne, the other lifting him unto his throne, whereby they which stand may
take heed lest they fall; and they which are fallen, may learn to rise again.

FINIS.
A DISSWASION FROM PRIDE, AND AN exhortation to Humility.
1. PET. 5. 5. God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble.
SAint Peter teaching every man his duty, how one should behave himself to
another, exhorts al me^ to be humble and abstain from pride: as though
Humility were the bond of all duties, like a list which holds men in a
compass, and pride were the makebate over all the world: to which Solomon
gives witness, Prou. 13. 10. saying, Only by pride man makes contention:
because pride makes every one think better of himself then of others,
whereby he scorneth to give place to the other, and therefore when neither
party will yield as Abraham did to Lot, how should there be any peace? Genesis 13.
9.
Thus pride does break the peace, and humility does set it again: therefore
to toll men from pride to humility, as it were from the concubin to the right
wife, the Apostle shows how God is affected to pride, and what mind he
bears to humility: God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble:
as if he should whisper men in the ears and say, take heed how you company
with pride, or give entertainment to her, for she is not Caesar's friend, the
king counts her his enemy, and all that take her part: she has been
suspected ever since the Angels rebelled in heaven, Genesis 3.
and Adam sought to be equal with God. therefore his majesty has a stich
against her, as Solomon had to Shemei, and would not have her favorites come in
his court, 1. Kin. 2. 36
unless they hold down their mace, stoop when they enter. But if you can get
in with humility, and wear the colors of lowlines, then you may go boldly,
and stand in the Kings sight, and step to his chamber of presence, and put up
your petitions, and come to honor. For humility is very gracious with him, and
so near of his counsel, that as David and Solomon say, Pro. 3. 32.
he commits all his secrets to her. This is Peter's meaning, Psalm. 25.
that the humble shall find grace with God and men: as we read of David and
John Baptist, according to that in the first Psalm. verse. 4. All things which
he does shall prosper: Psalm. 1. 4.
but the proud shall be troubled and crossed, and when they would do best
they shall do worst, when they would grace themselves, they shall shame
themselves: and God will be to them like the spirit of Saul which tormented him
wheresoever he went. This sentence is repeated again, James. 1. 6.
James 4. 6. the like sentence to this is in Proverbs 3. 34. Pro. 3* 34.
where he says, with the Scornful he scorneth: but he gives grace to the
humble: the like sentence is again in the 16. of Proverbs 18. where he says,
Pro. 16. 18.
Pride goes before destruction: Pro. 15. 33.
and in the 15. of Prou. 33. before honor goes humility. Pro. 29. 23.
The like sentence is again in the 29. of the Prou. verse. 23. where he says,
the pride of man shall bring him low, but the humble in spirit shall enjoy
glory.

The like sentence is again in the first of Luke. 46 where the Virgin sings,
Luke 1. 46.
He has put down the mighty from their seat, and has exalted the humble
and meek; that as it were by two or three witnesses, pride might be
condemned, and humility acquitted. One is to GOD like Jacob, Romans 4. 13.
of whom he says; Mal. 1. 3.
Jacob have I loved: the other is to God like Esau, Genesis 25. 8.
of whom he says, Esau have I hated. Jacob loved Esau because he loved
venison, but Rebecca loved Jacob because he was loved of God. So the proud are
in the Kings Court, because they seek honor, but the humble are in Gods
court, because they contemn honor: as he says in the third of the Prouer.
ver. 34. with the froward he will show himself froward: So he threatens here
that with the proud, he will show himself proud; that is, if they challenge,
he will defend: if they will provoke him, he will resist them: if they will
clime higher then their compass, he will pull them lower then their will.

Peter speaks of the proud, as if they did challenge God, like champions, and
provoke him like rebels, that unless he did resist them, they would go about to
deprive him of his rule, Number. 16. 2
as Corah, Dathan, and Abiram undermined Moses. For so the proud man says, I
will be like the highest, Esai. 14.
and if he could, above the highest too. This is the creature which was taken
out of the dust, Genesis 2. 7.
and so soon as he was made, he opposes himself against that majesty, which
the Angels adore, the throanes worship, the devils fear, and the heavens obey.
How many sins are in this sinful world, and yet as Solomon says of the good
wife, Prou. 31. 29. Many daughters have done virtuously, Pro. 31. 29.
but thou surmountest them all. So I may say of pride, many sins have done
wickedly, but thou surmountest them all: for the wrathful man, the prodigal
man, the laciuious man, the surfeting man, the slothful man, is rather an
enemy to himself then to God. The envious man, the covetous man, the
deceiptful man, the ungrateful man, is rather an enemy to men then to God. but
the proud man sets himself against God, because he does against his laws, he
makes himself equal with God, because he does all without God and craves no
help of him: he exalts himself above God, because he will have his own
will, though it be contrary to Gods will. As the humble man says; Psalm. 115. 1
Not unto us Lord, not unto us, but thy name give the glory. Psalm. 115. 1. so
the proud man says, not unto him, not unto him, but unto us give the glory:
like unto Herod, which took the name of God, and was honored of all but the
worms, and they showed that he was not a God but a man, Acts 12. 21.
Acts 12. 21. Therefore the proud men may be called Gods enemies, because as
the covetous pull riches from men, so the proud pull honor from God. Beside the
proud man has no cause to be proud, as other sinners have, the covetous for
riches, the ambitious for honor, the voluptuous for pleasure, the envious for
wrong, the slothful for ease; but the proud man has no cause to be proud, but
pride it self, which says like Pharaoh, I will not obey, Exodus 5. 2.
Therefore God is specially said to resist the proud, because the proud resist
him. Here is heaven against earth, the creator against the creature, the
father against the son, the Lord against the servant, the Prince against the
subject, who is like to win the field? If the Lord justify (says Paul) who
shall condemn? so if the Lord resist, who shall defend? If his law come with
thunder and lightning and tempest, with what terror will he come himself? It
was but a brag, when the king of Judah proclaimed war against the king of Aram
and said, 2. Kin. 1. 9.
No man shall deliver the^ out of my hands; but it is true when God says, no
man shall deliver them out of my hands: Heb. 10.
therefore the author to the Hebrews says, It is a fearful thing to fall
into the hands of God, for he ever overcomes. Therefore when the Egyptians
perceived that God fought against them, 1. Kin. 14. 9
they cried, We will fle, we will fly, for God sighteth against us, Exodus
14. 25. So the proud may cry, I will fly, I will fly, for God fights
against us. When the king of Judah proclaimed war against the king of Israel;
the king of Israel returned answer, that the thistle rebelled against the
cedar, 2. King. 14. 9. and yet there was but king against king. a man against a
man; how much rather may the king of heaven answer this proud earth, the
thistle rebelleth against the Cedar? 1. Sa. 17. 2.
The giant durst challenge but one of the host of Israel, but the Lord
chalengeth all the host of pride: even as he gives grace to all that are
humble, so he resists all that are proud. It had been too heavy for them, if
he had said, the Lord does not care for them, for Gods care preserves us, and
our own care does but trouble us: but to say that the Lord does resist them,
Revel. 12. 7
is as if Michael should denounce war with the dragon, till he has cast him
into the pit. This is a marshall word, and comes with arms and weapons upon
them: if a man should see a Lion come upon him, would he not start? if he
should see a Giant come against him, would he not fear? But now the Lord of
hosts, the Lion of Judah, which destroyed the Giants, is up in arms to resist
the proud, and the proud fear not so much as the humble. God resists the
proud, and gives grace to the humble: but the world resists the humble, and
gives grace to the proud, as David notes. Psalm. 49. 18.
Men will praise thee, not when thou reformest thy self to God, but when thou
do form thy self to thy lusts: that is, they which will be strowters, shall
not want flatterers, which will praise every thing that they do, and every
thing that they speak, and every thing that they wear, and say it becomes
the^ well to wear long hair, that it becomes the^ well to wear bellied
dublets, that it becomes them well to iet in their going, that it becoms the^
well to swear in their talking. Now, when they hear men sooth them in their
follies, then think they, we have nothing else to commend us, if men will praise
us for our vanities, we will have friends enough: so the humor swells and
thinks with it self, if they will look upon me when, I do set but a stout
face upon it, how would they behold me if I were in apparel? if they do so
admire me in silks, how would they cap me and cursie me, and worship me, if I
were in veluets? if I be so brave in plain velvet, what if my velvet were
pinct, or cut, or printed? So they study for fashions, as Lawyers do for
delays, and count that part naked which is not as gaudie as the rest, till all
their body be covered over with pride, as their mind is with folly. Therefore
David says, Psalm. 37. 6.
that pride is as a chain unto them, that is, it goes round about them like a
chain, and makes them think that all men love them, and praise them, and
admire them, and worship them for their bravery. Therefore as Saul said to
Samuel, Honor me before this people: so the proud man says to his, chain
and his ruffes, and his pinckes, and his cuts, honor me before this people:
all that, he speaks, or does, or wears, is like Nabuchadnezzars palace,
Dan. 4.
which he built for his honor. This is their work, so soon as they rise, to
put a Pedlars shop upon their backs, and color their faces, and prick their
ruffes, and frisle their hair, and then their days work is done, as though
their office were to paint a fair Image every morning, and at night to blot it
out again: from that day that pride is borne in the heart of man, as the false
Prophets were schooled to speak as the King would have them, 2. Kin. 21. 8.
so their eyes, and feet, and tongues are bound to speak, and look, and
walk, as the proud heart does prompt them. If GOD were in love with fashions,
he were never better served than in this age, for our world is like a pageant,
where every man's apparel is better then himself. Mat. 11. 6.
Once Christ said, that soft clothing is in Kings courts: but now it is crept
into every house: then the rich glutton ietted in purple every day, Luke 16.
but now the poor unthrift iets as brave as the glutton, with so many
circumstances about him, that if ye could see how pride would walk herself,
if she did wear apparel, she would even go like many in the streets: for
she could not go brauer, nor look stouter, nor mince finer, nor set on more
laces, nor make larger cuts, nor carry more trappings about her, then our
ruffians and wantons do at this day. How far are these fashions altered from
those leather coats which God made in Paradise? Genesis 3. 21.
if their bodies did change forms so often as their apparel changes
fashions, they should have more snapes then they have fingers and toes. 2. Kin.
14. 2.
As Ieroboams wife disguised her self that the Prophet might not know her, so
we may think that they disguise themselves that God might not know them, nay
they disguise their bodies so, till they know not themselves: for the servant
goes like his master, the handmaide like her Mistress, the subject like the
Prince, as though he had forgotten his calling, and mistook himself: like a
man in the dark, which puts on another man's coat for his own, that is too
wide, or too side for his body: so their attires are so unfit for their
bodies, so unmeet for their calling, so contrary to nature, that I cannot
call them fitter, then the monsters of apparel. Genesis 6.
For the Giants were not so monstrous in nature, as their attires are in
fashion, that if they could see their apparel but with the glance of a
spiritual eye, how monstrous it makes them like Apes and Puppets, and Vices,
they would fling away their attire, as David flung away Saul's armor: 1. Sa.
17. 39
and be as much ashamed of their clothes, Genesis 3. 9.
as Adam was of his nakedness.

Pride has been the deviser of all these vanities, which now neither shame nor
laws nor preaching can take away: therefore had we not need to show you, how
God resists this vice, that cares not for any else? Who can tell how this
weed grows, seeing we have nothing to be proud of, but more cause to be
ashamed of our selves, and fly from the face of God and man too, Genesis 3. 13.
then Adam our father had? we were earth, we are flesh, and we shall be worms
meat: what cause has earth, or flesh, or worms meat to be proud? We are
borne in sin, we live in misery, we shall die in corruption: what cause has
sin, or misery, or corruption to puff us, but to humble us? there is
nothing good which we are proud of, but a wise man is ashamed of the same
things whereof we boast. It is a wonder to see, how a gay coat, or a gold
ring, or a wrought handkerchiefe can brave a man's mind, that he thinks better
of himself that day when he wears them, then any day else, and speaks and
walks, and looks after another fashion then he did before?

If ye could say as the disciples said, Luke 10. 17. Lord the devils are
subject unto us: Yet (says the Lord) glory not in this: how many things do
we glory in, which we should not, if we may not glory in the gift of
miracles? Even as a covetous man is greedy of an halfpenie, and an envious man
is angry for a word: so the proud man is proud of a fether. Therefore shall
not God resist them which glory in all things but himself, and should glory
in nothing but in him? as he did emulate the lofty Babel, Genesis 11.
so he does resist these lofty minds.

But for Pride the angels which are in hell should be in heaven: Iud. 1.
but for pride we which are in earth should be in paradise: Genesis 3.
but for pride Nabuchadnezzar which is in the forest should be in his palace:
Dan. 4.
but for pride Pharaoh which lies with the fishes, Exodus 14.
should be with his nobles: no sin has pulled so many down, as this which
promised to set them up. Of all the children of pride, the Pope is the father,
which sits in the temple of God, and is worshipped as God. 2. These. 2. 4.
The Lords ministers are called servants, and his ministers are called Lords:
but for pride the Pharisees would have received Christ as gently as his
disciples: Matthew. 2.
but for Pride Herod would have worshipped Christ as humbly as the shepheardes:
but for pride our men would go like Abraham, 1. Pet. 1. 6.
and our women like Sara, as they would be called their children: but for
pride Noble men would come to Church, as well as the people: but for pride
Gentles would abide reproof, as well as servants: but for pride thou would
forgive thy brother, and thy brother would forgive thee, and the Lawyers should
have no work. But when thou think of these things, Pride comes in and
says, Will thou go like a hagler? will thou follow Sermons? will thou take
the check? will thou put up wrong? what will men say? that thou art a mome,
and a cowarde, and a fool, and no man will reverence thee, but every man will
contemn and abuse thee. Thus men are feign to put on the liuerie of pride, as
they put on the liueries of Noble men, to shroud and defend them from the
contempt of the world. Who has not felt these counsels in his heart, which
would not believe that any pride was in him? Yet as Absolon was a worse son
then Adoniah, because Adoniah rebelled against his brother, 1. King. 1. 5
but Absolon rebelled against his father: so pride has worse children, than
vanity of apparel. Tyranny in Princes, ambition in Nobles, rebellion in
Subjects, disobedience in Children, stubbornness in servants: name Pride, and
thou have named their mother: therefore shall not GOD resist pride, which has
sowed so many tares in his ground, that scarce a man can say like David, I am
not high minded. Psalm. 131. 1. Give me the minds of all men humbled, and there
is nothing left to raise strife in the world. Iam. 4. 5.
But as James says, The heart of man lusts after envy: so the heart of man
lusts after pride, though he have many heart breaks and pull downs, and many
times no countenance to show it: yet if a little spark be put to the tow, you
shall see how soon this flax will flame: therefore Solomon says, Eccles. 3.
10. that all the troubles that God lays upon a man, have this purpose, to
humble him; as though al troubles were little enough to humble pride, and that
but for pride there were no need almost of our troubles. For the avoiding of
this vice, GOD suffers men to fall into other vices, which men abhor and
punish, as theft, and fornication, and drunkenness, to make them ashamed by
these vices which were not ashamed of pride: this is an argument, that of all
sins pride is the worst, because God suffers other sins to come and shame
us, least we should be proud. Again, Pride has this property and slight
that it mixeth it self with our good works, and follows virtue: As from the
ashes of a Phoenix arises another Phoenix, so of the ashes of our good works
arises pride. When the devil cannot stay us from a good work, then he
labors by all means to make us proud of it, and so he staineth our work
and steals our reward. For though a man do never so much good, yet if he be
proud of it he loses his reward, as the Pharisees did: therefore the best
and the wisest, and the holiest men had need to watch this vice: for if they
take not great heed, it will make them proud of their wisdom, and of their
zeal, and of their goodness. 2. Cor. 12.
Paul was almost puffed up with revelations: Number. 12.
Aron and Miriam began to rebel, because they thought themselves as good as
Moses; and all the fathers of any heresy, began their heresy at this, a
magnificate opinion of themselves, and an ouerweening of their own gifts. So
pride sets upon the best, Math. 4.
even as the temper set upon Christ. Again, a man had need to take heed of
pride, for she will not keep counsel: but if he be proud, she will tell that
he is proud, and therefore is called an impudent sin, because she descrieth
her self in the eye, in the speech, in the iesture, in the look, in the ga^e,
like the drunkard, so that a man cannot be proud, and seem humble.

Thus God has tied a just punishment to this vice, that he which entertaineth
the vice that he loves, should not avoid the name which he abhors, but he
shall be esteemed proud and called proud of all that know him; and many that
know him not, shall point at him with their fingers in the streets, and say,
there goes a proud fellow: which they pronounce of no vice else, but the
drunkard, because these two bewray themselves.

Thus you see how the proud resist God: now you shall see how GOD resists
the proud. They are so heady, that almost none dare resist them but God: I will
resist them (says God.) Therefore when he heard the proud man say in the 14
of Esaiah, I will ascend up into heaven: he answers himself, Thou shall be
brought down to the grave. This is he which resists the proud. Hest. 6. 13.
When Hamans wife heard her husband say, that Mordecai was against him; because
he was an Israelite, she said that her husband should take the soil, and
Mordecai should prevail. What if she had heard her husband say, that the Lord
of Mordecai was against him? If the servant be so terrible, who dare encounter
with his master? Romans 9.
God hated Esau, and how did Esau prosper? though he was the elder brother,
yet he missed the birthright; and though his father loved him, Genesis 25. 28
yet he could not bless him, because God hated him. God was wroth with the
Angels, and drove them out of heaven; Iud. 1.
God was wroth with Adam, and thrust him out of Paradise; Genesis 3.
GOD was wroth with Nabucadnezzar, Dan. 4.
and turned him out of his Palace; God was wroth with Cain, Genesis 4. 12.
and though he were the first man that was borne of a woman, yet God made him
a vagabond upon his own land; GOD was wroth with Saul, 1. Sa. 31. 4.
and though he was the first king that ever was anointed, yet God made his
own hand his executioner; GOD was wroth with the old world, Genesis 6.
and though the earth was naked when they were drowned, yet he regarded
nothing, but destroyed a world of men together. This is he which resists the
proud, what shall we do if the world be against us, and the flesh against
us, and the devil against us, and God against us too, which should defend us?
In heaven, in earth, and in the sea he finds us out. And as the displeasure of
a king draws many enemies with it, so the displeasure of God sets all his
creatures against us: therefore he is called the Lord of hoasts, Esa. 1. 14.
as though he came with an army against us. When he fought with the
Aramites, Josh. 3. 10.
the Sun took his part: when he fought against the Sodomites, Genesis 16.
the fire took his part: when he fought against the Egyptians, Exodus 14.
the water took his part; when he fought against the Murmurers, Numb. 26.
the earth took his part; when he fought against the Idolaters, Dan 3.
the Lions took his part; when he fought against the mockers, 2. Kin. 2. 24
the Bears took his part: this is he which resists the proud. What can he
hope, which remembers that God is set against him, and that the Lord of heaven
and of earth is his enemy? This thought made the Philistines fly and say, God
is come into the host. 1. Sa. 4. 7.
No enemy is like this enemy, he ever overcomes, and when he has
ouercomen, he can cast into hell, and make the devils torment them again:
therefore well might Solomon prophecy, Pro. 29. 23. Mat 4.
The pride of man shall bring him low: for God has overcome him who brought
pride into the world; and as pride brought him low, so Solomon says, it shall
bring men low too. What a turn is this, that that which he took like a chain
(as David says) to adorn him; Psalm. 73. 6.
does hang him? that which he took to exalt him, does debase him; that which
he took to win love, gets hatred; that which he took to obtain glory,
procures shame: as if God did take the sword out of his hand, 1. Sa. 17. 51.
as David took the sword of Goliath, and slew him with his own weapon.

When the Pharisie said he was not like the Publicane, Luke 19. 11. he said
true: for then he was not like the Publican indeed, because the Publican was
better than he: So, when a proud man thinks best of himself, then God and
men think worst of him; all his glory is but like a vapor, which clymeth as
though it would go up to heaven, but when it comes to a little height, it
falls down again, and never ascends more. So Adam thought that the fair
apple should make him like his maker, Genesis 3. but God resisted his pride, and
that apple made him like the Serpent that tempted him with it. Absalom thought
that rebellion would make him a king, 2. Sam. 15. 2. but God resisted his
pride, and his rebellion hanged him on a tree.

Nimrod thought that Babel should get him a name, Genesis 11. but God resisted his
pride, and the name of his building was called Co^fusio^ ever since.
Nabuchadnezzar built his palace for his honor, Dan. 4. but God resisted his
pride, and his palace spued him out when his servants remained in it. Shebna
builded a sepulcher for his memorial, Esa. 22. but GOD resisted his pride, and
buried him in another Country, where he had no sepulcher provided. Herod hoped
when the people cried at his words, It is the voice of God, that he should be
worshipped ever after as God, but God resisted his pride, and before he
descended from his throane, the worms so defaced his pomp, that none which
called him God would be like unto him: so when women take more pains to dress
themselves, then they do all the day after, and pay deerer to maintain one
vice, than they need to learn all virtues, they think to please men by it:
but God resists their pride, and all that see them though they cap and curtsie
to them, yet they judge worse of them, and think that they would not wear
these signs of lightness and pride, unless they were light and proud indeed.
Thus if their apparel condemn them before men, how will it condemn them
before GOD? If sin did not blind them, would they so deceive themselves to
take the contrary way, and think that should honor them which disgraceth
other? Numb. 22.
But as Balaam was stopped and knew not who stopped him: so they are resisted,
and know not who resists them. Though they do al to please, yet they can
please none: they please not God, for God resists them; they please not the
humble, for the humble are contrary to the^; they please not the proud, for
the proud do envy them which strive to be as proud as they: they please not
themselves, because they cannot be so proud and brave as they would be: only
they please the devil, because their pride does entitle him to them.

Thus much of Gods battles against the proud. Here Peter leaves the proud
with this brand in their forehead, This is the man whom God resists: then he
turns to the lowly, and comfort them: But he gives grace to the humble;
as if he should say, you are like John the beloved Disciple, which leaned on
Christ's bosom: John 13. 23. though God resist the proud, yet he will not
frown upon you: but when he resists them, he will give grace unto you, as if
he should say, the proud are without grace, for God gives not grace unto the
proud, but to the humble, according to that to Esaias 66. 2. To him will I look,
even to him that is poor and of a contrite heart, and trembles at my words:
therefore Learn of me (says Christ) to be humble and meek: Mat. 11.
as though the humble and meek were his scholars. Therefore God must needs
love the humble, because they are like his son: they shall have his best
gifts, of which he says, 2. Cor. 12. 9. My grace is sufficient: as if he
should say, he which has given you his grace, can he deny you any thing? as
Christ says, He which has given us his Son, will he not give us all things
with him? Therefore grace may be called the gift of gifts, because all gifts
come with grace, as the Court goes with the Queen. Therefore fear not to be
humble, least you be contemned: for all the promises of God are made to
humility, and yet men fear to be humble, lest they should be contemned.
Humility did not make John contemptible, but when he refused the name of a
Prophet, Christ says, that he was more then a Prophet, Mat. 11. 2. Humility
did not make Moses contemptible, but as he was the mildest man upon earth; so
he was the greatest upon the earth, Numb. 12. Humility did not make David
contemptible, but when he humbled himself, he said unto Micol, I will be more
humble yet, and lowly in my own sight, yet thou and thy maids shall honor
me, 2. Sam. 6. 22. As Christ ceased not to be a king because he was like a
servant, nor to be a Lion because he was like a Lamb, nor to be God because he
was made man, nor to be a Judge, because he was judged: so man does not loose
his honor by humility: but he shall be honored for his humility, as the Son
was honored when he was humbled, Luke 15. 8. Thus humility has found that
which pride sought, like little David, which was least accounted of, and yet
got the victory; yea, when no man durst encounter with the Giant, 1. Sam.
17. 28. This is the ladder whereby we must ascend, Genesis 28. 12. pride did cast
us down, and humility must raise us up. As the way to heaven is narrow, Mat.
12. 13. so the gate is low; and he had need to stoop which enters in at it:
therefore be not proud, least God oppose himself against you; but be humble,
and the grace of God belongs to you. So long as thou art proud, and read
this sentence, GOD gives grace to the humble: thou may say to thy soul:
Soul thou have no part herein; for grace is the portion of the humble, and the
dowry of the meek, and the treasure of the lowly; but to thee it, is said,
The Lord resists the proud: as if he should say, Avoid Satan, Math. 4. or
Depart from me ye wicked, Math 25. 45. Thus you see how you may have GOD
your friend or your enemy, He resists the proud, and gives grace to the
humble: if thou disdain to learn humility of man, learn it of GOD, who
humbled himself from heaven to earth, to exalte thee from earth to heaven; to
which Kingdom (when the proud shall be shut out) the Lord Jesus bring us, for
his mercies sake.

FINIS.
THE YOUNG MAN'S TASK.
Ecclesiastes. 12. 1. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth.
IF it be so, as they say, that none but young men do hear our doctrine; then
this Text is well chosen for the auditory, to teach young men that which if
they learn, they may say with David, I have more understanding then the
ancient. Psalm. 119. 100. All Scripture is man's duty, and answers like John
Baptist to, What shall we do? In the first of John the second and the
twelfth, John says, I write unto you babes, I write unto you children, I write
unto you fathers, I write unto you youngmen, I write unto you old men. So the
word which is called aflying book, flies from one age to another, from one
sex to another, from one calling to another, till like a Judge it has given
every man his charge. Among the rest, I may call this Scripture, The young man's
task. Wherein the Wise man shows, when is the best time to sow the seed of
virtue, that it may bring forth the fruit of life, and make a man always
ready to die. Let him remember his Creator in the days of his youth, and all
his life shall run in a line, the middle like the beginning, and the end
like the middle; as the Sun sets against the place where it rose.

After Solomon had described man (like Martha) troubling and toyling himself
about many things; at last he brings him to that one thing necessary, which
Christ taught Marie: and shows him, that if he had begun there at first, he
had found that which he sought without trouble, and been happier many years
since, than he is now. Therefore to them which are young Solomon shows, what a
vantage they have above the aged like a ship, which seeing another ship sink
before her, looks about her, pulles down her sail, turns her course, and
escapes the sands, which would swallow her, as they had done the other.

So they which are young, need not try the snares and allurements of the
world, or the issues and effects of sin, which old men have tried before
them, but take the trial and experience of others, and go a nearer way to
obtain their wished desires. That is this (says Solomon) If thou would
have any settled peace or hearty joy in this vain or transitory world,
which thou have been seeking all the time since thou were borne, thou must
Remember thy Creator, which did make thee, which has elected thee, which has
redeemed thee, which daily preserves thee, which will for ever glorify thee:
and as the kind remembrance of a friend does recreate the mind, so to think
and meditate upon GOD, will supply thy thoughts, dispell thy griefs, and make
thee cheerful, as the sight of the Arc comforted David: for joy, and
comfort, and pleasure is whereas God is, as light, and cheerefulnes, and
beauty is whereas the Sun is. Now, if thou would have this joy, and
comfort, and pleasure to be long, and would escape those thousand miseries,
vexations, and vanities, which Solomon by many weary and tedious trials sought
to make naked before thee, and yet held all but vanity when he had found the
way, thou must Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, at the first
spring time, and then thy happiness shall be as long as thy life; and all thy
thoughts while thou remainest on earth, a foretaste of the glory of Heaven.
This is the sum of Salomons counsel.

Solomon finds man seeking happiness out of the way, as Esau hunted long for
a blessing, and yet went without it: he pities to see him seek and not find,
to run and not obtain: therefore he sets him in the way like a guide sent
from heaven, which often had strayed himself before, and being now recovered
to his right way, stands like a mark of knowledge in the turnings that lead
unto blind by-waies, to direct all those that pass by, that they may follow
the ready path that leads to eternal happiness.

And because the Trauailour marches cheerfully, which knows his way before
he sets forth: therefore from the first setting forth, even from the time
of youth, when a man begins to run his pilgrimage, Solomon tells him how he
shall therein prepare himself to walk, and sets him in a fair high way,
wherein is no turning either to the right hand or the left, which he calls,
the remembrance of GOD. As if he should say, Walk with God as Enoch did, and
remember well, that he which shall be thy Judge, does see all that thou do,
and hears thee at every word: and this thought shall keep thee in the way
at all times, like the cloud and pillar of fire which went before the Children
of Israel as well by day as night, when they travailed in the wilderness.

In the next chapter before, and the ninth verse, Solomon said, Rejoice O young
man in thy youth: now he has changed his note to Remember O young man in thy
youth. No more Rejoice, but Remember. Solomon mocked before, and showed what
they did remember: here he shows what they should remember, least any
Libertine should misconster him and say, Solomon taught us to rejoice, Solomon
gave us leave to sin, Solomon said, do as ye list, for you are young men, and
have a privilege to be lascivious and vain: he recants with a breath, and
denies forthwith his word, even where he spoke it.

What said I? Rejoice O young man in thy youth? I would say, Remember O young
man in thy youth. So God mockes us while we sin, like Michaiah, which bad
Achab fight against Aram, and then forbad him again: so he bids them rejoice,
and forbids them again. Rejoice not in thy youth, but repent in thy youth. One
would think that Solomon should have given this Memorandum rather to old men
then to young men, let them repent which look to dye. Oh says Jeremy, Lam.
3* 27.
it is good for a man to bear the yoke in his youth: if it be good to suffer
in youth, it is better to learn in youth. Therefore if David wished that his
tongue might cleave to the roof of his mouth, Psalm 137. 6
if he forgot Jerusalem: what are they worthy which forget GOD the King of
Jerusalem? Can a child forget his father? Is not GOD our Father? therefore who
is too young to remember him, seeing the child does know his father? As the
deepest wounds had need to be first tented: so the vnstablest minds have
need to be first confirmed. In this extremity is youth, as Solomon shows
them before he teaches them. For in the last verse of the former chapter, he
calls youth vanity, as if he would speak all evil in a word, and say that
youth is even the age of sin. Therefore when he had showed young men their
sollie under the name of vanity, like a good Tutor he takes them to school,
and teaches them their duty: Remember thy Creator, as though all sin were
the forgetfulness of God, and all our obedience came from this remembrance,
that God created us after his own image, in righteousness and holiness, to
serve him here for a while, and after to inherit the joys which he has
himself. Which if we did remember, doubles it would make us ashamed to think
and speak, and do as we are wont. For what man does remember his Creator,
or why he was created, while he swears and forsweareth, and makes his trade
of sin, as though there were no God to judge, nor hell to punish.

This is because the remembrance of God which would wake sinners, is so chased
from men, for fear it should curb them of their pleasures, that they dare not
think of him, but strive to forget him, that they may sin without fear.
Therefore he becomes a Schoolmaster for God, and calls children unto him
before they be corrupted, to teach them this one lesson for the guide of their
life, Remember thy Creator. To which he draws them as it were with two
cords: the short slight of their youth, and the infinite infirmities of age.
To show how soon our youth is gone, which we think will never have end:
Solomon does not reckon it by years, but by days, in the days of thy youth:
so the Scripture numbers our life, by days and hours, and minutes, to teach
us to make use of al our time, and every day to think upon the end. Yet least
they should post over this remembrance unto age, which is the general day
that all set to repent, after this verse Solomon brings in the old man deaf,
and blind, and lame, and stammering, for the young man to behold, as if he
should say: look my son, is this man fit to learn? which cannot hear, nor
see, nor speak, nor go? Therefore remember thou thy creator in the days of
thy youth before this dotage come. This then is the level of our message, to
hasten them forward which travel toward heaven, because there is a great
space between God and us, and much a do to aspire the top of mount Sion,
but more a do to aspire the top of the mount of heaven.

Therefore as Abraham rose early to sacrifice his son in the morning, Genesis
22. 3
so in the morning of thy life sacrifice thy self to God, and let him which is
Alpha in every thing, be Alpha in thy conversion, that is, the beginning as
well as the end. Because we are given to set the best last, that we may have
a longer time for our sins and pleasures, like the Jews in the 1. of Agge
and 2. which said always, the time was not yet come when they should build the
temple. Therefore the holy Ghost cries so often: 2. Cor. 6. 2.
This is the acceptable time, this is the day of salvation, to day hear his
voice, like Rebeccah which taught her son the nearest way to get the
blessing. Genesis 27. 9.
When Christ went about to cast out devils, they said, Mat. 8. 29.
that he tormented them before the time: so whenever thou go about to
dismiss thy sins and pleasures, though thou stay till thou be an old man,
yet they will say still that thou dismissest them before the time. But then is
the time, when the devil says, the time is not yet, for the devil is a lier,
and knows that with what liquor our vessels be seasoned at first, they will
taste of the same ever after, whether it be good or bad. Therefore as God sueth
to have us begin at goodness, so the devil wooes us to begin at wickedness:
alleging either that we are not resolved yet to leave our pleasures, or else
that God is exceeding merciful to sinners, or else that we shall have space
enough to serve him hereafter. So he stands as it were at the ladder foot, and
keeps us off with these weapons, that we cannot get upon the first staff,
but one thought or other pulls us back, when the foot is in the stirrup,
ready to ride away from all our sins at once. Thus we have long purposed to
serve God, and every man thinks that he should be served, but we cannot
accord of the time when to begin: One says when I am rich, an other says
when I am free, another says, when I am settled, an other says when I am old,
then my pleasure will leave me, and I shall be fitter to fast and pray, and
sequester my self, but now I shall be mocked if I be not like others. Thus like
bad borrowers, when our day is past already, we crave a longer and a longer,
and yet a longer, til we be arrested with death: so the prince of creatures
dies, before he considered why he lived, for as no discipline is used where
Christ's discipline is neglected, so no time is observed, where Gods time is
omitted.

It is an old saying; Repentance is never too late, but it is a true saying;
Repentance is never too soon. 1. Cor. 9. 24.
Therefore we are commanded to run, that we may obtain, which is the
swiftest pace of man. Exo. 25. 20.
The Cherubines were portraited with wings before the place where the
Israelites prayed, to show how quickly they went about the Lords business. The
Hound which runs but for the Hare, girdes forth, so soon as he sees the
Hare start: the Hawke which flies but for the Partridge, takes her flight so
soon as she spies the Patridge spring: so we should follow the word so soon
as it speaks, and come to our Master so soon as he calls. For God
requiring the first borne for his offering, and the first fruits for his
service, requires the first labors of his servants, and as I may say, the
maidenhead of every man. Therefore so soon as man was created, a law was given
him, Ge. 2. 15. 16
to show that he should live under obedience from the day that he is borne.
So soon as he is borne, he is baptized in the name of God, to show that when
we cannot run to Christ, we should creep unto him, and serve him as we can
in youth and age: so soon as he begins to pray, he says, Thy name be
hallowed, thy kingdom come, thy will be done, before he ask his daily
bread, to show that we should seek the will of God, before the food which we
live by, much more before the sins and pleasures which we perish by: so soon
as the Lord distributed the Talents, he enjoined his servants to use them. Who
is so young which has not received some tale^t or other: therefore youth
cannot excuse him, because the talent requires to be asked of every one which
has it. So soon as God had created the man and the woman, he commanded them
to increase and multiply: shall we increase and multiply in the flesh, before
we increase and multiply in the spirit: the first thing which God did after
he had created heaven and earth, he did separate light from darkness, Genesis 1.
14.
to show us how we should separate good from evil, before our good become
evil.

The first lesson that John taught, was: Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is
at hand. Math. 3. 2. The first lesson that the Disciples taught, was, Repent
too, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand, Matthew. 10. And the first lesson
that Christ taught, was repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand, Matthew.
4. 10. to teach us what we should do first. Repent was the first lesson to young
and old: For what can we owe God to morrow, which we are not indebted to day?
Therefore David prayed, Teach me O Lord to number my days: Psalm. 90. 12.
not years, nor my months, nor my weeks. but my days, showing that we shall
answer for days as well as years, for to day as well as to morrow: and for
our youth as straightly as our age, which made him cry, Remember not the sins
of my youth: which he would not have spoken, if God did not mark the sins
of youth as well as age. Therefore he calls children unto him as Solomon
does, and says, that he will teach them the fear of the Lord. For should
children honor their father and not honor God. It was a sweet comfort, when
the children went before Christ to his temple, and sang there Hosanna, to make
their fathers ashamed, which did not know the Messiah when he came, when their
little children knew him. It is written that when Christ heard a young man
answer, that he had kept the commandments from his youth, Christ began to
love him, which shows how Christ loves these timely beginnings, when we
make him our nurse, and draw our first milk from his breasts. There is not one
confession for old men, and another for young men, the old man says not, I
did believe in God: the young man says not, I will believe in God, but both
say, I do believe in God, for he which is called I am, in the third of
Exodus, loves, I am, and cares not for, I was, nor I will be. When Christ
asks Peter, Love thou me? he looks that Peter should answer him, Yea
Lord I love thee: and not drive him off as Felix did Paul, I will hear thee,
I will love thee, when I have a convenient time. For he which will not come
when God calls, whatsoever he say, it is impossible that he should resolve to
come hereafter: for he which is evil, how should he resolve to be good?
therefore now or never, now and ever, the tree which buddeth not in spring, is
dead all the year. when a man is first married, he may use the matter so, to
win his wife unto him, or to estrange her heart for ever. when a Pastor
comes first to a place, with a small matter he may make the simple people
like him or dislike him, so long as he staieth: when the heir comes to his
lands, lightly all his tenants begin to speak well of him, or evil of him.
when a Prince comes to the crown, by the laws which he makes, first the
people guess how he will rule ever after: and either dispose their hearts to
love him, or wish his death.

Therefore the sage and beaten counsaylers advised Rehoboam when he began to
reign: 1. Chro. 10.
Show thy self loving to the people this day, and they will be thy servants
for ever. As though all the days after could not do so much as the first:
Such a victory it is to begin well, as our Proverb says: he which has
begun well, is half his way, especially it is good for a man to begin
his repentance, before he learn to be evil: For herein our minds do follow
our bodies. If our children be deformed in their youth, we never look to see
them well sauored: so if the mind be planted in sin, sildome any goodness
buddeth out of that stock. For virtue must have a time to grow, the seed is
sown in youth, which comes up in age.

And if we can say of others, when we see a graceless boy, thou will prove a
wagstring, if thou live to be elder, why should we, if we begin as ill as
he, think that we shall be better and better, which judge that he will be
worse and worse; as the arrowe is directed at the first, so it flies all the
way, over, or under, or beside, but it never finds the mark, unless it be
leuelled right in the hand; so they which make an evil beginning forespeake
themselves as it were at the first, and wander out all their race, because when
they should have levied their life, they took their aim amiss. Therefore
happy are they which have the arrowe in their hand, and day before them, for
they need not wish to be young again. Now kill the serpent in the egg, for
when he is a serpent he will kill thee, if thou cannot overcome sin in the
infancy, before the root fasten, and the fence be made about it: how will thou struggle with the Lion, when he sees his paws? and sin is become like
an old man, so tough and froward, that he will not hear. As hard as it is to
reclaim one of these old sinners, or graunde Papists, which are incorporate
into popery, and as poison is settled in a serpent; so hard it will be to
reclaim thee, when thou will begin to say, it has been my custom, and I
cannot leave it.

Try thy strength but with one of thy sins: and see what shifts, what excuses,
what delays it will find, and how it will importune thee to let it alone, as
the devil tormented the Child before he went out: if thou can not
discharge one vice that thou have accustomed thy self unto, when all thy vices
are become customs, how will thou wrestle with them?

Therefore we bend the Tree while it is a twigge, and break the Horse while
he is a Colte, and teach the Dog while he is a whelpe: and tame the Eagle
while he is young.

Youth is like the day, to do all our works in. For when the night of age
comes, then every man says, I might have been learned, I might have been
a teacher, I might have been like him or him, but the harvest was past, before
I began to sow; And Winter is come, now my fruit should ripe. Thus every
man that is old says, he cannot do that which he thought to do, and cries
with Solomon: Catechize the Child in his youth, and he will remember it when
he is old: so corrupt him in his youth, and he will remember that too. Dan. 1.
This Nabuchadnezzar perceived, and therefore he chose the towardliest
children of the Israelites to train them up in idolatry, like the popish
Seminaries, that they might be his instruments another day: If he had let them
alone till they had learned the truth first, he thought that they would not
take his way: therefore he took them before they had any religion, to frame
them to his religion. If idolatours and Papists be so cunning in their
generation, to poison their Children betime, least they should prove
Christians after, what care appertains to Christians to season their children
in the spring, like the virtuous Lady which John commends, least they prove
papists and traitors, and reprobates, when they look for comfort of them.
There was nothing which made Rehoboam to choose such young counsailers, when
he began to reign, but because they were his companions before: therefore
they became his counsailers after. This is the preferment of our sins, if
they have been our companions in youth, in age they will look to be our
counsailers and masters too. Therefore the best season to seek GOD, is to
seek him early before the floudes of wrath arise, and the heap of sins
stand up like a rampired wall between GOD and us. They which seek me early,
shall find me, says Wisdom, in the 8. of Proverbs: but to them which
defer (she says) they shall seek me, but they shall not find me; 1.
Proverbs: because they did not choose the fear of the Lord: that is, when
good and evil were set before them, they did prefer evil before good, as a
man chooses that which he likes. Therefore when they seek me (says GOD)
they shall not find me. How do ye say then that ye will seek GOD, when
God himself says that ye shall not find him? Therefore in the 4. of
Proverbs and the 7. Wisdom is called the beginning, to teach us to seek
Wisdom in the beginning. Mat. 6. 33.
For says Christ, If ye seek the kingdom of heaven first, all the rest
shall be cast upon you: he says not, if you seek the world first, heaven
shall be cast upon you, but if you seek heaven first, worldly things shall be
cast upon you. He which does believe this, would first seek the kingdom of
heaven, for that which follows; that all the rest might be cast upon him, as
when Solomon desired wisdom before honor, God gave him wisdom and honor
too, Ioh. 5. 2.
because he sought the best first.

There was a poole in Jury, where the sick and Leprous lay, for at one time
of the day, the Angel came and stirred the water, and then he which stepped in
first was healed of his disease: he which stepped in first was healed says
John, none but he which stepped in first; so he which takes time is sure, but
he which foresloweth time oftener fails then speedeth. For when golden
opportunity is past, no time will fit for her. If Elias would be served
before the widow, when she had but a little cruse of Oil, which was not
enough to serve her self; will God be served after Elias, will God be served
after thee? Nay after the flesh and after the devil? Thou may read in the
19. of Leuit. and the 13. that GOD would not have the laborers hire stay in
thy hands all night, but would have thee pay him before thou sleep. If God
would not have the laborers due stay in thy hands one night; how dare thou
keep his due from him day and night? so many days and nights, and weeks, and
months and years together? where is the morning sacrifice which God
requires: nay where is the evening sacrifice which God requires: the glomy
morning has ouercast the whole day, do thou think it enough if thou do not
sit in the chair of scorners, or if thou do not stand in the way of sinners?
he which stands stays not, he which sits takes his ease, but he which
walks goes his way. Yet he which walks in the way of sinners, though he
neither sit nor stand, is not of the blessed number. But he which neither
sits, nor stands, nor walks, is blessed says David, Psalm. 1. ver. 1.
Alas then why do we sit, if they which stand are accurssed, and they which
walk are not blessed? Math 6. 33.
Christ says, First seek the kingdom of God, and we say first, let me
bury my father, first let me bid my friends farewell, and so many things
first. So long in burying our Father, and bidding our friends farewell: that is
the riches, and honors, and pleasures of this world, that there is no time
left to seek the kingdom: but follow me, is turned to, follow us, Christ
must follow our sins, and come after our pleasures, or else he shall not be
served at al. When we were Children, we deferred till we were men: when we are
men, we defer till we be old men, when we are old men, we defer till
death: in all our life we find no leisure to live well, but flit from sin
to sin, from wicked thoughts to wicked speeches, from wicked speeches to wicked
deeds, as the fly skippeth from scab to scab, until we be cast so far
behind, that we have no courage to go forward, or else straied so far out of
our way, that we care not to seek it again. Therefore I cannot say to you as
Christ said: First seek the kingdom of heaven, for then you should have
sought it long ago, but now I must say with the Apostle, Redeem the time, and
at last, Seek the kingdom of heaven. For it is to be feared, that as little
flies when many came together, plagued and destroyed the Egyptians: so short
hours, but many in sin and security will steal away our whole life, and
deceive our repentance, while we live like beasts longer then Nabuchadnezzar.
There be not many Lots, but many linger like Lot, loath to depart, until they
see the fire burn. If the Angel had not snatched him away, Lot had perished
with Sodom for his delay.

There be not five foolish Virgins, and five wise, but five for one knock when
the door is shut. There be not many Simeons, but many as old as Simeon, which
never yet embraced Christ in their hearts. They thought to repent before they
were so old, yet now they doat for age, they are not old enough to repent
yet. Nay I answer, many Masters of Israel, Majors, Aldermen, Sheriffs,
Justices, Ba^liffes, Constables, Gentlemen, know no more what it is to be borne
again; than Nicodemus which came by night: line after line, sermon after
sermon, and the Black more like himself. All their terms are vacations, all
their religion, promises; and all their promises hypocrises. In stead of
catechizing their children, as Solomon teaches them, they catechize them to
hunt and hawke, to ride and vaute, to ruffle and swear, to game and dance, as
they were catechized themselves; least the child should prove better than his
father, and then he is qualified like a Gentleman. Is this to seek the
kingdom of heaven first, or last, or not at all? Woe to the security, woe to
the stubbornness, woe to the drowsiness of this age. The thief comes at
midnight, and we sleep till the dawning of the day; we let in satan, before
we bid him avoid; we sell our birthright, before it come to our hands; we seek
for oil, when our lamps should burn: this day passes like yesterday, and
to morrow we will spend like this day. So he which should have the first
fruits, can get no fruits, because we mar the ground before we sow it.

Consider this, ye which might have known a thousand things more than ye do,
if ye had begun when Solomon taught you.

God will not always knock at the door, Christ will not always clock like an
Hen, John will not always cry in the wilderness; but mercy is in the
foreward, and judgment in the rereward. They which can say now, We have a
prophet; shall say, We had a prophet, but we entertained him like the
Gergesites: so God sent him away from us like Jonah to the Ninevites, when the
Israelites despised him. Yet Wisdom cries in the streets, Let every Joseph
store up before the famine come: for he which promises thee pardon when thou
do return, does not promise that to morrow thou shall return. Repentance
is a gift, and a gift must be taken when it is offered. The time past is gone,
and thou can not recall that to repent in; the time to com is uncertain, and
thou can not assure that to repent in; the present time is only thine, and
thou may repent in that: but anon that will be gone too. Therefore, as
Samuel began to serve God in his minority, as Timothy read the Scriptures in
his childhood, and John grew in spirit as he rypened in years; so whether
thou be old or young thy repentance cannot come too soon, because thy sin is
gone before. If thou lackest a spur to make thee run, see how every day
runs away with thy life, youth comes upon childhood, age comes upon
youth, death comes upon age, with such a swift sail; that if all our minutes
were spent in mortifying our selves, yet our glass would be run out, before
we had purged half our corruptions. All these examples and sentences, and
Proverbs, and reasons do cry with Solomon, Remember thy Creator in the days of
thy youth. This is the Kings commendation or greeting to the College of youth.
But how should young men remember God, when old men forget him? If Noah be
drunk, who shall rebuke Cham? It is time to remember GOD in age, or to forget
him for ever. Therefore as the Isralites gathered twice so much Manna the day
before the Sabboath as they gathered any day before that, because they might
not gather upon the Sabbath; so the gray head which looks every day for the
last Sabbath when he shall rest in the grave, should pray twice as much, hear
twice as much, do twice as much, to prepare the sacrifice of his body and
soul ready and acceptable unto GOD; because the night is at hand, when he
cannot hear, nor pray, nor repent any more. It is said, the Devil is very
busy because his time is short, but an old man's is shorter. What haste should
he make, that must go farther than the Mores, than the Sun in a year, or a
mouth, or a week, which the Saints were going all their life. Therefore, if
youth had need of legs, age had need of wings to fly unto God. But as
Christ said, The poor receive the Gospel, though the rich be more bound; so
we may say, the young men receive the Gospel, though the old men have more
cause.

The young men follow Christ, the young men hear the word, the young men
sanctify themselves, the young men stand for the church, the young men bear
the heat of this day: old Noah is drunk, old Lot is sleepie old Sampson
has lost his strength. Once the younger brother did steal the blessing from
the elder, and now he has got it again, as the malice of Esau shows, which
persecutes him for it. I speak it to their shame, they that wear the furs
and scarlets, as though they were all wisdom, and gravity, and holiness even
to the skirtes, may say as Zedechias said to Micaiah, When did the spirit
depart from me and go to thee? When did zeal depart from us, and go to you?
They are so nouseled to the world, and acquainted with sin, that it is too
late now for the world to speak unto them; they may look upon the signs of
wisdom, and gravity, and holiness, when they see their long beards, and gray
heads, and side gowns, and ask why is this bush hanged out, and no wine
within? What marvel then if they be not reverenced, but mocked and pointed at,
when Sem and Iaphet had need to come again, and cover their nakedness? What a
shame was it to the Israelites, when Christ said by a Canaanite, I have not
found so great faith in Israel? So what a shame is it to the elders, that
Christ may say again, I have not found so great faith nor knowledge nor zeal
in Masters, and Fathers, and Rulers, as in servants, and children, and
prentises? Which made an old Father of this City say, which now is with God,
that if there were any good to be done in these days, it is the young men that
must do it, for the old men are out of date, their courage stoopes like their
shoulders, their zeal is withered, like their brows; their faith staggereth
like their feet, and their religion is dead before them. Be assured of this
that ye are come to that time which your selves set to repent: and yet as
though there were another age to repent after old age: for you spend old age
like youth, as if you were appointed to die in your sins. God has chosen the
weak things says Paul, 1. Cor. 1. so I may say, God has chosen the young
things to do his work: as if the Lord had spoken to you in his wrath,
Fathers I will provoke you by your children, Masters I will provoke you by your
servants, as once he threatened to prouoake the Jews by the Gentiles.
Therefore be of good cheer young Daniel, young Samuel, young Timothy, though our
adversaries be as the Aramites, yet there be mo with us, than against us. Flesh
and blood could not overcome flesh and blood: but if you be sanctified, it is
the spirit which has sanctified you; for the devil would not go out, unless
a stronger than the devil had entered the house; when you come to be richer,
and elder like Demas, then take heed that ye do not embrace the world as Demas
did, and turn to that which ye condemn. The vine would not leave her grapes,
nor the olive her fatnes, nor the fig tree her sweetness to be a King, but the
bramble did; he is not a vine, nor an olive, nor a fig tree, but a bramble,
made for the fire, which leaves his righteousness to become worse. He which is
of the Church, will say with the Church, I have washed my feet, how should I
defile them again? Let the dog turn to his vomit, and the swine to their
walloing, but hold thou on thy sacrifice like Abraham to the evening of thy
life, and a full measure shall be measured unto thee, as thou have measured thy
self. Unto the which measure without measure, the Lord Jesus bring us.

FINIS.
THE TRIAL OF THE RIGHTEOUS.
PSALM. 34. 19. Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers
him out of all.
THe sum of this verse is, as if he should say, Let the Righteous look for
mo troubles than other, and likewise let the^ hope for greter comforts than
other: for when they are well, they shall be eclipsed again, to show that
their light was but borrowed; and when they are eclipsed, their light shall
return, to show their difference from them whom God hates, which fall from
plague to plague, as they run from sin to sin.

This verse has three parts, for here the righteous are the agents, their
condition troubles, and the Lord their deliverer: so many things fall out
contrary unto our minds, every day, that he which wants patience in this
world, is like a man which stands trembling in the field without his armor,
because every one can strike him, and he can strike none: so the least push
of pain, or loss, or disgrace, does trouble that man more, which has not the
skill to suffer, than twenty trials can move him which is armed with patience,
like a golden shield in his hand, to break the stroke of every cross, and
save the heart though the body suffer: for while the heart is whole, all is
well. A sound spirit (says Solomon) will bear his infirmity: but a wounded
spirit, what can sustain? Pro. 19. 14. Therefore as the lid is made to open
and shut, to save the eye: so patience is set to keep the soul, and save the
heart whole, to cheer the body again. Therefore if you mark, when you can
go by an offense, and take a little wrong, and suffer a trouble quietly, you
have a kind of peace and joy in your heart, as if you had gotten a victory;
and the more your patience is, still the less your pain is. For as a light
burden borne at the arms end, weighs heuier by much, than a burden of
treble weight, if it be borne upon the shoulders, which are made to bear: so,
if a man set impatience to bear his cross, which is not fit to bear; it will
grumble, and murmur and start, and shrink, and let the burden fall upon his
head like a broken staff, which promises to help him over the waters, and
leaves him in the ditch. But if you put it to patience, and set her to bear
it which is appointed to bear, she is like the hearty Spies that came from
Canaan, Josh. 2.
and said, It is nothing to overcome them: so patience says, it is nothing to
bear, it is nothing to fast, it is nothing to watch, it is nothing to labor,
it is nothing to be envied, it is nothing to be backbited, it is nothing to be
imprisoned: Romans 8. 37.
In all these things (says Paul) we are more then Conquerours. As though all
these things came not to make us mourners, but to make us Conquerours, nay more
than Conquerours, because a Conqueror conquereth his enemy but once: but we
conquer these as often as Christ did the tempter. Thus all is in the manner of
bearing, which makes persecution seem joyful to some, and irksome to
others, which makes poverty welcome to one, and bitter to another; which
makes him sing in his sickness, as if he were whole, and thee rave and whine,
and curse, as if thou were not sick but frantic: Therefore Christ's yoke is
called an easy yoke, Matthew. 11.
because it is easy to some, that is, to them which have skill to bear it, as
Christ did bea^e it; by his infinite patience, he suffered infinite pains for
infinite sins. Patience was like a privy coat upon his soul, that when the
Devil stroke at him, he was stricken himself: when death came to kill him he
was killed himself; and all their shot could not hurt him, because of his
preservative which he had about him, Iud. 16. 17.
like Sampsons hair, which saved him from all his enemies. If the Master
carried patience about him for to guard him through these pykes of troubles,
Genesis 3.
which stand like the fiery sword between us and paradise: how can the
servant escape then, unless he be armed as his Master was? For what has the
poor man to bear his wants? what has the bondsman to bear his griefs? what
has the sick man to bear his pains? but to lay all upon the shoulders of
patience, and to say with Jeremy, This is my sorrow, Iere. 10. 19.
and I will bear it. As the tree which Moses cast into the Spring, seasoned
the bitterness of the Waters; Exodus 25. 25
so patience cast into our troubles, seasoneth the bitterness of the Cross, and
is in stead of an assistaunt to every man, to overcome his troubles, like the
Armor-bearer, 1. Sam. 14.
which help Jonathan to vanquish his enemies.

She has a device to draw such a skin over our soars, that shall make our
poverty seem riches, our reproaches seem honor, our bondage seem liberty,
our labor seem rest, our sorrow seem joy, our pain seem ease, our
sickness seem health, and all that hurts us, rejoice us; until we say with
David. Thy judgments are pleasant; showing, that Gods justice is as pleasant
to the patient, as his mercies to others. Therefore what a peacemaker were
this in the Commonwealth, if the Magistrate had patience to bear his envy, if
the Preacher had patience to bear his study, if the creditor had patience to
bear his losses, if the bondman had patience to bear his service, if the
husbandman had patience to bear his labor, if the sick man had patience to
bear his pain, if the poor man had patience to bear his wants: for want
whereof, many think themselves in hell, and say, that no man's pain is like
their pain, no man's wants like their wants, no mansfoes like their foes, no
man's wrongs like their wrongs, when they can scarce tell where their pain
holds them.

Therefore, albeit few can brook of Humility, and Charity, and Meekness,
and Thankfulness, and Temperance, and those severe virtues, which pull from
pleasure; yet every man does wish for patience, like a Physician to ease his
grief, by all means that he can: so they which are wicked, although they
cannot see the goodness of other virtues, yet can see the goodness of patience,
and perceive when they see a patient man, and an impatient man both sick of
one disease, yet both are not troubled alike; but that he which has most
patience, has most ease: and he which is most impatient, is most tormented,
like a fish which strives with the hook. Therefore even those which cannot
suffer, that they might have rest, yet sing the patie^ Proverb, In sufferance
is rest. This is a lesson which I know you would gladly learn, even as Pharaoh
longed to know his dream, Genesis 41. 15.
though ye care not for virtue, as the cruel Judge cared not for charity. Yet
if you could gain such a bargain by any virtue to ease you of your pains, it
would make you look unto virtue, as Pharaoh used Moses, Exo. 9. 28.
but to remove the plagues.

This power God has given to patience, the medicinable virtue, that it should
be like an wholesome herb in the world, or a general Physician for all
persons and all diseases. Therefore when the Angel had recorded all the
troubles which should come in the latter days: at last he concludes, Here is
the patience of Saints: Apo. 13. 10.
as though patience should bear all. Therefore so many scriptures go like
preachers about the Bible, to exhort unto patience, like a Beacon which is set
up to call men together, showing us, that by patience we possess our souls:
Luke 8.
as though a man without patience had no rule of himself: that a man's wisdom
is known by his patience, Prou. 9.
as though that he which is not patient, cannot be wise: that by patience we
receive the promises, Heb. 10.
though the promises did not belong unto us, unless we have patience: Romans 5.
4.
that patience breeds experience, and experience hope, as though he which
wants patience, had no experience of GOD, to know the scope of his doings,
nor any hope to comfort him about the life to come: Romans 8.
besides many reasons more, That the afflictions of this world are not worthy
of the joys that succeed them: that all things (even our afflictions) turn to
the best, if we love God: Matthew. 5.
that they are blessed which weep here, because they shall laugh hereafter:
2. Tim. 2.
that if we suffer with Christ, we shall reign with Christ: that the Lord
does love those whom he chasteneth: Prou. 3.
that by suffering we are made like the Son of GOD, whose life was a
persecution, as though the holy Ghost by often calling upon us, like the
importunate woman, would compel us to be patient, Luke 18.
whether our flesh will or no.

Besides these honorable praises of patience, the Prophets, Evangelists, and
Apostles, have a set number of examples before our eyes, like banners of such
cures as have been healed by her: that as the Author of the Hebrews says,
Heb. 11.
By faith Abel offered a better Sacrifice than Caine: by faith Enoch was
translated before he saw death: by faith Noah prepared the Arc and was
preserved from the Flood: by faith Abraham was content to sacrifice his Son,
and yet believed that in his seed all the world should be blessed: by faith
Sara received strength to bring forth a child, when she was strooken in years,
and past the strength of the womb. So I may say of patience: by patience Job
did bear all the torments that the devil could heap upon him: Job. 1.
by patience Jacob put up a thousand wrongs from Laban and his children, Genesis
29. 50. 31
and never complained in one and twenty years before he departed: by patience
Joseph forgave his brethren, Genesis 45. 15.
when he might have put them to death, and gave the^ food when they feared
revenge: by patience Christ suffered banishment, and reproaches, and scourges,
until he went to his death, like a Lamb to the slaughter.

Among the strange cures of patience, David may report of his experience, what
this plaster has done for him: for being a figure of Christ, he was always
hedged about with the cross, which proved his patience like a Touchstone
every day. As Christ was contemned of his Countrymen, so David was contemned
of his brethren: 1. Sam. 26. 2* 28. 2.
as Christ fled to Egypt, so David fled unto Gath: as Christ received food of
women, Luke 8. 2.
so David received food of Abigail: 1. Sa. 25. 18* 19. 2. 16. 13.
as Herod persecuted Christ, so Saul persecuted David: and the wrath of the
King brought many enemies with it, that when he was anointed, yet he could
not reign: and when he reigned, yet his reign was but a warfare: 2. Sam. 8.
2. 6, 5, 6, 15, 4, 18, 33.
the Philistines against him, the Ammonites against him, the Edomites against
him, the Moabites against him, and Absolon his own bowels against him, for
whom he cried, Would God I had died for thee. This son which was his
dearling, was his traitor, and sought his death that brought him to life, as
though Saul had been risen from the grave again. In all these troubles Samuel
shows what was this pilgrims comfort: 1. Sam. 30. 6
But David comforted himself in the Lord his God, as though he had no comfort
but in GOD alone. This was the stone upon which he leaned his head, Be patient,
for Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of
all. When he did behold his trouble, 2. Kin. 6. 10
like the host of the Aramites, he looked back unto God like Elisha, and
spied one with him stronger then all against him. Therefore respecting his
afflictions, he cries, Many are the troubles of the righteous: respecting the
promise, he sings, The Lord delivers them out of all. Thus (by his own
foot) David measures the condition of the righteous, and says, Many are the
troubles of the righteous: and then by his own cure he shows how they shall
be healed, saying, The Lord will deliver him out of all. If ye mark, the
spirit has directed David to those two things, which make us take our
troubles grieously: one because we do not look for them before they come.
Therefore, John. 21. 28
as Christ told Peter before he suffered, to strengthen him when he suffered:
so the holy Ghost does run upon the Cross, to keep us in expectation of
troubles, that we might prepare faith, and patience, and constancy for the^,
as Noah prepared an Arc for the flood. The second thing which makes us to
start so at the Cross, is, because we are like the Prophets servant, 2. King.
6.
which did see his foes, but not his friends: so we see our sore, but not our
salve. Comfort seems a far off, Luke 16.
like Abraham in the heavens, as though it would never come so low: therefore
we go about to deliver our selves, Psalm. 2.
as it is said, Let us break his bands, as though we could deliver our selves.
But, Hold your peace (says Moses) the Lord shall fight for you. Exo. 14. 14.
So David comes in like a pacifier, and says: Vex not your selves, for the
Lord will deliver you. Bear both these sentences in mind, that you must go
through a sea of troubles, and then that you shall come to a haven of rest, and
no affliction shall take you, before you be armed for it, and in every trouble
you shall know where to have your remedy. Many are the troubles of the
righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of all. Here be the two hands of
God like a wound and a plaster: one casts down, and the other raises up.
It is good for a man to know his troubles before they come, because
afflictions are lightened in the expectation. Therefore GOD says of Paul, I
will show him how many things he shall suffer for me. Act. 9. 16.
God deals plainly, and tells us the woorst at the first, what we shall
trust to, as Christ told his Disciples at the first: Math. 16. 8
If ye will be my Disciples, ye must take up the Cross: cold entertainment
to break their fast with the rod. Luke 9.
Other feastmakers (says Christ) broach the best wine first, Ioh. 2. 10.
but Christ himself keeps the best till the last. This is the manner of Gods
proceedings, to send good after evil, Genesis 1. 3.
as he made light after darkness: to turn justice into mercy, Ioh. 2.
as he turned water into wine: for as the beasts must be killed before they
could be sacrificed, so men must be killed before they can be sacrificed, that
is, the knife of correction must prune them, and dress them, and lop off their
rotten twigs before they can bring forth fruit, these are the cords which
bind the ram unto the Altar, least when he is brought thither he should run
from thence again, this is the chariot which carries our thoughts to heaven,
as it did Nabuchadnezzars, and our assumption before our assumption. This is
the hammer which squareth the rough stones, till they be plain and smooth, and
fit for the Temple. This is the fierce messenger, which is sent to compel them
to the banquet, which will not come when they are invited. Because we are
naturally given to love the world, more then is good for us, therefore God has
set an edge of bitterness upon it, to make us to loath it, like a Nurse which
lays Mustard upon her breasts to weane the child from the dug: so Many are
the troubles of the righteous, Ioh. 8. 2.
to weane us from the dugge of the world. The cross is one of our
Schoolemasters in this life, and the best wisdom is dearest bought:
prosperity seeks for nothing, but necessity seeks, and studieth, and
labors, and prays for her wants. As the rod makes the Scholar to
apply his book, so all our knowledge is beaten into us: some learn their
goodness of poverty, some of sickness, some of troubles: adversity is the
fit time to learn the justice, mercy, power, and providence of GOD, a fit
time to learn the patience, wisdom, faith, and obedience of man, a fit time
to learn the subtlety, frailty, and misery of this world. All this thou
buyest for troubles, yet they are but troubles, not plagues, nor cursses, nor
torments, but like the travels of a woman, when the birth is ripe, she is
delivered, and straight she forgets all her pains, for joy that a man
child is borne into the world. So the servants of God travel but till the
fruits be ripe. When the new man is borne, their travels are ended, and they
forget all their troubles, because one is borne into the world, like the son
of God. This is the difference between the afflictions of the righteous and the
ungodly.

When GOD does visit the wicked, Exodus 8. 6.
his punishments are called plagues and curses, and destructions; John. 4.
the plagues of Egypt, the curse of Cain, the destruction of Sodom. But when
he does visit the righteous, his punishments are called corrections, John. 19.
and chastisements, and rods, which proceed from a father, not to destroy us,
Genesis 36.
but to try us, and purge us, and instruct us: therefore when we are
afflicted, one says, that God lets us blood to save our lives, for our
lives are rank, and must be lopped. As Jacob was blessed, and halted both at
one time; so a man may be blessed and afflicted together. Afflictions do not
hinder our happiness, but our happiness comes by affliction, as Jacobs
blessing came with halting, and as peace is procured by war. Mat. 5.
Therefore blessed are ye (says Christ) when men persecute you: as though they
were blessed even while they were persecuted. Therefore this must not dismay
us, that the scripture says, 1. Tim 3.
Many are the troubles of the righteous; but rather rejoice us, hecause we
bear the marks of the righteous. Daniel complayneth not of his sickness, but
of his sins. Who shall fight the Lords battles but the Lords servant?
Therefore when David spoke of many troubles, he pointed to the righteous, as if
he should say; this is your share, the rod is made for the Child. Christ
called the Cross his cup. The servant is beloved that drinks of his Masters
cup: Mat. 20.
Therefore Christ teaches it to the righteous, and bids none but his disciples
take the Cross: Mat 11.
every man which has his heaven here, Genesis 3.
does labor and sweat for his living, and shall not they which have their
hell here, suffer more then they which have their heaven here? All men are
subject to dangers and losses, and sickness: But all that believe in Christ
(says Paul) shall suff^^ persecution. 2. Tim. 4.
That is, more then dangers, or losses, or sickness which the wicked suffer,
for the world will not persecute her children, but she will persecute Gods
Children: therefore this church is called the militant church, because it is
always in warfare. Therefore the Gospel is called the word of the Cross, as
though it came to cross us: Therefore Paul describing the way to heaven, Acts.
14. 22
draws by this line, by many tribulations: the Cross way is the way to
heaven and the righteous walk in it. Mat. 21.
Therefore the Children of God are not only called laborers, to show what they
should do for God, 2. Tim. 2. 3.
but they are called Soldiers, to show what they should suffer for GOD. Ioh.
15. 20.
The servant is not above his master: but if Christ should suffer, and we
should rest the servant were above his Master. The prophecy must be fulfilled.
I will put enmity between the seed of the woman and the seed of the
Serpent: Genesis 3.
but if there be no war between the children of God and the children of the
world, the prophecy is not fulfilled. Therefore Esau and Jacob had no sooner
life, but they began to struggle one with another, before they came out of
their mothers womb. Therefore Abraham was banished so soon as he received the
promise. Therefore Abell was envied of his brother, Genesis 25. 22. 4. 14.
so soon as he was accepted of God. The righteous man was always like Lot
among the Sodomites, and like Sampson among the Philistines, set a work by
his enemies. As Christ was no sooner borne, but Herod sought his life; so the
new man is no sooner borne of the spirit, Matthew. 2.
but the serpent is ready to devour him, his brethren to banish him, and hell
to swallow him. In all the world he has no friend, but he which made the
world. This is the state of the church militant: she is like the Arc floating
upon the waters, like a Lilly growing among thorns, Exodus 3. 2.
like the bush which burned with fire and was not consumed, so the city of God
is always besieged, but never ruined. Christians and persecutions close
together, like Christ and his Cross. As Christ was made to bear his own
cross: so they are made to hold their cheeks to the nippers, Luke 23. 33
their faces to be buffeted, John 19. 17
their backs to be scourged, their eyes to be pulled out, their peace is
persecution, their rest labor, their riches poverty, their glory reproaches,
their liberty imprisonment; although they be the sons of God, the brethren
of Christ, the only heirs of heaven; yet because they suffer their hell
here, they must be contented to be subject to their enemies, to be abiects
to their kinsmen, Psalm 69. 8, 7, 1, 7.
to be hated of most, to be contemned of all, to be persecuted over the earth,
a very haven and receptacle of all troubles. Yet as Christ was the son of
God, though his life was nothing but persecution; Luk 10. 35.
so the righteous are the sons of God, for all these troubles: This is like a
bayte in their journey, to think as the Samaritan told his host, if thou
spend any more I will recompense thee when I come. So Christ will mende their
wages, when he comes. Why should not God try his friends, as well as we try
our friends, the same afflictions (says Peter) are accomplished in others,
nay, greater afflictions are borne of other, which would make us despair
like Caine, Christ was consecrated by afflictions, therefore we cannot be
consecrated without afflictions, who would not go to heaven with Eliah, though
it were in a whirlewind? if our troubles be light and few, it is because we are
weak and tender: 1. Cor. 10. 13
therefore God does respect our feeblenes, and lays no more upon us, because
we are not able to bear more. It is not a sign that we are righteous,
because our troubles are few; but because our troubles are few, it is rather a
sign that we are not righteous, because Many are the troubles of the
righteous. For they must be made examples of patience, they must suffer their
hell here, they must be squared for the temple, therefore they must have many
strokes to make them fit: God is not like a Waspe, which when she has
stoong once, cannot sting again: but there is a generation of crosses, and a
plurality of troubles. When David spoke of trouble, he spoke of troops and
heaps, and stars, and sands, and therefore he says, Many, as though he were
feign to lay them down in the gross sum because he could not reckon them. By
many tribulations (says Paul) but how many he could not number: Act. 14.
For except our sins, there is not such plenty of any thing in the world, as
there is of troubles, which come from sin: as one heavy messenger came to Job
one after another: Job. 1. 14. 16.
so now we are not in Paradise, but in the wilderness, Psalm. 42. 7. 18. 19.
we must look for one trouble after another; therefore afflictions are called
waters, because as one wave falls upon another, so one trouble falls upon
the head of another.

As a Bear came to David after a Lion, 1. Sa. 17. 34
and a Giant after a Bear, and a King after a Giant, and Philistines after the
King: so when they have fought with poverty, they shall fight with envy: when
they have fought with envy, they shall fight with infamy: when they have
fought with infamy, they shall fight with sickness, like a labourer which is
never out of work. This you see the righteous in troubles, like the Israelites
in exile: Now the Lord comes like Moses to deliver them: Exodus 3. 10.
adversity seeks out the promise; the promise seeks out faith; faith
seeks out prayer; then God hears, and mercy answers. All this while
Christ seemed to sleep, as he did in the ship: now he rebukes the winds
and waves, Math. 8. 26
and troubles fly before him, like a troop of Woolues before the Shepherd.
As he asked the adultresse, where are thy accusers? and she said they are gone:
so he may ask his patients, where are your troubles? and they may say, they
are gone: the sun rose, and the mists vanished: yet (says David) God is good
to all that are pure in heart: that is, he remembers them while he afflicts
them, and is preparing an issue while the cross prepares them. When Christ
heard them say, he whom thou love is sick, he answered, this sickness is not
to death. Ioh. 11. 3. So when it may be said, he whom God loves is sick: then
it may be said, this sickness is not unto death, and though it be to the first
death, yet not to the second. Ion. 3.
Who would think when Jonas was in the sea, that he should preach at Niniuie?
Dan. 4.
who would think when Nabuchadnezzar was in the forest, that he should reign
again in Babel? who would think when Joseph was banished of his brethren, that
his brethren should seek unto him, like his servants: who would think when Job
scraped his sores upon the dunghill, Job 1. 42. 10
all his houses were burned, all his ^attell stolen, and all his Children dead,
that he should be richer then ever he was? Exo. 15. 21.
these are the acts of mercy which make the righteous sing: The Lord has
triumphed valiantly. This is the privilege of the righteous, Mal. 3. 6.
as God says Ye sons of Jacob are not consumed. So they answer again. 1.
Cor. 4. 6.
We are not consumed. Therefore (Paul says) we are in distress, but we are
not forsaken: Luke 24. 6.
as Christ rose out of his grave, so we shall rise out of trouble; and when the
gold is fined, the fire shall hold it no longer. When Jesus was in banishment
with Mary and Joseph, at last the Angel came and said, John. 2. 3
They are dead which sought the childs life: so when the days of our
banishment and scarsitie, and bondage, and sickness are ended, Mat. 2. 20.
at last tidings shall come that our troubles are dead, and then the righteous
shall look up like Moses, when he was past the sea, and see all their
enemies, all their troubles drowned behind them; then the heart shall dance
like Miriam, and sing the song which sounded before Moses: Exodus 30. 15 20. 34.
The Lord, the Lord is strong, merciful and gracious, slow to anger, but
abundant in goodness and truth. And if David had stayed at troubles, and
spoken of nothing but rods, the wicked might say as they do in the 115.
Psalm. Psalm. 115.
Where is their God? and the righteous might complain with David, Psalm. 3.
I have cleansed my heart in vain: but as the waters of the sea flow and ebb
again, so the waters of affliction flow and ebb again, one casts Moses into
the water, and another draws him out of the water. There lies Lazarus at the
gate, there lies Joseph in prison, there lies Jeremy in the dungeon, there
lies Job in the Ashes, there lies Jacob in the fields, there lies David in the
wilderness, there lies Abraham in exile, there lies Daniel among the Lions,
there lies the children in the Furnace: Genesis 25. 20.
at last comes the year of Iubile, and all the prisoners of the Lord are set
at liberty, therefore they are called the prisoners of hope, because they may
hope to be delivered, etc. Therefore God translateth his Cross from the head to
the heart, from the heart to the foot, from poverty to sickness, from
sickness to labor: that wheresoever he places it, we might have patience,
Zach. 9. 1.
knowing that he can remove it as he places it.

Then are fulfilled all these sweet scriptures: The Lord retains not his
wrath for ever, because mercy pleases him. Mich. 7. 8. After two days he
will revive us, and the third day he will raise us up. Ose. 6. 2. Surely there
is an end, and thy hope shall not be cut off. Prouer. 23. 18. Heaviness may
endure for a night, but joy will come in the morning. Psalm. 30. 5. He which
has overcome death, and Satan, and the world, can easily overcome all the
troubles in the world: 1. Kin. 17. 6
rather then Eliah shall starve, the Ravens shall feed him: Jonah. 1.
rather then Jonah shall drown, Luke 16.
the fish shall save him: as when the Glutton did not pity, the Dogs took
compassion. Until David says, The Lord will deliver, the righteous and the
wicked go together, Luke 17.
but now they part, one is taken and the other is refused, one is delivered,
the other is left in prison. As Abraham came not to deliver the Sodomits, Gen
14 16.
but to deliver his brethren: so Christ came not to deliver his enemies, but to
deliver his servants: not to deliver them from troubles, but to deliver the^
out of troubles, Job. 1. 21.
that they may say as well, The Lord has taken, as the Lord has given. As
David gave charge to his Soldiers, that they should not kill Absolon his
son, 2. Sa. 18. 5.
though he sent them against Absolon, to stay his rebellion: so God forbids his
crosses to destroy his children, though he send them against his children to
purge their corruptions. As the Angel passed by the houses of the Israelits,
when he saw the blood of the lamb upon their doors: Exo. 12. 13.
so God has his marks, whereby he knows whom he should deliver out of
trouble, and whom he should leave in trouble: to one he says, Take my cross:
to another he says, Be thou healed: to another he says, Stay till thy time
comes: every hard word may be spoken to the godly as well as the wicked, but
that deadly word, Depart into everlasting fire. Matthew. 25.
Although they seem to depart here, yet then it shall be said, come and not
depart. As John after the voice of thunder heard the voice of harpers: Revel.
14. 2.
so when they have bin beaten, they shall be cherished: therefore the trials of
the righteous, though they be called many troubles, yet they are not called
everlasting troubles.

As David says here, Psalm 32. 10
Many are the troubles of the righteous: so in Psalm. 32. 10. he says. Many
are the sorrows of the righteous: but it follows, the Lord will deliver them
out of all: Prou. 11. 8.
nay (says Solomon) when the righteous escape out of trouble, the wicked shall
come in his stead, that is, the troubles of the righteous shall shift to the
ungodly, 1 Kin. 3. 27.
as the leprosy of Naaman went to Gehezi: Prou. 21. 18
and therefore the wicked are called the ransom of the just, because they lie
in bail for them. As one bird chirpeth to another, so one plague shall whistle
to another, and say, come and help me to torment this sinner, Exo 8. 9.
(for one plague will not serve the Egyptians) until he be so laden with
torments, Gen 4.
that he cry like Caine, My punishment is greater then I can bear. The
righteous never said, that their troubles were more, or greater, or longer,
then they could bear. For God has promised, he will not lay more upon them
then they are able to bear: 1. Cor 10. 13.
but when they begin to sink like Peter upon the Sea, then the hand is ready
to catch them, and straight GOD makes an issue for their troubles. Acts. 27.
As the Viper lept upon Paul, and lept off again, so troubles leap upon the
righteous, and leap off again; as though they had mistaken the party, and
rapt at the wrong door. Psalm. 37 37.
Therefore, Mark the upright man (says David) and behold the just, for the
end of that man is peace. Though his beginning be trouble, 55 23.
yet his end is peace: He will not suffer the righteous to fall for ever: he
says not that he will not suffer him to fall, but that he shall not fall for
ever: that is, at last his shackel falls from him, the net breaks, the
prison opens, and he goes forth like Lazarus out of his grave, to show what
wonderful things the Lord has done for him: So Paul after he had spoken of
his troubles, (as thought he thought upon this sentence of David) repeateth
the same of himself, saying: But the Lord delivered me out of all. 2. Tim. 3.
Therefore one calls affliction the trance of the righteous, because they
seem dead for a while, but they wake again: therefore they challenge their
enemies (and say) Rejoice not against me O mine enemy: Mich. 7. 8.
for though I fall, yet I shall rise.

This should content the righteous, to be delivered at last, as David quieteth
himself, saying: By this I know the Lord favors me, because mine enemies
do not triumph over me: Psalm. 41. 11
not because I have no enemies, or because I have no troubles which would
overcome me. Therefore when he wrote down. Many troubles, he blotteth it (as
it were) with his pen again, as a Merchant raceth his book when the debt is
discharged: and in stead of many troubles, he puts in, The Lord delivers.
Because he forgiueth all sins, he is said to deliver from all troubles, to
show that we have need of no Savior, no helper, no comforter but him.

The Lawyer can deliver his client but from strife, the Physician can deliver
his patient but from sickness, the Master can deliver his servant but from
bondage, but The Lord (says David) delivers out of all. As when Moses came
to deliver the Israelites, he would not leave an hoof behind him, so when the
Lord comes to deliver the righteous, he will not leave a trouble behind him,
but even as they pray in 25. Psalm. Psalm. 25.
Deliver Israel O Lord out of all her troubles: so he will answer them, B^
thou delivered out of al thy troubles, that is, this, and this, and this, that
trouble that thou think intolerable, that trouble which thou think
incurable, the almighty has might against all. Job. 24.
When Job is tried, not a sore shall stick upon him. 2. King. 6.
Therefore as Elisha feared not when he saw as many angels as enemies, so now
you see as many mercies as troubles: let the comfort satisfy you which
satisfied Paul, Act. 27. 24.
Fear not, for I am with thee, thy pardon is coming, Genesis 22.
like the Angel which staid the sword over Isaacks head. Read on but a little
further, and thou shall hear the voice which proclaimed war, proclayme
peace: many troubles in the beginning of the verse, and no troubles in the
end. What Physician has been here? The Lord (says David) the Lord was in
this place (says Jacob) and I knew it not: So the Lord is in affliction and
men know it not, he which says, I put away thine iniquities, Genesis 28 16.
must say, I put away thy infirmity. For there is no Savior but one, Esa 43
25.
which says to death, Math. 9. 29
I will be thy death. As the woman was sick until Christ came: so until the
Lord come, there is nothing but trouble. Many troubles of the righteous, but
one deliverer of the righteous: many tortours, but one Comforter. Troubles
come in an hundred ways, like waters through a grate: but mercy enters
always at one door like a pardon which comes only from the Prince:
therefore says GOD, In me is thy help. Hos. 11. 6. I create comfort, Esaias.
65. Mark, that he calls himself a creator of comfort: that is, as there is
but one Creator, so there is but one Comforter, and as he created all things
of nothing, so he creates comfort of nothing: that is, when all comfort is
worn out, and no seed of joy left to raise up comfort again: then he
brings comfort out of sorrow, as he brought water out of the rock, that we
may say, Exodus 17. 6. 8. 14.
The finger of the Lord has done this.

This is the anchor of the righteous. As he looks upon his troubles, the
promise comes in like a messenger from Christ, while he is praying, and
weeping, and says, The Lord will deliver thee out of all. Then he resolves
like Nehemiah, Nehe. 6. 11.
and says, Shall such a man as I fly? Shall such a man as I recant? If I be
faint in the day of adversity, Pro. 24. 10.
Solomon says, my strength is small: as if he should say, I was never
strong, but did counterfeite like Demas: if I want comfort in trouble, Solomon
says, Pro. 15. 15.
A good conscience is a continual feast. As if he should say, that I have not
a good conscience, if I have not comfort in the Cross. Therefore I will wait
the Lords leisure, Psalm. 2.
because Esaias says, Faith makes no have. I will not break his bands, because
then I am like the Heathen. I will not flatter the Judge, Pro. 29. 26.
because Solomon says it is vain. I will not betray the cause, because GOD
has appointed it to try me. Romans 14.
I will not offend my brethren, 1. Cor. 8. 10.
because Paul had rather dye than do so. I will not charge my conscience,
because it can vex me more than their bands. I will not turn from my
profession, because I learned it of GOD, and vowed to leave all for it, in the
day that I was baptized a Christian. Though my friends tempt me, like Jobs
wife: though my flesh flatter me, like Eve: though my persecutors would bribe
me, like Balaac: though they which suffer with me, should revolt for fear:
Josh. 24. 15.
yet I will be as Joshua which stood alone: 1 Samuel 1.
and as Elkanah was in stead of children to Annah, so Christ shall be in stead
of comfort, in stead of wealth, and health, and liberty to me. For many were
the troubles of Joseph, and the Lord delivered him out of all: many were the
troubles of Abraham, and the Lord delivered him out of all: many were the
troubles of David, and the Lord delivered him out of all: many were the
troubles of Job, and the Lord delivered him out of all: therefore he can
deliver me out of all. But if he do not (say Sidrach, Misaac, and Abednego)
yet we will not do evil to escape danger, because Christ has suffered more
for us. Hest. 4. 16.
Therefore, if I perish, I perish, says Hester. She was content that her life
should perish: but if my purse suffer, my money does but perish: if my body
be imprisoned, my pleasures do but perish: and who can tell when he has
suffered that which is appointed? Psalm. 75.
Therefore God says, When I see convenient time, will I execute judgment. Not
when thou do think it a convenient time, but when he does think it a
convenient time. 25. 5.
Therefore says David to the Lord, In thee do I trust all the day: that is, if
he come not in the morning, he will come at noone: if he come not at noone, he
will come at night: at one hour of the day he will deliver me: and then as the
calm was greater after the tempest, Mat. 28. 6.
than it was before, so my joy shall be sweeter after tears than it was
before: Psalm. 137.
the remembrance of Babylon will make us sing more joyful in Sion.

Thus David describes the journey of the righteous, Exo. 13. 17.
as if they should go through the sea, and the wilderness, as the Israelites
went to Canaan. Look not for ease nor pleasure in your way, but for beasts and
serpents, and thieves: until ye be past the wilderness all is straight, and
dark, and fearful but so soon as you are through the narrow gate, all is
large and goodly, and pleasant: as if you were in Paradise. Seeing then your
kingdom is not here, look not for a golden life in an iron world: but
remember that Lazarus does not mourn in heaven, Luke 16.
though he suffered pains upon earth: but the glutton mourns in hell, that
stayed not for the pleasures of heaven. To which pleasures the Lord Jesus bring
us, when this cloud of trouble is blown over us, Amen.

FINIS.
THE CHRISTIANS Practice.
Romans 12. 2. Be ye changed by the renewing of your minds, that ye may prove
what is the good will of God, acceptable and perfect.
WHen Christ sent forth his Disciples, he said unto them, Go preach and
baptize, Mat 21. 29
joining these two together, Preaching and Baptizing. This being the occasion
of our exercise, because I am to speak of Baptism, which is the Sacrament of
Regeneration, I could not choose a fitter Scripture then this which I handled
last, which speaks of the renu^ng of our minds: for when our minds are
renewed, then the vow which we made in Baptism is performed.

When Paul had forbidden the Romans to fashion themselves unto the world, he
shows them another fashion, which he calls The renewing of the mind. Psalm.
103. 5.
As the Eagle renueth her youth, so men must renew their minds. This fashion
is called the Wedding garment, Mat. 22. 12
which every man must wear that comes to the banquet of the King. As when men
have gone over one fashion after another, at last they come to the old fashion
again: so here Paul calls them to the old fashion again, Genesis 1. 26.
which was used in Adams time, that is, the Image and fashion wherein they were
created. Now the reason follows,

That they might prove what the will of God is, as if he should say, This shall
be the fruit of your regeneration, when your minds are renewed, you shall know
many things, which are hid from you; you shall be able to judge doctrines,
who preach truth, and who preach error; and you shall understand the will of
God, what he would have you do, and what he would have you fly, as if you
were in his bosom. As new wine will not abide but in new vessels; so this new
knowledge will not abide but in new minds. Mat. 9. 17.
The mind renewed knows God; so that this Scripture may be called the path to
knowledge, or the way to sound the mind of God, which is a secret that every
man longs to know, but the most turn a wrong leaf to find it, as Paul says
of Peter, Gal. 2. 14.
He looks a wrong way to the Gospel. When the serpent taught knowledge, he
said If ye eat the forbidden fruit, your eyes shall be opened, and you shall
know good and evil: but Paul says, Genesis 3. 5.
If ye will not eat the forbidden fruit, your eyes shall be opened and you
shall know good and evil. This is one reason why Paul would have them renew
their minds, That they might know the will of God Why? does not the word of
God teach us the will of God? Yes, but no man does understand this word, but he
which has a new mind: because as the Sun is not discerned by any light, but
by his own light: so no spirit can interpret the Scripture, but the same
spirit which wrote it, 1. Cor. 12. 3.
which is called the holy spirit, because it is holy, and because it makes
holy. Sin was the first veil which obscured man's understanding, Genesis 3. 7.
and till the cause of this eclipse be taken away, the Apostle says, that we
shall see but in part: 1. Cor. 13. 9.
that is, as the Sun may be seen in his eclipse, but he seems liker to
darkness then to light: so understanding may be seen in the wicked, but it is
liker ignorance then knowledge: therefore Paul makes knowledge one of the
fruits which bud out of righteousness.

They which have renewed their minds, says he, shall prove what the will of
God is: that is, they shall try all that they do hear, and learn by all
that they see, until they tract out the will and meaning of GOD. As the water
ingendreth Ice, and the Ice again ingendreth water, so knowledge begets
righteousness, and righteousness again begets knowledge, according to that in
Eccles. 2. 26 To a man that is good in his sight, God gives wisdom and
knowledge; therefore though ye have seen cunning Lawyers by much reading; and
expert Physicians by long study; yet you could never see a perfect and sound,
and judicial Divine without holiness. I cannot tell how, this knowledge is
rather feeling than learning in the abundance of the heart, or an extreme
study sent by God unto good men, like the Ram which was brought unto Abraham,
Genesis 22. 13
when he would sacrifice his Son.

As Solomon says, The knowledge of good things, Pro. 9. 10.
is understanding: so none but they which are holy have this understanding. He
which can say with David, Psalm. 119. 117.
I love thy law, and I keep thy precepts, may follow with David, I have more
understanding than my teachers, and know more then the ancient. Psalm. 45. 1.
He which cannot say with David, My heart meditateth a good matter, cannot
follow with David, My tongue is the pen of a ready Writer. This is, the
equity of God; they which are unwilling to obey, are not thought worthy to
know: for what should he do with his talent, Mat. 25.
which will not use it? He which forbiddes us to cast pearls before swine,
does stay his own hand from casting knowledge to the ungodly, they may know so
much as shall condemn them, but they never know what will save them. When
Christ heard Peter say, Mat. 16. 16
Thou art the Son of the living God: Christ answered; Flesh and blood has
not taught thee this; 17.
showing, that carnal men have not this knowledge. Mat. 19. 17
This is the word of which Christ says, All men do not receive it, It is
true, that the Spirit breaths where it will: John. 3. 8.
but it will breath upon none but her lovers. Wisdom is like the daughter of
God, which he marries to none but to him which loves her, and sues for her.
Psalm. 73. 17
As David could not understand why the wicked prospered until he entered into
the sanctuary of GOD; and as Aaron might not enter the Sanctuary where GOD did
answer, until he had sanctified himself; so if we will understand mysteries,
and hear God himself speak; we must put off our sins, Exo. 3. 5.
as Moses put off his shoes, or else we shall be like images which have ears,
Psalm. 115. 6.
and can not hear. When Paul heard mysteries, he was rapt into the third
heaven, 1. Cor. 12. 2.
when GOD would talk with his Church, he says, I will take her aside into
the wilderness, Ose. 2. 14.
and then I will speak friendly unto her: so when we will learn Divinity,
we must go aside from the world, and sequester our sins, and lift up our
minds above the earth, or else it will not stay with us. As the spirit went
from Saul when he sinned; so when knowledge has saluted the wicked, she bids
them farewell; like unto a Martin, which will not build but in fair houses.
It is said in John 14. 15. When Jesus went to eat the Passover, he came to a
chamber which was trimmed: so the chamber that received God, the heart which
should lodge knowledge must be trimmed, and all the sinful corners swept; 1.
Sa. 15. 26
or else, as Samuel would not come to Saul, so Wisdom will not come to that
host. There is an harbinger which goes always before the knowledge of God, to
prepare the house, and this is love, the bond of perfection. 1. Ioh. 4. 7.
They which have love (says John) know GOD, but they which have not love know
not God, though they have never so much knowledge beside. Unto good Nathaniell,
Christ said, Thou shall see greater things than these: but unto the obstinat
Jews he said, Mat. 13. 14
Seeing, Genesis 21. 19.
you shall not see; like Hagar, which had the well before her, and did not see
the water. He which cannot say with Paul, We have the spirit of Christ, 1.
Cor. 2. 12.
cannot say with Paul, 1. Cor. 8. 1.
We have knowledge.

Holy men were always interpreters of Gods word, because a godly mind
easeliest pearceth into Gods meaning, according to that, The pure in heart
shall see God: and that in John 7. 17. Mat. 5. 8.
If any man will do Gods will, he shall understand the Doctrine whether it be
of God, or no: and that in Psalm. 111. 19. They which keep thy precepts, have
a good understanding; and that in 1. Cor. 2. 15. The spiritual man
understands al things. Pro. 1. 7
And therefore the fear of the Lord is not only called the beginning of
wisdom; but in Pro. 2. 5. it is taken for wisdom it self. As when Christ
taught in the Temple they asked, How knows this man the Scriptures, John 7,
15
seeing he never learned them. So it is a wonder what learning some men have,
which have no learning, like Priscilla and Aquilla poor tent-makers, Act. 11.
15.
which were able to school Apollos that great Clerk, a man renowned for his
learning. What can we say to this but as Christ said, Luke 10. 21.
Father so it pleased thee: as when Jacob came so soon with the venison, and
his Father asked him, how he came by it so suddenly? Genesis 27. 20
Jacob answered, because the Lord thy God brought it suddenly to mine hand, so
the holy and righteous men cannot give any reason, why they conceive the words
of God so easily, and the wicked do conceive them so hardly, but that GOD
brings the meaning suddenly to their hearts as we read in Luke 24. 45. When the
Disciples were settled in the profession of Christ, it is said, that Christ
opened their understanding, and made them understand the Scriptures; so
suddenly came their knowledge. So we read in Proverbs 1. 23. Wisdom promises
to the righteous, If you will turn at my correction, I will power out my heart
unto you, and make you understand my words. A Schoolmaster might say to his
scholars, I will power out mine heart unto you: but he cannot say as God says,
I will make you understand mine heart. 1. Kin. 10. 8
Therefore if the Queen of Sheba thought the servants of Solomon happy,
because they heard his wisdom: how happy was Solomon himself, that served
God which gave him wisdom. Come unto me (says Christ) all ye which are
weary, Mat. 11. 28
and I will refresh you. As Christ has no comfort but for the weary, so he
has no wisdom but for the righteous. Mar 3. 35.
They are his brethren, and sisters, and father, and mother. There is a kind
of familiarity between GOD and the righteous, that he makes them of his
counsel, as Solomon says, Proverbs. 3. 32. His secrets is with the
righteous, and Psalm 25. 14. His secrets are revealed unto them that fear the
Lord.

They are like John the beloved Disciple which leaned in his bosom; John 13*
(...)
like Moses, Exodus 3.
to whom he showed himself, Luke 25
like Simeon, that embraced him in his arms; Luke 9. 28.
like the three disciples, which went up to the Mount to see his glory. So we
read of Abraham, Genesis 18. 17. Shall I hide it from Abraham, says God? As
though this were an offense in God, if he should tell the righteous no more then
he tells the wicked: therefore because Abraham was a good man he told him more
than he showed all the rest. As Adams knowledge was perfect, so long as his
righteousness was untainted; so the nearer we come to that righteousness again,
the more things come to our knowledge; according to that, Proverbs 28. They
that seek the Lord, understand al things. Such an heart God has given to his
servants like a touchstone, or a lamp to go before them, to examine all
things, as they go in this dark wilderness, least they should take error
for truth, evil for good, or their own will for the will of God; that they
which hate evil might be preserved from evil, as David was from the blood of
Nabal. 1. Sam. 25.
Now, because none but the righteous have this lamp before them, you see what
a difference there is between the knowledge of the godly, and the knowledge of
the wicked.

As the windows of the Temple were large within, but narrow without; so they
which are within the Church, have greater light than they which are without.
They sit like Pharaoh in the darkness of Egypt, when the other dwell like
Israel in the light of Goshen. Knowledge is easy to him which loves
knowledge, says Solomon: but the scorner seeks knowledge, and finds it
not, says Solomon, Pro. 14. The spiritual man (says Paul) searches the deep
things of God: 1. Cor. 2. 14
but The natural man (says Paul) perceives not the things of GOD. Thou have
revealed these things to babes (says Christ) but thou have hid them from the
wise of the world If any man will do Gods will, Luke 10. 21^
he (says Christ) shall understand the doctrine: but to the obstinate Jews
Christ says, you cannot understand my talk. My sheep hear my voice says
Christ: but to the wicked Christ says, you cannot hear my words. Beleeuest
thou for this? says he to Nathaniel, thou shall see greater things than these:
but If ye believe not says Esaias, Esaias. 7. 8.
ye shall not understand.

That these Scriptures might be fulfilled, you see that as sin is called
blindness. 2. Chro. 6. 18. so sinners are called blind, Esaias. 56. 10. and may be
called Strangers in Israel. Until we be borne again, we are like Nichodemus
which knew not what it was to be borne again. John 3.

Until we become zealous our selves, we are like Festus, which thought zeal
madness, Act. 26. Until we be humble our selves, we are like Michol, which
mocked David for his humility, 1. Sam. 6. 16. It was true then, and it is true
now, and it will be true always which Paul observes, 1 Corin. 1. 18. that to
some religion shall seem foolishness. The reason of all this Paul lays down
in a word. If ye ask why the wicked cannot understand heavenly things, he
says, Because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Corin 2. 14. therefore, how
should he discern them, that has not the spirit?

For this cause, wisdom is not said to be justified of any, but of her own
Children, Mat. 11. 19. neither does Christ say, that any sheep hear his
voice, but his own sheep. My sheep (says he, John 12. 27) hear my voice:
they follow their shepherd, they hear his voice, they understand his Law,
they judge of his judgments, they have the measure of his Words, all is open,
and plain, and manifest and clear unto them: they search deeper, and judge
righter, and know sooner, and though they have no learning, yet they have
better judgments, than the learned: whereas the other that labor and study
without God, walk in a labyrinth, and fall into doubts, while they seek
resolutions. When a wicked man reads the Scriptures, he sees no difference
between the word of God, Luk 24. 16.
and the words of men, like Cleopas which talked with Christ, and knew not
Christ. When he speaks of Religion, he flutters like a young bird which cannot
fly because her wings are not grown: when he prays, his prayer is like a
childs grace, that understands not one word that he says: he which has
but a show of holiness, has but a show of wisdom: a little knowledge is in
his head, but there is no knowledge in his heart. An evil man may know some
thing, and speak something of his reading and hearing, as Job says, Job. 32.
8.
There is a spirit in man, that is every man has a kind of knowledge, but the
inspiration of the Lord gives understanding: as though the sinners
understanding did not deserve to be called understanding.

If the wicked man speak any thing that is good, he speaks by roate, but he
which speaks not out of the abundance of his heart, Luke 6. 45.
is soon drawn dry. The preaching of the Word does not become him: it is
harsh and unkind in his mouth as though it came out of a wrong bow: or like
unto a shittle, which flittereth from the hand of a child, he is in the pulpit
as the guest at the banquet, Mat. 22. 11
which wa^ted his wedding garment, he speaks not like one which has
authority, Mat. 7 29.
but as one that has no authority, and always his conscience sounds unto
him, Psalm. 50. 16.
What have thou to do to take my word in thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be
reformed? Therefore be renewed, that ye may know what the will of GOD is: this
is the Abce, and Primmer, and Grammar, the first lesson and last lesson of a
Christian, to know the good and perfect and acceptable will of God, which must
make us good and perfect, and acceptable our selves: the will of God is always
good and acceptable, and perfect, howsoever it seem to us: though it condemn
us of evil, yet it is good: though we see not how it is perfect, yet it is
perfect: nay, it is so perfect, that we cannot see the perfection of it, as the
Sun is so bright that we cannot behold the brightness of it: first it seems
good unto a man before it be acceptable, when it is acceptable, then it seems
perfect and as Gods will does seem to us, so we do seem to him: if his will
cannot seem good and acceptable, and perfect to us, much less may our will
seem good, or acceptable, or perfect unto him, for this is our goodness, to
acknowledge his goodness. If it be such a contentment, to know the will of
GOD, what shall keep us from the knowledge of it, shall sin, which is the
worst thing in the world? Because we will not renew our minds, therefore we
are ignorant of so many things which we would know, and until we be willing
to follow the word, we shall never thoroughly understand it, but buzze and
grope at it like Owls which pry at the sun out of a barn. Oh! 1. Kin. 3. 12
what a benefit had Solomon lost, if he had lost his wisdom which God gave
him: as great a benefit do thou loose, if thou loose the knowledge of Gods
will, for from the day that a man cannot discern the will of Satan from the
will of Christ, every Heresy seems truth, every evil seems good, and
this has been the beginning of al errors in the Church, because men did not
love the truth, therefore God would not reveal his truth unto them:
therefore I conclude as I began, Be ye changed by the renewing of your minds,
that ye may prove what is the good will of God, and acceptable and perfect.

Now a word of the Sacrament, there is an infant to be received into the
Church, which puts us in mind of the promise which we made unto God, when
we were received into the Church our selves. This Sacrament was instituted by
Christ, when he was baptized of John in the river of Jordan, and it succeeds
Circumcision as the Communion was ordained in stead of the Passover, Matthew. 3.
14.
so soon as we are borne we are baptized, Mat. 28. 19
In the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, to signify that we
owe a duty unto God, from the day that we come into the world. In this
Baptism our bodies are washed with water, to signify how our sins are
washed with Christ's blood: when our bodies are washed, they are taken out of
the water again, to signify how we shall be raised from death to life, by the
resurrection of Christ, and how we should rise from sin to righteousness:
thus we begin our life with a solemn promise to God before the Church, to
serve him with our bodies and souls till death us depart.

Now let us remember how we have kept this promise with the Lord, or rather how
we have broken promise with him: then we gave our selves to GOD, but since we
have given our selves to sin: then we promised to renounce the world, but
ever since we have embraced the world: therefore now let us begin to pay that
which we ought so long, and pray the Lord which has instituted this Sacrament
as a seal of his mercy, to receive this child into his favor, as we receive
it into his Church: Ioh. 3. 11.
to baptize it with his spirit, as we baptize it with water: and power upon it
his grace, as we give it the sign of grace.

FINIS.
THE PILGRIMS WISH.
PHILIP. 1. 23. I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ.

Here is Paul's desire to be dissolved, and the cause, that he might be with
Christ: wherein first you shall see the difference between the faithful and
the wicked, how one loatheth this life, and the other longs after it.
Secondly, because the Apostle seems to desire death, you shall see whether any
man may wish to die. Thirdly, because after his dissolution he hopes to be
with Christ; you shall see the diversity of judgments between Paul and the
Papists, which think when they are dead, that they shall go on to Purgatory.
Lastly, because the souls which are with Christ cannot walk as they did when
they lived upon the earth, you shall hear a little of walking spirits, which
have been so much talked of in the time of popery, and were taken for the
souls of them which were dead: after we will speak a little of the Sacrament
which ye come to receive, and so commit you to God. I desire to be dissolved.
1. King. 2. 10.
Before Christ's coming, when the Kings or Patriarchs died, it is said, that
they went to their fathers, 2. Chr. 9. 37
as we read of David and Solomon, 2. Chr. 21. 1.
etc. but after Christ's coming, when the faithful die, they are said to go to
Christ, Acts 7.
as we read of the penitent thief, Luke 23. 43. Not because the Patriarchs
went not to Christ as well as they, but because yet Christ was not ascended to
heaven: therefore they are not to go to Christ, although if they went to heaven
they must needs go to Christ, because Christ touching his Godhead, was always
in heaven. I desire to be dissolved: As the wordly long for Christ to come to
them, so the faithful long to go to Christ, for unless we ascend to him as he
descended to us, his descending is in vain, because he came down that we
might go up, he descended to take our flesh, we ascend to take his kingdom, he
descended to be crucified, we ascend to be glorified, he descended to hell, we
ascend to heaven, that is, to joy, to glory, to bliss, to our father, to our
Savior, to our comforter, to Angels, to Saints, to eternal life: therefore
good cause had Paul to desire to be with Christ, that he might be at rest: for
no doubt it was the sweetest voice that ever the thief heard in this life,
when Christ said unto him, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Luke
23. chapt. verse. 45. Besides, as Paul persecu^ed before, so he was after
persecuted himself, as he tells the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 11. 24. I was thrice
beaten with rods, I was once stoned, I suffered thrice shipwrake, etc.
Therefore good cause had Paul to desire to be with Christ, that he might be out
of trouble. Yet he will not dissolve himself, but desires to be dissolved: that
is, that he which brought him into this world, would take him out of the world:
neither does he wish or pray, or make any petition to God to take away his
life, but tells him his desire, desiring to be dissolved: to desire is not to
pray, but shows what we approve: neither does he desire so to be dissolved, as
though he were weary of his labors, and would suffer no more for Christ, but he
is content to live as he says in the 24. verse. Nevertheless for me to abide in
the flesh were better for you, as if he should say, to do you good I am content
to suffer evil, and stay still from Christ, whom I long to be with. Seeing then
that he will not dissolve himself, nor pray to be dissolved, but is content to
live still: why does he say, I desire to be dissolved? Only to show what he
prefers in his desire, if he might choose life or death for his own
respect, he could be content to leave friends and riches, and pleasures, and
life, and all, only to be with Christ. This seems to be a good lesson for
sickemen, when they can live no longer, then to be with Christ were better then
to be with the glutton, which never thought of heaven til he was in hell: Luke
16.
but Paul was not sick nor sore when he desired to be dissolved: therefore
this is not only for the sick, but for the whole. If he had wished to live
and stay still in the world, no man need to be taught to say after him, for
young and old desire not to be dissolved, but few are content to be dissolved.
To a natural man in this life, nothing is so sweet as life it self, and he
which is in love with this world, seldom dies quietly upon his bed: but to a
mind which misliketh this world, nothing can come so welcome as death,
because it takes him out of the world. This it is which Paul would have us
learn, that nothing in this world is so precious or pleasant, that for it we
should desire to live or stay from God one hour: though all may not wish to
die, yet all must subscribe to this, that death is better then life, because it
leads to Christ, which when Paul had thoroughly tasted, he was satisfied for
all things else, and desired to live no longer that he might be with Christ;
herein appears the end of man's life, which when he has obtained, he
desires to live no longer, how great riches, and honors, and friends soever
he leave behind him. From the time he knows Christ crucified, Genesis 5. 22.
and begins like Enoch to walk with God, he cries ever after with the
Apostle, Romans 7. 24.
I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ: who shall deliver me from
this body of sin? death wear to me advantage. Even as Simeon reioiced that
Christ came to him, Luke 2. 28.
so the faithful rejoice that they shall go to Christ.

The necessity of sin is so irksome to him which knows the vileness of
sin, that the faithful man, but to do good, would not live out of heaven,
no not one hour. This made the Martyrs so willing to abide any kind of death
that tyranny could devise, to be rid of their sinful bands, and this
corruptible burden, which presses down the soul, that looks after Christ
like his disciples when he ascended to heaven. Acts 1. 10.
All is trouble and wearines, and vanity to the godly mind, whether he eat or
drink, or sleep, he counts it a servitude unto the flesh, and wishes with
David to be rid from these necessities: so the knowledge and love of God makes
a man forget his own flesh, makes him despice the whole world, takes away
the difference from life and death, changes his nature which he could never
overcome, and teaches him to renounce his dear self, and say, though he
should die, Not my will but thy will be done. All this appears in this
example, what operation is in the knowledge and love of Christ: it made the
world irksome unto Paul, which all men naturally desire: it made death pleasant
unto him, which all men naturally abhor: although they be weary of their
life, and have no pleasure from morning to night; yet it will not please them
to change, which they needs must, they never loath but love their miseries, I
will not dye one hour to live for ever. Do not the wicked themselves
prophecy by their fear of death a worse condition of some dreadful judgment
after this life prepared for sinners, and all that contemn GOD, when none but
they stand in such fear of death? Why does one wish for it, and another
tremble to hear of it? If it were but a sleep, no man would fear it at all:
for who fears to take his rest when the night approaches? If it did take
away sense and feeling, and make men trees or stones, no man would fear it at
all, for who would fear strokes if he could feel no more then a stone? or
who would care for any thing if he had no sense of anything? would any man
tremble so to be as the dead creatures which have no sense of evil? They must
needs be in better case than the happiest man in this life, which is not
without the sense of evil. Therefore this fear of death which you see in all
but the faithful, does presage some strange torment, some heavy change and
sharp punishment to those men: which they begin to taste already before they
dye, like the spirit which persecuted Saul before his end. 1. Sa. 16. 14.
They desire not to be dissolved, but they fear to be dissolved, they go not
to Christ, but their departure is an everlasting departure from Christ to the
damned, to the devils, to hell without either end or ease, or patience to
endure it.

Thus you see that no man is willing to die, before his conscience be quieted
toward God, and that he can catch some hope of a better life after this life.
He which knows that he shall go to Christ, it is impossible that he should die
unwillingly: but he which can not hope for a better world, must needs leave
this world grudginglie, and fear death more then all the terrors of life. He
had rather to be sick and cold, and hungry, and want and beg, then go with
death, because he knows what he suffers here, but he knows not what he
shall suffer hereafter. Therefore he which is not willing to be dissolved, has
not ^earned Christ yet as Paul did, for no man esteem this life when he begins
to taste of the next, 2. King. 2. 14.
but then the love of the world does fall from him like the mantle of Elias
when he was rapt into heaven.

The Apostle had seen many good things in his days, and was never satisfied,
willing to be dissolved, but thirsted still, and no water could quench his
thirst, until he drank of the water of life, and then he thirsted no more:
so nothing can fill the soul which was made for God, but God alone. Riches and
honors, Luke 2. 29.
and pleasures, did not make Simeon willing to die, but the sight of Christ:
happy are the eyes which see him; for they are as willing to die as Simeon
was. Ioh. 1. 2^.
So soon as John Baptist did see our Savior, Math 3. 11.
and knew that it was he, he debased himself, as if he had been nobodie,
and would not be accounted of, but sought to loose the opinion of the people
that Christ might have all; although he was a Prophet, and more than a Prophet,
and not a greater amongst the sons of women. So when Paul had seen his
Savior, he forgot all that he loved, all that he desired, and all that he
possessed: no joy, no glory, no life now but to die. All things must yield
to the Son, and be content with John, that he increase, and we decrease.
This is our glory and life, that he lives in glory. Genesis 45. 28.
It is enough (says Jacob) for me that Joseph my son lives: it is enough
for us that Jesus our Savior reigns. If the head be crowned, all the body
is more honored: therefore let us glory that Christ is glorified, and rejoice
as much that he is ascended, as our fathers rejoiced that he descended: for
where the head is, there the body must needs be.

I desire to be dissolved: he calls his death not a destruction but a
dissolution, for three causes. First he departs from this life, and has no
more society with them that live upon the earth. Secondly, his soul departs
from the body until the day of resurrection, then she finds her own body
again, and they rejoice like friends which are met together. Thirdly, he
departs from this vale of misery, into the paradise of joy and all
felicity, to live and reign with God for ever: in assurance whereof he says,
that he shall be with Christ, so that death is the way to Christ. As the Dove
found no rest until she came to the Arc: Genesis 8. 9.
so the faithful find no rest till they come to Christ, they go through the
wilderness like other men. Until the Jews arrived at Canaan, Josh. 13. 17.
all their life was spent in sinful Egypt, or in the dreadful desert, during
the time of their journey they had no settled rest or continuing pleasure. Peace
begins when the battle ends, there is the prerogative of the dead, least
death should be too fearful to us. The best of Gods blessings are behind,
that is, everlasting life, and the way to it is death, thou art going to joy,
therefore look not for it until thou come to thy iourneys end. Revel. 2. 10.
If Canaan the land of peace, the land of plenty, the land of pleasure, be in
the wilderness: stay here, march no further, whither do you go like the
Pilgrims of Israel if Canaan be in the wilderness? But Paul looks for the
crown at the gole: he is not with Christ, but trusts to be with Christ: he is
not in heaven, but he hopes to come to heaven, and this hope led him through
the wilderness, that he murmured not like the Israelities, but only longed for
that day, when Christ shall say unto him as he said to the penitent thief:
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Thus you have heard the difference
between the faithful and the wicked, how the one lotheth this life, and the
other longs after it.

Now we come to our questions. Simeon said, Luke 2. 29.
Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace* so Paul says, I desire to
be dissolved and to be with Christ: they doubted not as the Papists do, what
should become of them after death: for one says that he goes to Christ, and
the other says that he goes to peace: therefore it seems that Purgatory was
not yet found, when the just men went to peace. This is one of the fruits of a
godly life, it has hope (says Solomon) in the end: Pro. 14. 36.
in death it warranteth a man of life, Prou. 11. 7.
and when the flesh says, fear, and the serpent, despair, it makes the flesh
crouch, and the serpent fly, and the soul rejoice while death is opening the
prison door, that she may fly to her country from whence she came. Therefore
what shall I say to Purgatory, if Paul go to Christ, and Simeon go to peace?
Some say that it is in the air: some say that it is in the earth, some under
the earth: Dan. 4. 1.
some a little above hell. Thus Nabuchadnezzar cannot assoile his own dream.
You must understand that Purgatory is like your painted Sepulchers, which are
framed more for the living then for the dead: for you know that the locusts of
Rome live by Trentals, and Dirges, and Masses for the dead, as the Siluersmiths
in Ephesus lived by Images: Act. 10. 25.
and therefore as they were loath that Images should go down: so they are loath
that their Purgatory should be quenched: for it is the gainfullest lie in all
Popery, for out of this lake issue their Masses and Dirges, and Trentals for
the dead. They are said for the dead, but they make for the living: For the
dead have no portion of all that is done under the sun. do what you will, say
what you can, Masses, Dirges, or Trentals, they have no portion in it, for they
have received their reward already, and the tree lies where it fell: yet
these foolish virgins hope for oil of the wise virgins, and think they shall
be paid for other men's labors, and alms, and trentals, and pilgrimages and
Masses: as though they never read that the just shall live by his own faith,
Gal. 3. 11.
that he which believes shall not go to judgment, Ioh. 5. 24.
but pass from death to life, that they that die in the Lord rest from their
labors: how do they go presently into Paradise, Reu. 14. 15.
if they stay at Purgatory, and fire and torments? Has Christ satisfied for
us, and must we now make satisfaction for our selves? Luke 16.
Whither the glutton and the beggar are gone, thither must we all, that is to
Abraham's bosom, or hell fire: there are but two kinds of men, and therefore
but two ways, and where then is Purgatory, which the best of the fathers
confesses that he could never find in Scripture? Therefore take heed of hell,
for Purgatory is but a scarre babe. Furthermore, when Paul says, that he
shall go to Christ, this seems to resolve the old question often debated
among the simple people, once deluded, whether the souls of men departed,
walk after death, and appear unto men, exhorting them to this or that, as
Gregory or some counterfeit reports in his Dialogues.

The Apostles before their full grows, might seem to be encumbered with this
error, because when they saw Christ walking upon the waters, they said, It is
a spirit: and when Peter knocked at the door in the night, they said to Rhode
a Damsel, It is his Angel: Act. 12. 15. Which error was drawn from the
elusion of Satan, and vulgar opinion received from Pythagoras, which taught
that the souls of men departed, did return into the bodies of other men after
death, either for correction, or for reward: if they were good souls, then
they were preferred to better men: if they had been badde souls, then they
were cast into worse bodies then they had before: a fine Philosophical dream.

This deluded Herod: when he heard of Christ, he supposed that John Baptist
was risen again, whom he had beheaded: and the better sort of the people, as
we read in Mat. 16. 14. dreamed that Christ was Elias, or John Baptist, or
Jeremy, or some of the Prophets risen again. But touching the soul once
departed from the body, that it returns not nor can return into the world:
many examples and testimonies, and reasons, and the order of our resurrection
declares. John. 10. 28
The souls of the righteous are in the hands of the Lord, and no man or devil
can take them out of his hands: the souls of the wicked are in the hands of
the devil, and God will not take them out of his hands: and therefore Abraham
says. He which is here, Luke 16.
cannot come from hence, and they which be there, cannot come from thence: for
then the pains of hell were not everlasting pains, not the joys of heaven
everlasting joys, but temporal, like the pains and joys of this world.
Therefore it is no soul which walks about. How then? What is this which I see
in the night like such a man, and such a man? The Devil (which changes
himself into an Angel of light to deceive) can change himself into the
likeness of a man much more: that is it which thou see, as Saul saw Samuel,
1. Sam. 28. 8. not Samuel himself. For could the Witch raise Samuel out of the
grave, which could not keep her self out of the grave? or could the devil
disturb the Prophet after death? Then he should never be quiet, if the devil
could disturb him, because he disquieteth the godly so much while they live.
If this apparation be called Samuel, how does he call it Samuel, if it be not
Samuel? As the Books of Calvin are called Calvin: as the picture of Beza is
called Beza: as he which plays the King upon a stage, is called a King: as
the golden Myce and Hemerodes which the Philistines laid in the Arc, were
called Myce and Hemerodes, although they were but mere shapes and figures of
them: so this likeness of Samuel, is called Samuel, though it was not Samuel
in deed, but a counterfeit shape of Samuel. For GOD would not answer Saul
before by Oracle, nor by Priest, nor by Prophet: and would he answer him by
the dead, which does forbid to ask counsel of the dead? No (says Abraham)
they have Moses and the Prophets, Luke 16. As if he should say: let them
learn of the books of the dead, for the dead shall not return unto them.
Again, if it had been Samuel himself which had taught Saul to worship GOD,
would that holy Prophet have received worship himself, as this spirit did?
Again, If it had been Samuel Saul's Schoolmaster, which taught him always to
repent while he lived: he would rather have exhorted him to repentance now
then before, seeing the day of his death was so near. But you will say,
Whatsoever it was, it seems that he could prophecy of things to come: for he
foretold Saul's death. Can the devil prophecy? This was an easy matter for
the devil to prophecy, because he knew that David was anointed before, and
therefore Saul must be removed, that he might reign as he was anointed.
Secondly, he knew that Samuel had prophesied his confusion, and therefore he
must be degraded, that the Prophecy might be fulfilled. Thirdly, he did see
the Philistines coming against him, and therefore no marvel if he did aim
that his death was near at hand, seeing a man might prophecy the same.

If any man be not satisfied with this, to believe that the souls of the dead
do not walk after their dissolution, let me reason with him thus. Is it a
soul which thou see? Why a soul is a spirit, and cannot be scene no more
then a voice, or an Echo: did thou ever see thine own soul, though it
has been ever with thee since thou was borne? Do thou think it is a body?
Why a body cannot walk without a soul: for the soul is the life which
moves the body. If thou say it is a body and soul too, then why does Paul
call death a dissolution? It is a separation of the soul from the body: if
the body and soul be not dissolved, then the man is not dead but living
still. If thou say the soul is come to the body, and the body is risen to
the soul for that time: then I can say no more to thee, but believe thine own
eyes. If thou think that it is such a man's body which thou see, look in
the grave, and open the ground, and there thou shall see the body where it was
laid, even while this vizard walks in thy sight: therefore apparitions are no
other, then that which appeared to Saul. Thus the Devil has many ways to
deceive; and this is one and a dangerous one, to draw us from the word of God,
to visions, and dreams, and apparitions, upon which many of the doctrines of
the Papists are grounded.

They had never heard of Purgatory, but for these spirits which walked in the
night, and told them they were the souls of such and such, which suffered in
fire till their masses, and alms, and pilgrimages did ransom them out: So
these night spirits begat Purgatory, and Purgatory begat trentalles, as one
Serpent hatcheth another.

Yet a third question rises out of these words, and that is this; Whether a
Christian may wish for death? As Paul desired, so may we desire, Luke 9. 54.
if we have Paul's spirit. As Christ told his Disciples when they asked him,
whether they should pray for fire from heaven, as Elias did? Christ answered,
that they knew not of what spirit they were: as if he should say, If you were
of Elias spirit, and did pray with the same mind, and to the same end that he
did, then you might pray as he prayed. The wicked wish to die, because they
would be rid of the cross, and suffer no more for God: as Cain, Genesis 4.
so soon as he was cursed, and knew that his life should be a torment, he
sought to dye, to prevent the just judgment of God* and spite him (as it
were) which should punish sins. So do the people oftentimes, which have not
to satisfy hunger, and the sick which saint of an incurable disease, and the
weary captives in prison, galleis, and bonds. As for the faithful, if they at
any time wish to die, they pray for death, as the last remedy against sin and
Satan: even as they pray in the Revelation, for the hastening of Christ's
coming to judgment, Reu. 22. 20.
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, for the shortening of the days of sin, least
all flesh should perish. But they which wish for death in this sort, would dye
as the will of God has ordained, and mortify their flesh to abide these
troubles, and still by faith suppress the doloruos grief of sin, by frequent
meditation of inward joy, received by grace in Christ, and therein revive
themselves, as with the earnest penny of their inheritance, which they shall
receive at the fit time, when it shall comfort them much to have suffered so
long. Much therefore have they to answer, which are not contented to die in
peace, and stay till they be dissolved, but as though themselves were the
authors of life and death, from cruel heart give wrongful commission to the
bloody hand, to cut asunder that which God has joined, the loving soul and
their body; as Judas, Achitophel, 2. Macc. 14 37.
Saul, and Pilate did: not one of these was good in life or death. Yet the
Author of the Macchabees commends Raz is most of all, for that which was the
greatest sin that ever he did, for killing himself. Man was not borne of his
own pleasure, neither must he die at his own lust; or else it had been good
for Job, Job. 2.
which suffered more than any Saint, except Christ, to make away himself, as
Judas did. Exodus 20. 1^
But why is it commanded then, thou shall nor kill? If thou may not kill
another, much less may thou kill thy self. As for the example of Sampson,
Iud. 16. 30. which may seem to oppose against this, in that he killed
himself, when as he pulled the house upon his own head, and all that were
with him: understand, that he was a figure of Christ, which vanquished more in
his death than in all his life; and it appears that he had warrant from God,
in that his strength being taken from him, was (for the act) in a moment
restored to him upon his prayer. And the Epistle to the Hebr. 11. 13. to clear
that fact, says, that he did it of faith; that is, knowing that he had
deserved to die, and that by these means the enemies of God should be
destroyed, he submitted himself to the good will of GGD, like a good Captain
which ventured his life to kill his enemies: therefore we must not look to
particultr examples, but to the general law. Wherefore let no man do this
evil, that any good may come of it, but rather follow the advice of the holy
Apostle, as it becomes us, with patience let us run out the race which is
set before us.

Here I might show you that they are guilty of their own death, that kill
themselves with surfeiting, intemperance, drunkenness, etc. although they love
their life too dear, yet they take all means to hasten their deaths. Thus
much of Purgatory, and night spirits, and praying for death.

Now it remaneth, that as the Levites sanctified their brethren before they
did eat the Passover, so I would prepare you, before ye eat this holy
Sacrament, of which the passover was but a sign, The Jews were taught of God
before they did eat the Passover to put away leaven out of their houses the
day before, Exodus 12. 15. Has God care of leaven? No: this is it which the
Apostle teaches, 1. Corinthians. 5. before ye come to the Lords Supper, Purge the
old leaven of maliciousnes and wickedness out of your hearts: that is the
leaven which you should purge out of your houses. Therefore mark what the
Apostle writes to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 11. I believe it is a matter which
you did never consider, For this cause many are weak and sick among you, and
many sleep or die. For what cause? Because they received this holy Sacrament
unworthily, and irreverently, before they were prepared with faith, and hope,
and repentance: for this cause many are weak, and sick among you, and many
die. Who did ever think that his sickness, or his wants, or his infirmities did
grow, for that he received the Lords supper unworthily? Many causes have bin
supposed, but this cause was never thought of. Have any of you said in
distresses of body or mind, This is come unto me, because I did receive the
blessed Sacrament of Christ unworthily, because I came not prepared with that
mind, as they which believe and know God? Yet the Apostle, which by his divine
spirit knew the cause of these calamities among the Corinthians, does depute
their strange diseases and sudden death, to none other cause but to their
unworthy and vnreuerent receiving of this holy Sacrament. Nay he says
further, That he which eats and drinks this Sacrament unworthily, eats
and drinks his own damnation; that is, he takes possession of death, 1. Co.
11. 29
hell, and damnation, even while he eats, as the devil entered into Judas
while he received. Now, if your Physician should warn you of such a thing,
that you take it in season and in measure, or else it is poison, and will kill
you; I suppose you would observe the season and measure, and take it in such
order as he prescribes, as near as you could, if you believe him: so, if ye
believe the Apostle, that you receive the Sacrament to your damnation, if you
receive it unworthily, I am sure you will not take it irreverently or rashly
for all the world. If I had the words of motion to speak that which might be
spoken of this matter, Mat. 22.
it would fright Judas himself, that no man would come to this holy banquet
without his wedding garment. Consider but this, how you would come into the
presence of God, how would you prepare your selves to come before the maker of
heaven and earth, which searches the reins, and knows every corner of the
heart? If ever ye did approach unto God, if ever ye came near unto the Lord,
you never came so near as now, when you come to receive his body and blood,
and are united unto him in one spiritual body; and yet (peradventure) many
come not so prepared, so cleansed, so dressed, so trimmed into the presence of
God, as Hester did into the presence of Assuerus. Hest. 5.
What do you think of these elements? what do you imagine of this bread and
wine? They are seals. What seals? Seals of his word, seals of Gods promise,
seals of your adoption. If ever you were instructed or comforted out of this
book, that instruction and comfort is confirmed and ratified unto you now by
Christ's seal. Christ has not ordained Sacraments in his church for a fashion
or dumb show, that you should feel, or see, or taste, but as the woman which
had a bloody flix, when she touched the hem of Christ's garment, he said, that
virtue was gone out of him: that is, all the graces which these signs
represent, that is, all the blessings that Christ Jesus has purchased unto man
by his death. Now because if you receive this Sacrament rightly, you are united
unto Christ, as the members with the head: if ever you did believe, or love, or
repent before; this requires you to believe, and love, and repent more,
because now you are Christ's body, which shows that ye must obey Christ the
head like members of the body, for the body is ruled by the head. What have
you now to receive al these blessings? If ye have not faith, how can you lay
hold of any promises or merits of Christ, to say this is mine? If you had a
hand to take and a faith to apprehend, now you might eat of that bread which is
better then Manna, which he that tastes, does not hunger again after any
pleasure in the world. Here is enough for Abraham, and Abraham's seed, Come
unto it all that thirst, and it will refresh you. Happi^r is that man now that
has his wedding garment, Luke 16.
than the rich glutton, that fares deliciously, and goes in purple every
day. Now you are the Lords guests, and the Lord himself is your feast, and
this feast is before you, the holiest meat that ever you did eat, and the
comfortablest meat that ever ye did eat, and yet the dangeroust meat that
ever you did eat: you stand upon life or death, you eat to salvation or
damnation; there is nothing in this world which you can receive with greater
benefit, or with greater peril. Adam did not eat the forbidden fruit with
greater danger, Gene. 3.
Adam could not taste the tree of life with greater fruit, than you may taste
and receive this Sacrament. The Arc was a sign of mercy, 2. Sam. 6.
yet Vzziah was slain for touching the Arc irreverently: Circumcision was a
good thing, yet Circumcision did not profit the Sichemites, Genesis 34.
but was away to make their enemies slaie them, because they were not
circumcised for Religion, but for lucre: so if ye receive for custom, and not
for devotion, this Sacrament shall be to you as Circumcision was to them.
Therefore take heed how you receive as they received, least you mere with a
curse, when you look for a blessing. If thou remembrest any sin against God or
against thy neighbor, leave thine offering at the Altar, and be reconciled
before thou come into his presence, for if stubble come to fire, there is no
way but burn: now beloved, let faith, and love, and repentance have their
perfect work, that you may receive this Sacrament as Christ would have you
rceiue it: and God grant you as much profit by it, as is offered in it, and so
much comfort of it, as it has brought to any, whosoever have received it
faithfully, reverently, and worthily before you.

FINIS.
THE GODLY MAN'S REQVEST.
PSALM. 90. 12. Teach us, O Lord, to number our days, that we may apply our
hearts to wisdom.
THis Psalm was compyled by Moses, as ye may see by the title, at what time
the Spies returned from the land of Canaan, and God for the murmuring of the
people, pronounced, that al which were above twenty years old, should die in
the wilderness, except Caleb and Joshua, that encouraged their brethren to go to
Canaan. Nu. 14. 29.
Now when Moses heard the sentence of death pronounced against himself, and
all the Jews which came out of Egypt, except only two Caleb and Joshua, that
all should die before they came to the land which they sought, he prays thus
for himself, and the rest. Teach us, O Lord, to number our days, that we may
apply our hearts to wisdom: that is, seeing we must needs die, teach us to
think of our death, that we may die in thy fear to live again: showing us
how the consideration of our mortality will make us apply our hearts to
godliness. He which is tottering himself, had need to lean unto a stable
thing; therefore a wavering man is commended here to constant wisdom. Man is
mortal, wisdom is immortal, yet by wisdom man becomes immortal too:
therefore Moses thinking of his death, runs to wisdom as a remedy against
death. I have chosen a text fit for the time, For it was preached at the
beginning of the year.
which warns us how our years pass that when we think of the old year how
soon it is gone, ye may see upon what a whirling wheel we are set: which
puts us in mind every day of that last day, which is coming for us, when
we shall give account how every day was spent before it. So many years as are
past; so many years we are nearer to the last: and though the old year be
gone, and a new year come; yet whether another shall come after this, as this
came after the former, no man (I think) has any promise of him that made
time: for even these two days since the old year went out, many have gone ^he
way which we all shall follow. Now why ^re days, or weeks, or years, but for
us? But for man there should be no winter, nosummer, no spring, no autumn;
that we seeing how the seasons are renewed, at last with them we may learn to
renew our selves: for to celebrate new years with old sins, is to let every
thing go before our selves; and suffer the time to condemn us which was given
to save us, God has showed us new years, but he would have us show him new
men. This is Gods new years gift, Heb. 10. 1.
not sheep, nor doves, nor fruits which the Jews offered; neither mirth,
frankincense and gold, which the Gentiles offered, Mat. 2. but a new creature,
Gal. 6. 15. Therefore we must come to some schoolmaster, Luke 3. 10.
which teaches us like John Baptist, what we should do, that we may grow in
knowledge, as we grow in years. Teach me to number my days (says Moses)
that I may apply my heart to wisdom. Whereby Moses tells us, that this was
one of his helps, which made him profit in the knowledge of God, to number his
days: as a man that has a set time for his task listens to the clock, John,
9. 4.
and countes his hours, so we have a set time to serve God, Work while it is
day, says Christ. What he does mean by this day, The Apostle shows you,
This is the day of salvation; that is, this life is the day wherein you
should work. What work have you to do? The Apostle tells you, Work out your
salvation. This is a long task, therefore we had need to number our days,
and not loose a minute, least we be benighted before our work be done. Teach
me, O Lord to number my days. He which in the Land of Midian learned to
number sheep, now he is come into the wilderness, lerneth to number his days.
Teach us, O Lord, to number our days. Not teach us the number of our days,
for we shall forget it again, and the knowledge of times, is Gods knowledge;
but Teach us to number our days; that is, that we may be still numbering and
counting our days, and hours, and minutes, to see how fast we die, that every
day and hour we may learn some thing. As God has numbered our days, so we
must learn to number our days, or else it seems that we cannot apply our
hearts to wisdom: that is, unless we think upon death, we cannot fashion our
selves to a godly life, though we were as well instructed as Moses. This we
find daily in our selves, that the forgetfulness of death, makes us to apply our
hearts unto folly, and pleasure, and all voluptuousnes; that contrary to his
advice: Work your salvation, we work our damnation. We are so far from numbering
our days, that we do not number our weeks, nor our months, nor our
years, but as the Apostle says, 2. Pet. 2. 8.
A thousand years with God are as one day: so one day with us is a thousand
years: that is, our time seems so long that we think we shall never die: but
he which made this prayer is now dead, and the number of his days is ended,
and nothing is left, but his holy books which bring this prayer unto us, that
we may learn to pray so too. Now I must pray, Teach me, O Lord to number my
days, and thou must pray: Teach me, O Lord, to number my days, that we may
apply our hearts to wisdom: that is so to pray, and fast, and watch, and
hear, and do, as becomes him which shall shortly give account of his
Stewardship. Luke 16. 2.
This is the fruit which comes to a man by nu^bring his days. God teaches a
man to apply his heart to wisdom: and this is his lesson which he gives for
that purpose, number thy days, that is, think that wisdom is a long study,
and that thou have but ashort time to get it, and this will make thee get ground
of virtue: for there is no such enemy to repentance, as to think that we
have time enough to repent hereafter, which makes a man say, when any good
motion comes, nay I may stay yet, yet I may stay, like the sluggard, Pro. 6.
10.
which turns upon his bed like a door upon the hinges, and says, yet a
little more, a little more sleep, a little more slumber, I may lie still a
while: this is not to number our days, but to stretch our days and make them
seem more then they are, and they that do so, never apply their hearts unto
Wisdom: so you see what a preservative Moses used against sin and pleasure, he
kept a calendar as it were of his days which called upon him, Be diligent, for
thou have but a short time. Five things I note in these words: first that death
is the haven of every man, whether he sit in the throne, or keep in a
cottage, at last he must knock at deaths door, as all his fathers have done
before him. Secondly, that man's time is set, and his bounds appointed, which he
cannot pass, no more then the Egyptians could pass the sea: and therefore
Moses says, Teach us to number our days, as though there were a number of our
days. Thirdly, that our days are few: as though we were sent into this world
but to see it, and therefore Moses speaking of our life, speaks of days, not of
years, nor of months, nor of weeks: but teach us to number our days,
showing that it is an easy thing ever for a man to number his days they be so
few. Fourthly, the aptnes of man to forget death rather then any thing else, and
therefore Moses prays the Lord to teach him to number his days, as though
they were still slipping out of his mind. Lastly, that to remember how short a
time we have to live, will make us apply our hearts to that which is good. The
first point is, that as every one had a day to come into this world: so he shall
have a day to go out of this world. When Moses had spoken of some which lived
700. years, and other which lived 800. years, and other which lived 900.
years, showing that some had a longer time, and some a shortet, yet he speaks
this of all, mortuus est, at last comes in mortuus est, that is, he died, which
is the Epitaph of every man. We are not lodged in a castle, but in an Inn,
where we are but guests, and therefore Peter calls us strangers. 1. Pet. 2. 11.
We are not Citizens of the earth, but Citizens of Heaven, and therefore the
Apostle says, Heb. 13. 19.
we have here no abiding City, but we look for one to come. As Christ says,
John 8. 36.
my kingdom is not of this world: so we may say, My dwelling is not in this
world, but the soul soareth upward whence she came, and the body stoopeth
downward whence it came: Genesis 3. 19.
as the tabernacles of the Jews were made to remove, Exodus 33. 7.
so our tabernacles are made to remove. Exodus 26. 1.
Every man is a tenant at will, and there is nothing sure in life, but death: as
he which wrote this is gone, so I which preach it, and you which hear it, one
coming in, and one going out is to all. Although this is daily seen, yet it
had need be proved, nay every man had need to die, to make him believe that he
shall die. When Adam and Eve became subject to death because of their sin to
teach them to think on death, so soon as they were thrust out of paradise, God
clothed them with the skins of dead beasts, which showed them that now they
were clothed with death, and that as the beasts were dead whose skins they
wore: so they should die also: therefore David says, Man being in honor
became like the beasts which perish: when he says, that he did become like
the beasts which perish, he implies that man should not perish like the
beasts, but when he did like a beast, he died like a beast. From that day
every man might say with Job, Job. 17. 14.
Corruption was my father, and the worm was my mother. Luke 16. 22.
For the rich glutton is locked in his grave as fast as poor Lazarus. Therefore
God speaking of kings, Psalm. 82. 6.
says, I said ye are Gods, but ye shall die like men. If kings must die like
men, then the expectation of men is death: therefore when this king was ready
to die, he said to Solomon, 1. Reg. 2 2.
that he should go the way of all the earth, calling death the way of all the
earth: to which Esaias be ares witness, Esa. 40. 6.
crying, all flesh is grass, that is, it falls, and is cut down like
grass. Genesis 1. 27.
In paradise we might live or die: in the world we live and must die: Genesis 3.
21.
in heaven she shall live and not die. Before sin nothing could change us:
now every thing does change us. For when winter comes we are cold, when age
comes we are withered, when sickness comes we are weak, to show that when
death comes we shall die. The clothes which were upon our backs, the sun which
sets over our heads, the graves which lie under our feet, the meat which goes
into our mouths, c^ie unto us that we shall we are, and sade, and die, like
the fishes, and fowls, and beasts which even now were living in their
elements, and now are dead in our dishes. Every thing every day suffers some
eclipse, and nothing stands at a stay, but one creature calls to another, let
us leave this world. Our fathers summoned us, and we shall summon our children
to the grave: first we wax old, then we wax dry, then we wax weak, then
we wax sick, so we melt away by drops; at last as we carried other: so other
carry us unto the grave: this is the last bed which every man shall sleep in: we
must return to our mothers womb. Genesis 47. 9.
Therefore Jacob called his life but a pilgrimage, 2. Tim. 4. 7.
therefore Paul called his life but a race; therefore David calls him self but
a worm; Psalm 22. 6.
a pilgrimage has an end, a race has a stop, a worm is but trodden under
foot and dead straight: so in a hour we are, and are not: here we are now,
and anon we are separated, and to morrow one sickneth, and the next day another
sickneth, and all that be here never meet again, 2. Cor. 4. 7.
we may well be called earthen vessels, for we are soon broken, a spider is
able to choke us, a pin is able to kill us: all of us are borne one way, and
die a hundred ways. 1. Kin. 19. 9
As Eliah stood in the door of the ca^e when God passed by, so we stand in
the passages of this world ready to go out whenever God shall call. We loose
first our infancy. and then our childhood, and then our youth, at last as we
came in the rooms of other, so other come into our rooms. If all our days
were as long as the day of Joshua, Josh. 10. 12.
when the sun stood still in the midst of heaven, yet it will be night at last,
and our sun shall set like other. It is not long that we grow, but when we begin
to fall, we are like the ice which thaweth sooner then it froze: so these
little worlds are destroyed first, and at last the great world shall be
destroyed too, for all which was made for us, shall perish with us. What do you
learn when you think of this, but that which Moses says, to apply your
hearts to wisdom? death comes after life, and yet it guides the whole life
like the stern of a ship: but for death there would be no rule, but every man's
lust should be his law: he is like a King which frighteth a far often, though he
defer his sessions, and stay the execution, yet the very fear that he will
come, makes the proudest peacock lay down his feathers, and is like a dampe
which puts out all the lights of pleasure. The second note is, that the time of
man is set and his bounds appointed, which he cannot pass, and therefore Moses
prays the Lord that he would teach him to number his days, as though there
were a number of our days: Therefore God is called Palmoni, which signifies a
secret number, because he knows the number of our days, which is secret to
us. As it was said to Balthazar, God has numbered thy kingdom, so it may be
said to all, God has numbered thy life. To this Job bears witness, saying,
Job. 14. 5.
Are not his days determined? thou have appointed his bounds, which he cannot
pass. Again Jeremy says, Ier. 46. 21.
they could not stand because the day of their destruction was come. As there
is a day of destruction, and a day of death, so there is a day of birth, a day
of marriage, a day of honor, a day of deliverance, according to that, Dan. 11.
36
the determination is made, that is, God has determined all things. As God
appointed a time when his Son should come into the world, Dan. 9. 26.
and he came at the same time, Gal. 4. 4.
as the Prophets and the Evangelists accord: so he has appointed a time when
all his blessings shall come unto us, and they come at the same time. As we
read of Joseph, when his appointed time came, showing that God appointed a
time when to exalt him, Psa. 105. 19
and before that time came, he could not be exalted: therefore Christ says
so often, John. 7. 8.
My time is not yet come, showing that he knew the time of his baptizing, the
time of his preaching, the time of his working, the time of his rising, and the
time of his ascending. 2 King. 20. 1
As for that which is objected of Ezechias, because Esaie showed him that he
should die, and after told him that fifteen years were added to his life: it
is like the preaching of Jonas to the Niniuits, Ionath. 3. 3.
Forty days and Niniue shall be destroyed, and yet Niniuie was not destroyed,
because they repented: so Ezechias was not abridged, because he repented.
Therefore you must understand the phrase of God, as when we say that we will
journey to morrow, we understand If God will: so when God says, I will
destroy, he understands, if we persist. As all the promises of God are
co^ditional to take place if we repent, so all the threatenings of God are
conditional to take place if we repent not: and therefore some time this word
if, is put in, as where there is no blessing nor cursing without an if. Den. 28.
I may answer again, that God is a judge, and spoke like a judge to Ezechias:
a judge does not condemn all whom he says he will condemn, nor a
Schoolmaster beat every one whom he says he will beat, to make him learn,
yet the judge and schoolmaster do not dissemble but menace: this is not lying
but threatening. But you will say, if any time be set, thus long I shall live,
and I cannot pas^e, then I will take no physic. You may as well say, I will
take no meat. God has not ordained the end without means, but the means as
well as the end. If he have appointed one to die in his youth, he has
appointed some means to shorten his life, 2 Sa. 18. 6.
as he did Absolons: if he have appointed one to live long, he has appointed
also some means to preserve his life, as Joseph cherished Jacob in his age.
Therefore though God had promised Paul that his company should not be drowned,
Acts 27. 21.
yet he told the mariners, that unless they kept in the ship they should be
drowned: as if their safety should not be without means: but a good mind
does never quarrel about these things.

The third point is, that our life is but a short life: as many little skuls
are in Golga^ha, as great skuls: for one apple that falls from the tree, ten
are pulled before they be ripe, and the parents mourn for the death of their
children, as often as the children for the decease of their parents. This is
our April and May wherein we flourish, our June and July are next when we
shall be cut down. What a change is this, that within fourscore years not
one of this assembly shall be left alive: but another preacher, and other
hearers shall fill these rooms, and tread upon us where our feet tread now?

The Raven and the Phoenix, and the Elephant, and the Lion, and the Heart
fulfill their hundreds, but man dies when he thinks yet his sun rises,
before his eye be satisfied with seeing, or his ear with hearing or his heart
with lusting, death knockes at his door, and will not give him leave to
meditate an excuse before he come to judgment. To show the shortness of man's
life, Moses used the shortest division in nature to express it by, he might
have said, Teach me, O Lord, to number my months, or my years, but he speaks
of days: so the Scripture is wont to number our life by days, and hours,
and minutes, to show us that we shall give account for hours, as well as for
days, for days as well as for weeks, for weeks as well as for months, for
months as well as for years, which warns us to make use of all our time,
and every day to think upon the last.

This was the Arithmeticke of holy men in former times to reckon their days,
so that their time might seem short, to make them apply their hearts to
wisdom: The Hebrews did number their days thus: first they did deduct the
time of sleep, so that if our years be threescore and ten, Psalm. 90. 10
as the Prophet says, five and thirty of these years are stricken off at one
blow, because we spend half our time in sleep: then they did deduct the time
of youth, Eccle. 11. 10
which Solomon calls vanity, as though it were not worthy to be called life
but vanity: Then they did deduct the days of sorrow, because in sorrow a man
had rather dye then live: so when the hours of sleep, and the hours of
youth, and the hours of sorrow are taken away, what an Epitomie is man's life
come to? The Fathers used an other account: First they did deduct all the time
which is past, for the time which is past is nothing: then they did deduct the
time to come, because the time to come is uncertain, and no man can say that he
shall live. Now, when the time past, and the time to come is set aside, there
is nothing left but the time present, that is, a moment, which is not so much
in respect of eternity, as a little mote to the whole earth.

David numbered his days by a measure, My life (says he) is like a span long,
Psalm. 39. 5. when he measured his life, he took not a pole, nor an ell, nor a
yard to measure it by, but a short measure, his short span, My life is like a
span long. Thus you have learned to number your days, or rather the hours of
your days: as some came into the Vineyard in the morning, and some at noone,
and some at night: so some go out of this Vineyard in the morning, some at
noone, and some at night: some man's life has nothing but a morning, some have
a morning and noone, he which lives longest, lives all the day; and therefore
the youngest of all pray, but for this day: and if he live till to morrow, then
he prays for that day, saying still, Give us this day our daily bread: So
that a pleasant life may be compared but to a glorious day, and a sorrowful
life to a clowdie day, and a long life to a summers day, and a short life to a
winters day. How comes it to pass, that when a man dies, all his years seem
but so many days, and before he dies, all his days seem so many years?
Job. 14. 1.
Job speaks of all a like, Man which is borne of a woman has but a short
time to live, Jacob was 130. years old, and yet when he came before Pharaoh,
he said, Few and evil have my days been. Though Pharaoh did not speak of
days, but asked him how old he was, yet he answered of days, to show that not
only his years but his days were few. Our fathers marueiling to see how
suddenly men are, and are not, compared life to a dream in the night, to a
bubble in the water, to a ship in the sea, to an arrow which never rests till
it fall, to a player which speaks his part upon the stage, and straight he
gives place to another, to a man which comes to the market to buy one thing,
and sell another, and then is gone home again: so the figure of this world
passes away. This is our life, while we enjoy it we loose it: Genesis 47 9.
as Jacob said, that his days had been few: so we may say, that our days
shall be few.

Now, why has GOD appointed such a short time to man in this world? Surely,
least he should defer to do good, as his manner is: for though his life is
so short, yet he thinks it too long to repent. Psalm. 90. 10.
The Prophet says, that our years are but threescore and ten, as though this
were but a little time to live. But why should we live so long? for if our life
were but a year, yet a year is more then we use, all the rest is lost: for we
defer till that week which we think will be last. It is said of the devil,
Reu. 12. 12.
that he is busy because his time is short: but the time of man is shorter:
and therefore Christ says, Luke 19. 42.
In this thy day: as though no day could be called thy day, but this day:
and therefore all that thou have to do, thou must do this day. Consider this,
all which travel toward heaven: had we not need to make have, which must go
such a long journey in such a short time? How can he choose but run, which
remembers that every day runs away with his life?

The fourth point is our aptness to forget death rather then any thing else,
and therefore Moses prays the Lord to teach him to number his days, as
though they were still slipping out of his mind. He which has numbered our
days, must teach us to number our days: for when Moses prays the Lord to
teach him to number his days, he signifies that he would very feign remember
them, but still his mind did turn from them, and that he could not think
upon them longer then he thought on the Lord, which taught him to number them:
such is the rebellion of our nature, we cannot remember that which we should,
because we remember so many things which we should forget. How often does the
Scripture call death to our minds? Yet we read how they put the day of death
from them, Amos. 6. 3.
and would not remember it. Solomon bids us remember that we shall come to
judgment, and yet we read how they plead against the day of judgment, and
syllogize to their sins, That all things shall continue as they be, Eccle.
11. 9.
because there has been no change yet: 2. Pet. 3. 4.
even so it is with us, Psalm. 14. 1.
as the fool says in his heart, there is no God: so we say in our hearts there
is no death, or at least death will not come before we be old. Of al numbers
we cannot skill to number our days: we can number our sheep and our oxen, and
our coin: but we think that our days are infinite, and therefore we never go
about to number the^. We can number other men's days and years, and think they
will die ere it be long, if we see them sick, or sore, or old, but we can not
number our own. When two ships meet on the sea, they which are in one ship
think that the other ship does sail exceeding fast: but that their ship goes
fair and softly, or rather stands still, although in truth one ship saileth
as fast as the other: so every man thinks that other post, and run, and fly
to the grave, but that himself stands stock still, although indeed a year
with him is no longer then it is with other: beside that, we are given to
forget death, we strive to forget it, like them which say, we may not
remember. Teach me to number my days: Amos. 6. 10.
nay, teach me to multiply my days, teach me to remember death, nay, teach me
to prolong death: or if I cannot prolong death, teach me to forget death, that
I may sin without fear: for the remembrance of death makes a man to sin
fearfully, and takes away the pleasure of sin. Therefore if ye mark, there
is a kind of men which cannot abide to hear of death, they are sick with the
name of it: the reason is, Achab cannot abide Michaiah, 1. King. 22.
because he never prophesied good unto him but evil: so death never
prophesied good to the wicked but evil, for which they cannot abide it.
Therefore as Pharaoh bad Moses go out of his sight: so they bid death go out
of their sight, and say when he comes as Achab said to Eliah, Art thou here my
enemy, when they should say, welcome my friend? For as the devils thought
Christ was come to torment them: so the ungodly think that death comes to
torment them. Is it peace, when they see death, they doubt it is not peace,
because they never loved the God of peace. O that I could bring you into their
hearts, that ye might see more then tongue can express: for I do not think
that any Epicure, or worldling, or Nonresident, have any joy to think of
death, or desire to be dissolved, but rather that he might never be
dissolved, because death coms to the wicked like a iayler, which comes always
to hale unto prison: therefore their care is not to remember death, that they
might apply their hearts to wisdom: but to forget death, lest they should
apply their hearts to wisdom, and loose their pleasures before the time: for
he which is not purposed yet to leave his sins, would not be troubled with
any thought that might make him take his pleasure fearfully, least he should
leave sin before sin leave him. Therefore the devil does never teach a man
to number his days, because he gains by the forgetfulness of death: but the
Lord which would have a man to apply his heart to wisdom, it is he which
teaches us to number our days: and therefore Moses prays unto him, and
because we pray not unto him as he did, to teach us to number our days,
therefore we die like worms before we be aware. So far we are from that
which he shoots at, to apply his heart to wisdom, that we are not in the
way unto it, that is, to remember that we shall die. The last point is the
cause why Moses would learn to number his days, that he might apply his heart
to wisdom as if he should say, until men think upon death, they never apply
their hearts to wisdom, but busy themselves with worldly matters, as though
they were fethering a nest that should never be pulled down. Wisdom has
always carried that show of excellency, that the very wicked have labored to
put on this vizard: as we read of Pharao, who to cover his foolishnes, Exodus
1. 10.
says, Come let us do wisely. And again, it is said, that the Grecians sought
after wisdom, 1. Cor. 1. 22.
eue^ the Nation which God calls the foolish nation, Deu. ^2. 21.
did seek after wisdom: that is, they would have the name of wisdom: but
this wisdom which Moses calls wisdom, is counted foolishnes, 1. Cor. 1. 21
the foolishnes of preaching, says Paul, meaning how the foolish count
preaching foolishnes. (...).
Again, foolishnes to the Gentiles, meaning that the word of God seems like
a foolish thing unto many. For that which Christ said unto Peter, he may say
almost to al, Mat. 16. 23
They do not savor the things of God. As Anah devised a new creature: Gen 36 24.
so they have found out another wisdom which is called the wisdom of the
flesh. Romans 8. 7
They remember, Be wise as serpents: Mat. 10. 1^
but they forget, Be simple as doves. He which is like Achitophel is counted a
deep couns^^ler, 2. Sam. 17. 7
he which is like Machiuel, is counted a wise fellow. Alas, how easy a matter
is it to deceive and counterfeit, and play the subtle serpent, if a man would
set his head unto it? Could not David go as far as Achitophel? Could not
Paul show as much cunning as Tertullus? Acts. 24 2.
Yes, yes, if they were not taught to be simple as doves. Matt. 10. 6.
But this wisdom comes not by the remembrance of death, but by the
forgetfulness of death. Men do not use to think of death when they go about
such matters, but say like the serpent, Gen 3. 3.
We shall not die. Two things I note in these words: First, that if we will
find wisdom, we must apply our hearts to seek her: the^, that the
remembrance of death makes us apply our hearts unto it. Touching the first,
Moses found some fault with himself, that for all he had heard and seen, and
observed, and was counted wise: yet he was new to begin, and had not applied
his heart to learn wisdom, Pro. 30. 2.
like the wise man which says, I am more foolish then any man, I have not the
wisdom of a man in me. So insatiable and covetous (as I may say) are the
servants of GOD, the more wisdom, and faith, and zeal they have, the more
they desire. Moses speaks of wisdom, as if it were Physic, which does no
good before it be applied, and the part to apply it too is the heart, where
all man's affections are to love it and cherish it like a kind hostess: when
the heart seeks, it findethas though it were brought unto her like Abraham's
Ram. Therefore GOD says, They shall seek me, Ier. 20. 13.
and find me, because they shall (...) me with their (...) as though they should
not find him with all their seeking, unless they did seek him with their heart.
Therefore the way to get wisdom, is to apply our hearts unto it, as if it
were your calling and living to which you are bound prentises. A man may apply
his ears, and his eyes, as many trewants do to their books, and yet never
prove scholars: but from that day which a man begins to apply his heart unto
wisdom, he learneth more in a month after, then he did in a year before,
nay, then ever he did in his life. Even as you see the wicked, because they
apply their hearts to wickedness, how fast they proceed, how easily and how
quickly they become perfect swearers, expert drunkards, cunning deceivers: so
if ye could apply your hearts as thoroughly to knowledge and goodness, you
might become like the Apostle which teaches you. Therefore when Solomon
shows men the way how to come by wisdom, he speaks often of the heart, as
Give thine heart to wisdom, Pro. 22. 10.
Let wisdom enter into thine heart, Get wisdom, Keep wisdom, Pro. 45.
13. 8.
Embrace wisdom: as though a man went a wooing for wisdom. Wisdom is like
Gods daughter, that he gives to the man that loves her, and sueth for her,
and means to set her at his heart.

Thus we have learned how to apply knowledge, that it may do us good, not to
our ears like them which hear Sermons only; nor to our tongues, like them
which make table talk of religion; but to our hearts, that we may say like
the virgin, Luke 1.
My heart does magnify the Lord: and the heart will apply it to the ear,
Mar. 12. 14
and to the tongue, as Christ says, Out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks. The last point is, that the remembrance of death makes us to
apply our hearts to wisdom. Moses commended not many books to make a wise
man learned, but as David commends one book in stead of many: Psalm. 1. 2.
Meditate in the Law of God day and night: for, the reading of many books
(says Solomon) is but weariness to the flesh. Eccl. 12. 12.
Therefore as though Moses had marked what did move him most to seek after
GOD, he prays that that thought may run in his mind still, the remembrance
of death. As many benefits come unto us by death: so many benefits come unto
us by the remembrance of death, and this is one, It makes a man to apply his
heart to wisdom: For when he considers that he has but a short time to
live, he is careful to spend it well, Heb. 12. 26.
like Moses, of whom it is said, that when he considered how he had but a
season to live, he chose rather to suffer afflictions with the servants of God,
than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. This is that which makes the
old men fast, and watch, and prepare themselves more than young, because they
think themselves nearer the door, like old Isaac, which when he was blind
for age, said unto Esau, Genesis 27. 2.
Behold, I am now old, and know not the day of my death; that is, because I am
old, I look to die shortly. And therefore as Esaias taught Ezechias, 2. Kin. 20. 1
to set all things in order before he died: so he called his eldest son, to
whom he thought that the inheritance belonged, that he might bless him before
he died. This wisdom the Fathers called, the wisdom of the cross, which we
call the best, because it was dearest bought. It is hard for a man to think of
a short life, and think evil; or to think of a long life, and think well.
Therefore when Jeremy had numbered all the calamities and sins of the Jews; at
last he imputed all to this, Lam. 1* 9.
She remembered not her end: so if I may judge why natural men care for nothing
but their pomp, why great men care for nothing but their honor and dignity,
why covetous worldlings care for nothing but their gain, why voluptuous
Epicures care for nothing but their pleasure? I may say with Jeremy, They
rememember not their end. We never covet the same things living and dying:
therefore when Solomon had spoken of all the vanities of men, at last he
opposes this Memora^dum, as a counterpoyse against them all; Eccl. 11. 9.
Remember, that for all those things thou shall come to judgment: as if he
should say, Men would never speak as they speak, nor do as they do, if they
did but think that these speeches and deeds should come to judgment. As the
bird guides her flight with her train: so the life of man is best directed by
a continual recourse unto his end. The thought of death has made many sins
avoid like the devil, when Christ alleged Scripture: Math. 4.
it is like a strainer, all the thoughts, and speeches, and actions which come
through it are cleansed and purified like a cloth, which comes out of the
water. Seeing then that so much fruit grows of one stalk, which is the
numbering of our days, let us consider what an harvest we have lost, which
happily before this day never prayed with Moses, that the Lord would teach us to
number our days. What if we had died in the days of our ignorance, like
Judas which hanged himself before he could see the Passion or Resurrection,
Mat 27. 5.
or ascension of Christ? But God has cared for us more then we have cared for
our selves. We should have numbered our days and sins too, but alas, how
many days have we spent, and yet never thought why any day was given us? But
as the old year went, and a new year came, so we thought that a new would
follow that, and so we think that another will come after this, and so they
thought, which are dead already. This is not to number our days, but to
provoke GOD to shorten our days: there are few here which have not seen
twenty years; now if we had but every year learned one virtue since we were
borne, we might by this time have been like Saints among men: but the time is
yet to come when we must apply our hearts to wisdom. To riches and pleasures
we have applied our hearts, and our eyes, and our ears, and our hands too, but
to wisdom we have not applied our hearts.

There may be many causes, but there should be no cause if we had numbered our
days. For surely if a man could persuade himself that this is his last day,
as it may be, he would not defer his repentance until to morrow. If he could
think that this is his last meal that ever he shall eat, he would not
surfeit: if he could believe that the words which he does speak to day, should
be the last that ever he should speak, he would not offend with his tongue: if
he could be persuaded that this sermon should be the last sermon that ever he
should hear, he would hear it better then ever he heard any yet. Yet breath
is in the body and the heart may apply it self, and the eye may apply it
self, and the ear may apply it self, and the hand may apply it self.
Work while it is light. I can but teach you with words, as John Baptized with
water. As Moses prayed the Lord to teach him to number his days: so you must
pray the Lord to teach you to number your days. And now I lead you to number
your days. It may be that thou have but twenty years to serve God, will thou
not live twenty years like a Christian, that thou may live a thousand
years like an Angel? It may be that thou have but ten years to serve him,
will thou not serve ten years for heaven, which would serve twenty years
for a farm?

It may be, that thou have but five years to serve God, will thou spend five
years well to redeem all thy years for five? Yet GOD does know whether many
here have so long to repent for all the years which they have spent in sin?
If thou were borne but to day, thy journey is not an hundred years? If thou be
a man, half thy time is spent already: if thou be an old man, then thou art
drawing to thy Inn, and thy race is but a breath: therefore as Christ said unto
his Disciples when he found them sleeping, Mat. 26. 40
Could ye not watch one hour? So I say to my self, and to you, can we not
pray? can we not suffer a little while? He which is tired can crawle a little
way, a little farther, one step more for a kingdom. For this cause God would
not have men know when they shall die, because they should make ready at all
times, having no more certainty of one hour than another. Therefore our
Savior says, watch because you know not when the Lord will come to take you,
or to judge you, Happy are they which hear the word and keep it. Thus you see
that death is the last upon earth, that the time of man is set, that his race
is short, that he thinks not of it, that if he did remember it, it would make
him apply his mind to good, as he does to evil: and now I end as I began.
The Lord teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts to
wisdom, Amen.

FINIS.
A LOOKING-GLASS for Drunkards.
Genesis 9. 20. 21. 20 Noah also began to be an husbandman, and planted a vineyard.

21 And he drunk of the Wine and was drunken, and was uncovered in the midst
of his Tent.


FIrst we are to speak of Noah, then of Cham his wicked son, and after of
Shem and Iapheth his good sons. In Noah, first of that which he did well, and
the^ of his sin. In Cham first of his sin, and then of his curse. In his
brethren, first of their reverence, and then of their blessing. Now we will
speak of the Father, and after of his Children. Then (says Moses) Noah began
to be an husbandman. This is the first name which is given to Noah after the
flood, he is called an Husbandman, and the first work which is mentioned,
was the planting of a Vineyard. One would think, when all men were drowned
with the flood and none left alive to possess the earth but Noah and his
sons, that he should have found him self something else to do, than to plant
Vineyards: and that the holy Ghost should have entitled him king of the world,
and not an husbandman of the earth, seeing there be no such, men as Noah was,
which had more in his hand than any king has in the world or shall have to the
worlds end: but hereby the holy Ghost would show that God does not respect
kings for their titles, nor men for their riches as we do, and therefore he
names Noah after the work which he did, not after the possessions which he
had, an husbandman. It seems that there was great diversity between their
age and ours. For if we should see now a King go to plough, a Noble man drive
the teame, a Gentleman keep sheep, he should be scorned for his labor, more
than Noah was for his drunkenness: yet when we read how this Monarch of the
world thought no scorn to play the husbandman, we consider nor his Princely
calling, nor his ancient years, nor his large possessions, to commend his
industry, or modesty, or lowly mind therein; which may teach us humility,
though we learn to disdain husbandry: of whom will we learn to be humble,
if Kings give examples, and the son of GOD humbles himself from heaven to
earth, and yet we contemn the example of Kings of the earth, and the example
of the King of heaven?

The time was when Adam dug and delued, when David kept sheep, and all the
house of Jacob were called men occupied about cattle: but as they for this
were abominable to the Egyptians (as Moses says in the same verse) so they
which do like them, are abhorred of their brethren: and they which live by
them, scorn them for their work, which would be chastened themselves, because
they work not: There was no Art nor Science, which was so much set by in
former times, and is now profitable to the commonwealth, bringing less profit
unto it self, that may so justly complain of her fall without cause, and her
despite from them which live by her, as this painful Science of husbandry:
that it is marueil that any man will take pain for the rest, to be contemned
for his labor, and be a scorn for the rest, which might hunger and starve, if
he did not labor for them more then they do themselves. No marvel then though
many in the poor countries, murmr and complain that other cannot live by
them, and they cannot live themselves: but it is marvel if their complaint do
not grow in time of rebel on, and pull other as low as themselves: for why
should the greatest pain yield the least profit? yet this is their ease, for
if you mark, you shall see that the husbandman does bate the price of his
fruits so soon as the dearth is past, though he rayseth it a little, while the
dearth lasts: but they which raise the price of their wares with him, seldom
fall again, but make men pay as dear when the dearth is past, as if it were a
dearth still. Thus a plentiful year does damage him, and a hard year does
vantage them. So this painful man, is fai^e to live poorly, fare meanly,
go barely, house homely, rise early, labor daily, sell cheap and buy dear,
that I may truly say, that no man deserves his living better, no man
fulfilleth the law nearer: that is, thou shall get thy living in the sweat
of thy brows; then this poor son of Adam, which pickes his crumbs out of the
earth: therefore he should not be mocked for his labor, which has vexation
enough, though all men spoke well of him, and in my opinion, if any deserve to
be loved for his innocence, or for his truth, or his pain, or the good which
he brings to the common wealth: this Realm is not so much beholding to any
sort of men (but those that feed the soul) as those which feed the body,
that is, those that labor the earth: yet you see how they live like drudges,
as though they were your servants to provide food for you, and after to bring
it to your doors: as the beasts serve them, so they serve you; as though you
were another kind of men. I cannot think upon their misery, but my thoughts
tells me, that it is a great part of our unthankfulness, that we never consider
what an easy life and living God has given unto us in respect of them. If the
Apostles rule were kept, they which do not work should not eat: but now they
which do not work eat most: and the husbandmen which work eat not, but are
like Bees, which prepare food for other and pyne themselves. Let us consider
this, for they had not one law and we another, but the same curse which was
denounced upon Adam, was denounced upon all his children, that every man should
get his living in the sweat of his brows. Although I know there be diverse
works, and diverse gifts, and diverse callings to work in; yet always
provided, they which do not work should not eat, for in the sweat of thy
brows, that is, in labor and travel, thou king, and thou Judge, and thou
Prelate, and thou Landlord, and thou Gentleman, shall get thy living as Adam
thy Father did: or else thou do avoid the curse, and a greater curse shall
follow; that is, they which will not sweat in earth, shall sweat in hell.

Adam had food as well as thou, and so had Noah, and more then thou, unless
thou had all, for they had all, and yet they might not be idle, because their
hands were not given them for nothing. Some work with their pen, some with
their tongues, some with their fingers: as nature has made nothing idle, so
God would have no man idle, but that he which is a Magistrate, should do the
work of a Magistrate: he which is a Judge, should do the work of a Judge: he
which is a Captain, should do the work of a Captain: he which is a
Minister, should do the work of a Minister: as when Noah was called an
husbandman, he did the work of an husbandman. This contempt of the Country,
does threaten danger to the land as much as any thing else in our days, unless
their burden be eased, and their estimation qualified in some part to their
pains. Thinking that you have not heard of this theme before, seeing the
words of my Text did lie for it, thus much have I spoken to put you in mind
how easily you live in respect of them, and to certify your minds toward our
poor brethren, which in deed seem too base in our eyes and are scorned for
their labors, as much as we should be for our idleness.

Then (says Moses) Noah began to be an husbandman. In that it is here said
that Noah began, it does not disprove that he gave not himself to husbandry
before, but it imports that Noah began to set up husbandry again after the
flood, before any other: so this good man recomforted with the experience of
Gods favor, (which had exempted him and his seed out of all the world) and
rejoicing to see the face of the earth again after the waters were gone,
though then an old man, and weak he was, yet he returns to his labor
afresh, and scorned not to till and plant for all his possessions, as though
he were an husbandman: such a lowlines is always joined with the fear of
GOD, that they that are humbled with Religion, do not think themselves too
good to do any good thing. Here note by the way, that none of Noah's sons
are said to begin this work: but Noah himself, the old man, the hoary head
and careful Father begins to teach the rest, and shows his sons the way
how they should provide for their sons: and how all the world after should
live by labor and travel, till they return to dust: so the old man whom age
dispenses withal, to take his ease, is more willing to provide for the wants
of his children, then they are which are bound to labor for themselves and
their parents to: as the Storke does feed the damme when she is old, because
the damme fed her when she was young: what a shame is this to Shem and Iapheth,
that is, to us which are young and strong, that the father should be called a
labourer, when the sons stand by.

Now, the ground was barren because of the flood, and could not bring forth
fruit of it self, because of the curse: therefore it pitied Noah to see
desolation and barrenness, and slime upon the face of the earth, which he had
seen so glorious and sweet, and fertile, with all manner of herbs, and
fruits, and flowers before. Therefore he sets himself to manure it, which
wanted for nothing now but a painful labourer to till and dress it, that it
might bring forth delights and profits for sinful man, as it did before.

By this we may learn to use all means for the obtaining of Gods blessings,
and not to loose any thing which we might have or save for want of pains, for
that is sin, as Solomon notes in the four and twentieth of the Proverbs,
when he reproves the slothful husbandman, because his field brought forth
Nettles and This^les in stead of grapes: not because the ground would not
bear grapes, but because the slothful man would not set them. Shall God
command the earth and all his creatures to increase for us, and shall not we
further their increase for our selves? As we increase and multiply our selves,
so we are bound to join hand and help, that all creatures may increase and
multiply too, or else the Fathers should eat the childrens portion, and in
time there should be nothing left for them that come after: this regard Noah
seems to have unto his posterity, and therefore he gave himself unto
husbandry, which is commended in him unto this day, and shall be recorded of
him, so long as this book is read: whereby we are warned, that he which lives
only to himself, is not to be remembered of them which live after.

But as David cared how the Realm should be governed after his death, as well
as he did during his life: so though we dye and depart this world, yet we
should leave that example, or those books or those works behind us, which
may profit the Church and Commonwealth, when we are dead and buried, as much
as we did when we lived among them: even as Noah planted a Vineyarde, not for
himself, but for the ages to come after.

Some do think that Noah planted the first Vineyard, and drunk the first
wine, and that there was no use of grapes before: which opinion they are led
unto, that they might excuse Noah and mittigate his fault, if he did sippe too
deep of that cup, the strength and operation whereof was not known unto him,
nor unto any man before: but it is not like, that the excellent licour and
wholesome juice of the Grape, did lie hid from the world so many hundredth
years, and no doubt but there were Vines from the beginning, created with other
trees: for how could Noah plant a Vineyard, unless he had slippes of other
Vines, or Grapes that grew before, seeing he did not create fruits, but plant
fruits as we do? For this is principally to be noted, that so soon as he had
opportunity to do good, he omitted no time, but presently after the flood was
gone, and the earth began to dry, he plied it with seeds, and wrought it,
till he saw the fruits of his labor. By this we learn to omit no occasion
to do good, but whenever we may do good, to count it sin if we do it
not. But if we be so exercised, then all our works shall prosper like the
Vineyard of Noah, because the fruit of the Vine does cheer the countenance
and glad the heart of man. Therefore some have gathered upon the planting of
this Vineyard, a signification of gladness and thankfulness in Noah for his
late deliverance, as the Jews by their solemn feasts did celebrate the
memorial of some great benefit: but I rather judge, that God would have us
see in this example, what men did in those days, and how we are degenerate
from our parents, that we may prepare against the fire, as Noah prepared
against the water. This is worthy to be noted too, that God did not so
regard his husbandry, but that he had an eye to his drunkenness, and speaks
of his fault as well as his virtue: whereby we are warned, that though God bless
us now while we remember him, yet he will chasten us so soon as we forget
him: though we be in good name now, infamy will arise in an hour: though we
be rich at this present, poverty may come suddenly: though we be well while
we are here, yet we may fall sick before night, even as Noah is praised in
one verse, and dispraysed in another: even now God commends him for his
lowlines, and now discommends him for his drunkenness: as though he had forgot
all his righteousness so soon as he sinned, and would call in his praise again.
This was to show, that Noah was not saved from the flood, because he deserved
to be saved; but because God had a favor unto him: for he which was not
drowned with water, was drowned after with Wine. As the Pharisees when they had
done well, were proud of it, and lost their reward: so when Noah had done a
good work he spotted it with sin, and was dispraised where he was praised,
as though God repented him that he commended him. He planted well, but he
drunk not well: therefore that which was good did him hurt: then seeing he
was trapped with a good work, whatsoever we do, we may remember how easy it
is to sin, if we miss in the matter, or in the manner, or time, or the
place, or the measure, as Noah did. He which planteth the vineyard, is worthy
to taste of the grape, but if thou have found honnie (says Solomon) eat not
too much least thou surfeit. So if thou have found Wine, drink not too much,
least thou surfeit. A little Wine is better than a great deal, and if thou will
follow the Apostles counsel, thou must drink it but for thy stomachs sake,
least that happen to thee, which thou shall hear of this noble Patriarch.
Though he was never so righteous before GOD and men, though he escaped the
destruction, which lighted upon all the world, though he had all the fowls
of the air, and beasts of the land at his command, though he passed the
pilgrimage of man nine hundredth years, yet Noah was but a man, so ancient, so
righteous, so mighty, so happy: Noah showed himself but a man for drinking
the Wine which himself had planted: he was drunken. This is Noah's fault, he
was drunken with his own Wine, as Lot was defiled with his own daughters. If
Cham his son had taken too much, and stripped himself as his father did, the
holy Ghost would scarce have spoken of it, because he was a man of no note:
but when the father forgot himself and gave this offense, mark the manner of
the holy Ghost, as though he would show you a wonder: he displayeth Noah's
drunkenness, as Cham displayed his nakedness: as if he would say, come and
see the strength of man. He which was counted so righteous, he which believed
the threatening, like Lot when the rest mocked, he to whom all the fowls of the
air and the beasts of the earth flocked in couples, as they came to Adam He
which was reserved to declare the judgments of God, and to begin the world
again. Noah the example of sobriety, the example of moderation, is overcome
with drink, as if he had never been the man. How easily, how quic^ly, the
just, the wise, the prudent, has lost his sense, his memory, his reason, as
though he had never been the man. And how hard it is to avoid sin, when
occasion is at hand, and pleasant opportunity tempts to sin? It is easier
for the bird to go by the net, than to break the net: so it is easier for a
man to avoid temptations, then to overcome temptations. Therefore God forbad
Balaam, not only to curse the people, as Balaac would have him, but he forbad
him to go with Balaacs servants, knowing that if he went with them, and saw
the pomp of the court, and heard the King himself speak unto him, and felt
the tickling reward, it would strain his conscience, and make him doubt
whether he should curse or bless. Peter but warming himself at Caiphas fire,
was overcome by a silly damsel to do that which he never thought, even to
forswear his Lord God: therefore Daniel would not eat of the Kings meat,
least he should be tempted to the Kings will, showing us that there is no way
to escape sin, but to avoid occasion. Therefore David prays, Turn away
mine eyes from vanity: as though his eyes would draw his heart, as the bait
tilleth on the hook. Noah thought to drink, he thought not to be drunk: but
as he which comes to the field to sound the Trumpet, is slain as soon as
he which comes to fight: so the same wine distempereth Noah, which has
distempered so many since. Where he thought to take his reward, and taste the
fruit of his own hands, God set an everlasting blot upon him, which sticks
fast till this day, like a bar in his arms, so long as the name of Noath is
spoken of, that we cannot read of his virtue, but we must read of his sin,
whereby every man is warned, to receive the gifts of God reverently, to use
them soberly, and to sanctify himself, before he reach forth his hand unto
them that they may comfort and profit us, with that secret blessing, that God
has hid in them, or else every thing the best gifts of God may hurt us: as
this pleasant wine stained and confounded the great Patriarch, when he
delighted too much in it, which he might have drunk as Christ did at the last
Supper, and this disgrace had never been written in his story; but God would
have a fearful example, like the pillar of Salt, to stand before those
beasts, whose only strife is to make trial who can quaffe deepest, and show
all their valiantness in wine. Because there is such warning before us, now we
have the drunkard in schooling, I will spend the time that is left, to show you
the deformity of this sin, if any hear me which have bin overtaken with it,
let him not marvel why he cannot love his enemies, which loves such an enemy
as this, which leads til he reeleth, duls him till he be a fool, and
steals away his sense and wit, his memory, his health, his credit, his
friends, and when she has stripped him as bare as Noah, then she exposes
him like Noah to Cham, and all that see him do mock him: it is wonder almost
that any man should be drunk that has seen a drunkard before, swelling, and
pussing, and foming, and spuing, and groueling like a beast for who would be
like a beast, for all the world? Look upon the drunkard when his eyes stare;
his mouth driuels, his tongue faulters, his face flames, his hands tremble,
his feet reele? how ugly, how monstrous, how loathsome does he seem to thee,
so loathsome do thou seem to others when thou art in like taking. And how
loathsome then do thou seem to God? Therefore the first law which Adam
received of God, was abstinence, which if he had kept, he had kept all virtues
beside, but intemperancie lost all. In abstinence the law came to Moses, and he
fasted when he received it, to show that they which receive the word of God,
receive it soberly.

A temperate man seldom sins, because the flesh which does tempt is
mortified, least it should tempt: but when the handmaid is above the mistres,
and a man has lost the Image of God and scarce retayneth the image of man, all
his thoughts and speeches, and actions must needs be sin, and nothing but
sin, because sobriety the bond of virtue is broken; which kept all together.
When did thou want discretion to consider? When did thou want patience to
forgive? When did thou want co^tinencie to refrain? When did thou want
heart to pray, but when sobriety is fled away, and intemperancie filled her
room? If shame let to sin, it casts out sin: if fear let to sin, it
casts out fear: if love let to sin, it expulseth love: if knowledge let to
sin, it expulseth knowledge: like a covetous Landlord, which would have all
to himself and dwell alone.

There is no sin but has some show of virtue, only the sin of drunkenness
is like nothing but sin: there is no sin, but although it hurt the soul, it
beautifieth the body, or promises profit, or pleasure, or glory, or something
to his servants, only drunkenness is so impudent, that it descryeth it self:
so unthankful that it makes no recompense: so noisome, that it consumes the
body, which many sins spare, least they should appear to be sins. Every
sin defiles a man, but drunkenness makes him like a beast: every sin
defaceth a man, but drunkenness takes away the image of a man: every sin
robs a man of some virtue, but drunkenness steals away all virtues at
once: every sin deserves punishment, but drunkenness vpbraids a man while
the wine (...) in his stomach; and though he would dissemble his
drunkenness, yet he is not able to set a countenance of it, but the child
descryeth him, the fool knows that he is drunk, because his face bewraieth
him, like the leprosy which burst out of the forehead: so worthily has he
lost the opinion of sobriety, which has lost it self. His son thinks
himself more master now than his father: his servant makes him a fool, his
children leads him like a child; his wife uses him like a servant, and
although his drunkenness leaves him when he has slept, yet no man seckes to
him for counsel after, no man regards his word, no man reckons of his
judgment, no man is persuaded by his counsel, no man accounts of his learning,
no man has any glory to accompany with him, but so soon as drunkenes has
made him like a beast every man abhors him like a beast, as they did
Nabuchadnezzar: the spirit flies from him least he should greiue it, his
friends go away least he should shame them, and no virtues dare come near,
least he should defile them. How many things fly out when wine goes in? How is
it then, that he which loves himself, can be so cruel to himself? that he
should love his life, and shorten his life? that he should love his health, and
destroy his health? that he should love his strength, and weaken his strength?
that he should love his wealth, and consume his wealth? that he should love
his credit, and crack his credit? that he should love his understanding,
and ouerturne his understanding? that he should love his beauty, and deforme
his beauty? The Poets need feign no more, that men are transformed into
beasts, for if they were living now, they should see men like beasts: some like
Lions, some like Wolves, some like Foxes, some like Bears, some like Swine:
who is the beast, when the beasts satisfy nature, and man satisfies appetite?
when the beasts keep measure, and man exceedes measure? when the beasts are
sound laboring, and man found surfeiting? who is the beast? I have read of a
bird which has the face of a man, but is so cruel of nature, that sometime
for hunger she will set upon a man and slaye him: after, when she comes for
thirst unto the water to drink seeing the face in the water, like the face of
him whom she devoured, for grief that she has killed one like her self,
takes such sorrow, that she never eats nor drinks after, but beats and
frets and pines her self to death. What will thou do then which have not
slain one like thy self, but thy self, thy very self, with a cup of wine,
and murtherest so many graces and virtues in an hour?

As Esau sold his land and living for a mess of pottage, so the drunkard
sells his sense, and wit, and memory, and credit, for a cup of wine. Thou
have not murdered thy brother like Caine, but thou have murdered thy self,
like Judas: as the Rechabites abstained from wine, as Ionadab bad them,
obtained the blessing which God had appointed to the Israelites: so let us take
heed least they which we account Idolaters; whilst they fast and watch, and
obtain the blessing that GOD has appointed for us, get away the blessing,
while we sit down to ear and (...) to play. Therefore as Christ said,
Remember Lots wise: so I say, remember Lot: one hour of drunkenness did him
more hurt, the ^all his enemies in Sodom. Remember Noah, one hour of
drunkenness discovered that which was hid six hundred years.

Ten times more might be said against this vice, but if I have said enough to
make you abhor it, I have said as much as I would. Some go about to excuse
Noah, because he was an old man, and therefore might soon be taken
cup-shot: some, because the Wines were hotter in those Countries then they are
with us: some, because of his change of drinks, which had not wonted himself
to wine before: some, because as most men delight in that which by great labor
they have brought to pass of themfelues, so no marvel though Noah had a
longing to his own grapes? following herein the example of a curious Cook,
which does sip and sip his broth, to taste whether it be well seasoned, that
he may amend it if he can, or amend the next: but as the fly by often dallying
with the candle, at last scorcheth her wings with the flame: so taking, he was
taken, and at last was drunk: yet this is imputed to him for his fault, that
he was drunk, as the punishment which follows does witness. Such is the
providence of God, that his mercy might be glorified in all, he has
concluded all under sin, and suffered the best to fall, that no man might
trust in his own strength, and that we seeing their repentance, may learn to
rise again, how grievous so ever our sins be. If we have been Idolaters, if
adulterers, if persecutors, if murmurers, if murderers, if blasphemers, if
drunkards: Aron, and Moses, and Lot, and Abraham, and David, and Solomon, and
Peter, and Paul, and Noah have been the like, who reign now in the kingdom of
Christ with his Angels, and so may we if we repent like them. These examples
(says Paul) are not written for our imitation, but for our admonition. Thus
you have seen Noah sober, and Noah drunken: whereby we may see, that a man
may be drunk with his own wine, he may surfeit with his own meats, he may
lust with his own wife, he may offend with his own gifts, his own honor may
make him proud, his own riches may make him covetous, his own strength may
make him venturous, his own wit may make him contentious: therefore as the
child pluckes out the sting before he takes the honey; so let every man
before he receive the gifts of God, sit down and look what baits, what
snares, what temptations satan has hid in them, and when he has taken out
the sting, then eat the honey, and he shall use the blessings of Christ, as
Christ did himself.

FINIS.
A GLASS FOR DRVNKARDS.
22 And when Cham the father of Canaan saw the nakedness of his father, he
told his two brethren without.

23 Then took Shem and Iaphet a garment, and put it upon both their shoulders,
and went backward, and covered the nakedness of their father with their faces
backward: so they saw not their fathers nakedness.

24 Then Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger son had done
unto him:

25 And said, Cursed be Canaan, a servant of servants shall he be unto his
brethren.

26 He said moreover, Blessed be the Lord God of Shem, and let Canaan be his
servant.

27 God persuade Iaphet, that he may dwell in the tents of Shem, and let Canaan
be his servant, etc.

YOu have here the Story of Noah and his sons. As Noah did well and evil,
so he had good sons and evil: but as his virtues were more notorious then
his vices, so GOD blessed him more then he crossed him: for he had two good
sons, and but one evil son: his good sons were Shem and Iaphet, his
wicked son was Cha^: his good sons were blessed, his wicked son was cursed.
First of the father, and then of his sons. In Noah first you see his
husbandry, and then his drunkenness, and after his nakedness. In Cham first
you see his mockery, and after his curse: in Shem and Iaphet first you see
their reverence, and after their blessing.

Of Noah's drunkenness and his husbandry we have spoken: now a word of his
nakedness. Drinking of the wine he was drunk, and was uncovered in the midst
of his tent, etc. It is said that drunken porters keep open gates, so when
Noah was drunken, he set all open: as wine went in, so wit went out: as wit
went out, so his clothes went off. Thus Adam which began the world at first,
Genesis 3.
was made naked with sin: and Noah which began the world again is made naked
with sin, to show that sin is no shrowder but a stripper. This is one
fruit of the Vine more then Noah looked for: in stead of being refreshed and
comforted, he was stripped and scorned.

There is a thing which follows sin, which Job calls a rod, Job. 9. 34.
and 21. 9. 6
which the sinner never thinks of, before he have done. When the child has
faulted, then he is beaten: so now Noah has sinned, he must be beaten: first
he is stripped naked, after he is scourged; wine puts off his clothes, and
then Cham comes and lasheth him: to show, that wine can both cheer the heart,
and grieve the heart. As the forbidden tree when it promised our parents
knowledge, Genesis 3. 6.
took their knowledge from them: so every sin gives other wages then it
promises. Little thought Noah that wine would make him naked: but now he is
naked and stripped too, as though he were first stripped and then whipped. He
which believed the threatening (like Lot) when others mocked, Genesis 19.
he which escaped the flood when others were drowned, he to who^ all the fowls
of the air, and the beasts of the earth flocked in couples, as they did to
Adam, he which was reserved to declare the judgments of GOD, Genesis 2.
and begin the world again; Noah, the example of temperance, the example of
moderation, the example of sobriety, lies naked in his Tent for drinking the
wine which he himself has planted: the operation of wine was drunkenness,
the sequel of drunkenness was nakedness, the effect of nakedness was
derision. As the Serpents sting is in his tail, so the end of sin is
bitterness, least he should love the vice wherewith he was once defiled, as
they which are once drunk, hardly get out of the sellar. God gives him a
Memorandum like Jacobs limping, that he was never drunken after, but learned
temperancie of intemperancie: therefore it is good a little to feel the sting
of sin, that we may handle it like a hornet.

Now when Noah the father was drunken, Cham the son becomes a scorner: the
father deserved to be despised of his son, because he had disfigured the
image of a father. Therefore it follows, When Cham the father of Canaan saw
the nakedness of his father, he told his two brethren without, etc.
Drunkenness was his fault, and shame must be his punishment. Whereby you may
note, how God does proportionate and match sins and punishments together, that
a man may look upon his punishment like a glass, and see his sin. Again,
by this you may see, how God does bring forth the faults of the just as well as
the unjust, or else other would say as Christ says, Ioh. 8. Who can accuse me
of sin? What a grief was this to David, that his son should be his traitor?
So to increase the grief of Noah, his son was his scorner. He may say as the
Psalmist says, Psalm. 54. 12. It is thou O man, even my companion and familiar,
which delighted together. If mine enemy had defamed me, I could have borne it,
or I would have fled from him: but he whom I have loved, nay he whom I brought
into the world, made me a shame to the world, like the Viper which kills the
damme that bears it. So, oftentimes the prophecy of Michaiah proves true, A
man's enemies are they of his own house, Chap. 7. 6. As Judas betrayed his
Master. Who can reclaim a wicked disposition? how deep was the root of evil
hid in his heart, that Noah could never know it before he showed it. Until now
Cham seemed as good as Shem, and if Iaphet had said, thou shall be cursed, he
would have said, thou shall be cursed. Hypocrisy is spun with such a fine
thread, that we may live as long with a man, as Noah did with Cham, and scarce
discern him.

Here are two sins, which go before Chams curse; one that he did see his
fathers nakedness, the other, that he did reveal it unto his Brethren.

When he says, that Cham saw his fathers nakedness: he means that he looked
upon it with a pleasure, 2 Samuel 11.
as David upon the nakedness of Bethsheba, for he might have seen it by
chance, and not offended, as a man sees an Image and detesteth it.

The Edomites are reproved for looking upon the affliction of their brethren,
Obad. 11.
because they rejoiced to see it. But the friends of Job looked upon his
afflictions, and are not reproved because they sorrowed to see his sorrows.
Therefore Cham did not sin in seeing, but in gazing, and rejoicing, like the
Edomites.

There is a wise eye, Eccl. 2. 14.
and there is a foolish eye, Pro. 17. 24.
the wise eye is like the Be, which gathers honey of every weed: the
foolish eye is like the spider which gathers poison of every flower.
Therefore God licensed Abraham to see the flames of Sodom, which he forbad
Lot, because that which teaches one, tempts another: it is a true Proverb,
the eye is a shrew; although it show light, yet it leads many into
darkness. If Eve had not seen, she had not lusted, for it is said, Seeing
that the tree was pleasant to the eyes, Genesis 3. 6.
she took and eat. Iosu. 7. 21.
If Achan had not seen, he had not stolen. For he says, first I saw, and then
I coueted. If David had not seen, he had not lusted, for it is said first,
That he did see her, and then he sent for her. 2. Sam. 11. 2
So when Cham had seen the temptation, he was snared with the sin: therefore
it follows, He told his brethren which were without, etc. Thus sin grows of
sin from the eye to the heart, and from the heart to the tongue, a man may go
into a labyrinth easily, but when he is in he cannot get out: so Cham did see
a temptation easily, but when he had seen it, he could not look from it.
Therefore when Esayah speaks of vanity, Esa. 5. 18.
he named Cart-ropes of vanity, to show how one sin draws on another, as
it were with Cart-ropes, Genesis 3.
and one sinner makes another, 1. Pet. 5.
as Eve did Adam. When Satan was cast out himself, he sought ever after
whom he might devour, so when Cham had strained reverence himself, he
labored to bring his brethren into the same disobedience. All men seek after
fellows, and we think it evil to be evil alone, therefore the thieves
before they go to steal, call their mates, and say, Come with us, Prou. 1.
10. 1. Pet. 4. 3.
It is enough (says Peter) that we have spent our former time in lusts: so it
was enough that Cham had faulted himself, but when he had seen, he would have
his brethren see too: When he was become a scorner, he would have his brethren
scorners too: therefore as Andrew called Simon, and Philip called Nathaniel,
John. 1.
to see the Son of God: so Cham called his brethren to see the nakedness of his
father. The sins of men are like a plume of feathers, for itching ears, and an
evil disposition breeds an evil suspicion: therefore Cham thinking that his
brethren had bin as shameless as himself, thought this a merry may game to
make them sport. Come with me says he, and I will show you my Father naked:
they say it is an evil bird which will defile his own nest: so it is an evil
son that will shame his own father, he should have covered his fathers
nakedness so soon as he saw it, lest his brethren should see it too, but he
was ready to make it worse, like them which hear a suspicion and make it a
report, he should have taken the beam out of his own eye, when he spied a
moate in his fathers eye: but as the eye sees all things, and cannot see it
self, so we can see others men's faults but not our own. Pro. 30. 1.
When Agur had considered the follies of others, he considered his own
follies, and said, I am more foolish then any man: When Judah had considered
Thamars sins, Genesis 38.
he considered his own and said, She is more righteous then I. But when Cham
did see a fault in his father, al his own faults were hid under a bushel, he
cared not that he was his father, nor that he was saved for his
righteousness, nor that he had planted a Vineyarde for him and his brethren,
nor that he was never drunken before, nor that he had committed greater sins
himself, but like them which make their sport, that which should be their
sorrow, so he laughed at that which might make him weep. Often did I well
might Noah say, and thou did never honor me for that: but once did I evil,
and for that thou would shame me.

There is a kind of men which are ashamed of other men's faults, but not of
their own: they are like flies which always light upon the sore, if they
find any sin, there they talk, that is their sport, like a Tennis ball,
when they come to their ordinaries, and though they did never well in all their
life, yet that fault seems greater to them then all their own, these men are
so like the devil, that in Reuelat. 12. 10. The devil is called by their name,
An accuser of the brethren, and that you may know that such tongues shall
burn in the fire of hell, Saint James says, That their tongues are kindled
with the fire of hell already. James 3. 6. This was ever the property of bad
men, to seek faults in good men, to object again, that they may sin without
reproof of them. Tit^^. 2. 8.
Therefore says Paul, So behave your selves, that they which would slander
you, may be ashamed, having nothing to speak evil of you: If Noah had not
been drunken, Cham had lost his sport.

Now because this fact of Cham was so heinous, when he is accused of it, he is
called the Father of Canaan, as if he should say, think what he deserves,
which being a father himself, would so dishonor his father. It was meet that
he which had Children should know the duty of a Child, and ever think,
that as he behaved himself toward his Father, so his sons would behave
themselves to him again, but all this did nothing move him, therefore the
greater was his sin.

To conclude then, as Cham was worse then Noah whom he derided, so if you
mark* they which are wo^t to speak hardly of others have greater faults
themselves* which they cannot tell how to cover, but by disgracing others. Thus
much of the wicked son, now of the good sons it follows.

Then took Shem and Iaphet a garment, and put it upon both their shoulders,
and went backward, Pro. 1. 10.
and covered the nakedness of their father, etc. Solomon says, If sinners
tempt thee, yet consent thou not: So though Cham tempted them, they consented
not, but when he said, Come and see, they went and hid: Noah stripped himself,
but he could not cover himself, so we can corrupt our selves, but we cannot
amend our selves. As Cham is accused of two faults, for beholding his fathers
nakedness, and for revealing it: so Shem and Iaphet are commended for two
things, that they would not see their fathers nakedness and that they covered
it. All came of one root, and all had one duty, and yet see what difference
was between the^, one was glad of his fathers shame, and the other were sorye
for it: one published it, and the other smothered it. These two, says Moses,
saw not their Fathers nakedness. Once it was no shame to be naked: for it is
said, that Adam and Eve were both naked, Genesis 2. 25.
and were not ashamed. But as sin made labor irksome, which was not
irksome before, and made heat offensive which was not offensive before, and
made cold hurteful, which was not hurtful before, so it made nakedness
shameful which was not shameful before, that rather then a man would be naked
now, he will cover himself, as Adam did with fig leaves. Therefore we never
read that Noah was naked before he was drunken, showing that a sober man will
never open that which nature has hid*

This is a difference between men and beasts; men are not only ashamed to be
seen naked themselves, but unless it be some Cham, they are ashamed to see
another naked. Shem and Iaphet saw not their fathers nakedness, who is so
blind as he which will not see? Nay who is so blind as he which will see? the
light of the eyes oftentimes draws the soul out of light into darkness,
knowing therefore that it was hard to see like Cham, and not to sin like Cham,
they would not see least they should offend. As they would not see it
themselves, so they were careful that none other should see it, and therefore
they covered it with their cloakes. For we must not only refrain sin, but
restrain sin, according to that, Leuit. 19. 17. Suffer not thy brother to
sin, so Shem and Iaphet seeing how their brother had sinned, stopped the
cause that no more might sin, they were loath that he should see that which
he would have them to see, their grief and modesty it was such, that they did
not stay to make him any anuswere, or ask him any question, but straight they
thought what was best to be done, and as a Nurse takes the milk out of her
own mouth to give to the Child, so they took off their cloakes from their
backs to cover their fathers. Such a reverence is in children toward their
parents, if they have but nature, that they will not suffer the majesty of
their Father to wax vile, but rather they will hear any reproach against
themselves, then abide a word against their Father. Now if we do such
reverence to earthly Fathers which bring us into misery, that we had rather
shame our selves then they should bear any shame, why are we so ashamed and
afraid to speak for our father which calls us out of misery into
happiness: if Cham b^ cursed for dishonouring a man, let them fear which
dishonor God.

You know that the Papists do cover the spots of their Bishops with this
cloak of Shem and Iaphet, and not only they but others too, for if any speak
of corruption in Rulers, or briberie in Judges, or Simonie in Bishops, or
non-residencie in Pastors, he is said to discover his fathers nakedness like
Cham, but as we may not reveal all sins, least the uncircumcised rejoice, so
we may not cover some sins, least the uncircumcised increase: For if some
men's drunkenness were not reproved, they would be drunken still, and make a
common weal of drunkards: therefore they which will be converted, first let
them prove themselves fathers, as Noah was, and after let them amend as Noah
did, and they which cover them, let them distinguish between Noah and Cham,
and between error and obstinacy. For some, Christ appoints admonition, for
others reprehension, for others Excommunication, and for others correction:
therefore every man's nakedness must not be covered as Noah's was: we will
cover the first drunkenness, as Shem and Iaphet did, if they will repent as
Noah did, and be drunken no more. But shall we follow them like a blind
man's Boy, to stay them so often as they fall, when they say that they stumble
not, though they lie on the ground? This is not the cloak of reverence, but
the cloak of flattery. Therefore as Christ said, Let the dead bury the dead:
So I may say, let the wicked cover the wicked; the Wolves are not the Lambs
fathers, but the Lambs Butchers, therefore if they would be covered, let them
speak to their Children to cover them, for this is our rule, They which sin
openly, reprove openly, that the rest may fear, 1. Tim. 5. 20.

Thus you have heard what the badde Son did, and what the good sons did:
now we come to Noah again: Then Noah awoake and knew what his younger son
had done unto him, and said unto him, Cursed be Canaan, a servant of servants
shall he be unto his brethren. He said moreover, Blessed be the Lord God of
Shem, and let Canaan be his servant, etc.

First he shows, how Noah comes to himself, then how he knew what his
sons had done unto him; then how he curses one and blesses another. As his
sons were ashamed of his nakedness when he was drunken, so now he is sober, he
is ashamed of it himself, therefore he is said to awake from his wine, as
though he had been a sleep; for The drunkard (says Solomon) is as one that
sleeps, Proverbs 23. 34. When the belly is full, the boanes are at rest, so
when Noah was full, his thoughts were at rest: therefore being as it were
lulled a sheep, with overmuch wine, he may be said to awake. Here Moses would
exhort all them that sleep with Noah, to awake with Noah. Noah was once
intemperate, and many follow him in that, Noah was but once intemperate, and
few follow him in that: David was once incontinent, and many follow him in
that; David was but once incontinent, and few follow him in that: Peter was
once unfaithful, and many follow him in that; Peter was but once unfaithful,
and few follow him in that. This the difference between the faithful and the
wicked, both fall, and but one rises again. It follows. He knew what his
younger son had done unto him: either by the spirit of God, which suggested
him, or else by some other that told him; for a drunken man does not remember
what is said or done: and therefore the drunkard says, I was beaten, but when
I awaked, I knew it not, Pro. 23. 35. Therefore when Lot was drunken, his
daughters lay with him, and it is said, Genesis 19. 33. that he perceived not
when they lay down, nor when they rose up: therefore Noah knew either by the
spirit which informed him, or by others which told him.

Now, as Moses (declaring Chams sin) called him the father of Canaan: so Noah
repeating his sin again, called him his younger son. He disdaineth to name
him, but calls him a younger son; to aggrauate his fault, because we will
suffer our elder sons to be more familiar with us, but of the younger we
look for more reverence; or else because parents are wont to make more of the
youngest, and dandle them, as Jacob did Benjamin, and so he might say, My
younger son, which for his years should have showed me most duty, and for
my affection should have borne me most love; my younger son has sought my
dishonor; and not content to scorn me himself, has published my shame, and
as much as in him lay, provoked his brethren to scorn me too.

Of whom is a man so often deceived, as of his nearest friend? Lightly the
younger son is better than the elder, as Joseph was better than his elder
brethren, David was better than his elder brethren, Abell was better than his
elder brother, Isaac was better than his elder brother, Jacob was better than
his elder brother; but here the youngest is worst: so neither virtue nor vice
goes by age. Now, as Christ when he awoke, rebuked the winds, and comforted
his Disciples: so Noah when he awoke, cursed the scorner, and blessed the
other. Moses does not set down his words of choler, but brings him in,
speaking by the spirit of prophecy, what should come upon all his sons. It
is like that the good Patriarch had bewailed his own sin before, and now
having repented, and got pardon for it, he comes forth like a proclaymer of
Gods judgment, and thundreth against this mocker. What a grief was this to
the father, to be constrained to condemn his own son, and with his own
mouth to pronounce him banished from the Church of God: for though Cham had not
the nature of a son, yet Noah had not lost the nature of a father, and he saw
what a small number was left upon earth, like Adams children for to replenish
the whole world again: therefore it grieved him to curse his son, as much as
it rejoiced his son to scorn him. Yet as Abraham would sacrifice his son,
rather then displease GOD; so Noah did curse his son, rather then he would
displease GOD: showing that we should not spare our own bowels, when God
would have them punished, but do as the fathers and mothers of Idolaters and
blasphemers did in the law, Dan. 13.
who brought the first stone to press their sons to death, showing that as
the son of God died for them, so their sons should die for God, if they
would not serve him. Now the curse goes forth: Cursed be Canaan, that is,
cursed be scorners, cursed be all they which dishonor their father and mother,
A servant of servants shall he be: this is the first mention of servants in
all the scripture, man was not made to serve but to rule, but sin makes them
serve which should rule: therefore as you saw sin bring in the first
nakedness, so you see sin bringing in the first servant, A servant of servants
shall he be. This curse is denounced with great vehemency: for he says not
simply, A servant shall he be, but A servant of servants shall he be: as if he
should say, a servant, and more than a servant, that is of a servile condition,
and servile mind. As the Sabbath of Sabbaoths signifies a high Sabbath; and
as the Song of Songs, signifies an excellent Song; and as the Holy of holiest
signifies the holiest place, and as the Lord of Lords signifies the chiefest
Lord: so Vanity of Vanities signifies the gretest Vanity, and servant of
servants, signifies the vilest servant. Seeing then that the Pope takes this
name unto him, and writes himself The servant of servants, in all his
Indulgences, as though he did ground upon this curse of Cham it seems that the
Lord would show thereby, who is like Cham, and who is cursed: therefore let not
us deny him that which the holy Ghost does give him, but as he takes Chams
name, so let him take his curse too, Cursed be Canaan, etc. It was not Canaan
which tempted Shem and Iaphet, to gaze upon their fathers nakedness, but it
was Cham. How comes it then that Noah does curse Canaan, and not Cham? In
the 22. verse Cham is called the father of Canaan, so that Canaan was Chams
son, therefore God not content with the punishment of Cham alone, says,
Cursed be Canaan also; showing, that both Cham and Canaan, the father and the
children, shall be cursed for this impiety: because Cham had showed himself
a rebellious child to Noah, God shows that his children shall do the like
by him. Here is to be noted, that whereas Cham had elder sons then Canaan,
and Canaan was his youngest, yet God for a purpose names the youngest in the
curse, showing that his wrath should last, even to the youngest, and be a great
while before it were forgotten. Here is to be noted again, that whereas the
country of Canaan was so fruitful, and so blessed a country, that it was
called the land that flows with milk and honny, yet under the name of Canaan,
Chams youngest son (of whom the country of Canaan took the name) God
shows that the Canaanites shall be cursed in this blessed land, as Cain was a
vagabond upon his own ground: Genesis 4.
to show, that the joy of heart, and peace of conscience comes from God, and
nothing else. Now the issues which followed upon this curse, do show that Noah
spoke not from the spleen, but from the spirit of God: For first you read how
the Canaanites, who came of Canaan, were slain of the Israelites; then you
read how the Gibeonites which came of Canaan were made slaves to the
Israelites; then you read how the Egyptians and Ethiopians which came of
Canaan, were taken captive by the king of Ashur: Esaias 20. 4.
then you read, how Nemrod and his accomplices, that came of Canaan, were
confounded at Babel, when they went about to exalt themselves. Beside, where as
length of days, is a blessing to them which honor their father, Cham which
dishonored his father, Genesis 27.
had not one son of his line which lived above an hundredth years: so, as
Isaac said, Jacob have I blessed, Genesis 28. 1.
and he shallbee blessed, so Noah may say, Cham have I cursed, and he shall be
cursed, for he was cursed indeed; cursed in himself, and cursed in his
children, cursed in heaven, and cursed in earth, cursed with God, and cursed
with men: for after this he began to be abhorred, and they that came of him.
Therefore Abraham commanded his servant, that he should not choose a wife for
his son, of the Canaanites, Isaac gives the like commandment to his son
Jacob, because they were a cursed nation, and hated of God ever since Noah
said, Cursed be Canaan. Thus when Cham said unto his brethren, Come and I
will show you my father naked: he might have said; Come and I will show you my
self accursed. If GOD have such wrath against a scorner, think whether thou
followest not some sin worse then scorning.

Now after Noah had cursed Cham, he blessed his brethren, Blessed be the Lord
God of Shem, etc. Of Shem came the Jews which had the first blessing, and
therefore Shem is blessed first: of Iaphet came the Gentiles, which had the
latter blessing, and therefore Iaphet is blessed after: the form of Shems
blessing is; Blessed be the Lord God of Shem, etc. One which hears this
blessing would think that Noah did not bless Shem, but that he blessed God,
for he says not, blessed be Shem, but blessed be the Lord God of Shem. This
is to signify that as cursed Canaan came of Cham, so the blessed Messiah
should come of Shem, which though he were Shems son, yet here he is called
Shems Lord, as he was called David's son, and David's Lord. Then to show that
Noah does not bless Shem, but God does bless him, and Noah prayed that he
might be blessed, as Christ gave the spirit, and John ministered but the
water. Thirdly, to show that God for blessing us, should be blessed of us; and
therefore Noah said, Blessed be the Lord God of Shem, etc. as if he should
say, blessed be the Lord which blesses Shem. Further this shows the
difference between Shems blessing, and Iaphets blessing, that is the Jews and
the Gentiles, for he says, God persuade Iaphet to dwell in the tents of Shem,
as though Iaphet were not blessed yet, but should be blessed; but he says of
Shem, Blessed be the Lord Gods of Shem: as if he should give him possession,
and say, take thy blessing: for to assure him of Gods blessing, he calls God
Shems God: As were say, my lands, or my goods, so he might say, my God, and
my Lord: such a property the faithful have in God. As Paul says, God is not
the God of the dead, but of the living: so I may say, God is not the God of the
wicked, but of the righteous, and therefore he is called, The God of Abraham,
the God of Isaak, and the God of Jacob, which were all good and righteous and
holy men. The next blessing is Iaphets, the form of his blessing is, God
persuade Iaphet to dwell in the tents of Shem, that is, God persuade the
Gentiles which come of Iaphet, to embrace the Religion of the Jews, which come
of Shem. See how God counts it for a blessing, to be in the true Religion,
and how men should be persuaded unto it, because it is love which cannot be
forced: this is the first prophecy in scripture of the calling of the
Gentiles, that is of our calling to Christ. And to put us in mind that we were
once out of the covenant, and but added to the covenant, the name of Iaphet,
which was the father of the Gentiles, does signify, persuaded or enlarged, as
it were added to the Church, as though the time were when we were out of the
Church: therefore first we are indebted to our good mediator, which added us
to the kingdom, when we were out of the kingdom; and then that he did it by
persswasion, not by compulsion. As Noah prayed God to persuade Iapheth, so he
has persuaded us by his word, and not forced us by his rods: showing how we
should persuade one another to the truth, in the spirit of mildnes, remembering
that we come of Iapeth, which signifies, persuaded. Now after Shems
blessing, and after Iaphets blessing likewise, he says, Let Canaan be his
servant; this is thrice repeated in three verses together, as if God had
ratified it, and sworn it with a treble verelie. For when Joseph told Pharaoh
why his dream was doubled, he gave this reason, because it should surely come
to pass, Gen* 41. 22.
so Cham might be sure his curse would come to pass. Here is a sweet
observation beside, how Shem and Iaphet are blessed in Chams curse, and how
Cham is cursed in their blessing: for when he says, Let Canaan be Shem and
Iaphets servant; he implies this, that beside they were blessed in their own
children, because they were obedient to them, they should be blessed in Chams
children, because they were servants to them: so Shem and Iaphet were blessed
in Chams curse. Again beside that Cham was cursed in his own children,
because they were rebellious to him, he is cursed also in Shems and Iaphets
children, because they were Lords over him, according to this saying, Let
Canaan be their servant; so Cham is cursed in Shem and Iaphets blessing, as the
Egyptians were drowned in the waters which saved the Isralites. These are the
notes which I could pick out of this story: here you see how Cham was cursed
but for doing evil, and how Shem and Iaphet were blessed but for doing well;
therefore as the Angel said to them which sought Christ at the sepulcher;
Fear not you, so I may say to all which seek Christ, fear not you, for when
Cham is cursed Shem and Iaphet are blessed; so when the wicked are cursed, the
godly shall be blessed, as the sheep went to the right hand, when the goats
went to the left hand. This is enough to show what we are, that when God saved
but eight persons in the flood, yet you see one of them drink until he be
drunken; and another scorn until he be cursed. If two among so few did so,
when the flood was by them, what marvel though so many do so now the flood is
gone, and the weather calm: As there was a Cham in the Arc, so look always
to have Cham in the church. Shem did not go out of the Arc, because Cham was
in the Arc, neither let the faithful go out of the church, because wicked are
in the church. As Cham scorned, and Noah was scorned: so there shall be always
one that persecuteth, and one which is persecuted: if the son persecute the
father, think it not strange to be persecuted of any, for they which are not
persecuted, lightly are persecutours themselves. Thus you have seen Noah
drunken and scorned, Cham scorning and cursed, Shem and Iaphet reuerencing and
blessed. In this story is the first mention of planting of Vineyardes, the
first speech of drinking of wine, the first example of drunkenness, the first
blessing and cursing of parents, the first name of servant, and the first
prophecy of the calling of the Gentiles. Noah is a warning to all drunkards,
Cham is a warning to all scorners, Shem and Iaphet are an example for all
subjects to reverence their rulers, and for all children to reverence their
parents. Now as Noah prayed, God persuade Iaphet to dwell with Shem, so God
persuade us to dwell with Christ.

FINIS.
The Art of Hearing, in two Sermons:
Teaching a way to remember Sermons or counsel afterward as well as presently,
and how every Sermon shall take away some corruption from the hearer.
TO THE READER.
BY the ear comes knowledge, and therefore it is likely that many would
profit by Sermons, if they were taught to hear. But before they can tell how
to hear, that is, what things to observe, and the way to remember them, it is
not possible that they should learn much, though they hear often: for this I
know by trial, even of those which are counted amongst the best and
auncientest bearers in London, that they might learn more in a month, tha^
they have gathered in twenty years, for they understand neither the Lords
Prayer, nor the Creed, nor the ten Comma^dements, but have a few notes in
their heads of some Sermons that they have heard, and that is all their
knowledge, except some few, which have kept the order laid down in this
book. Therefore that every man may be able not only to make a confession of
his faith, but to give a reason of his faith too, that which I have preached,
here I have written, as a Catechism for hearers to begin at: Desiring all my
brethren, that they would tell their flocks at the first, that they shall
never profit much, unless they record their Sermons so soon as they are
gone, and that they as Teachers would study to deliver that which is worthy to
be recorded.

The first Sermon.
Take heed how you hear. Luke. 8. 18.
THis is the warning of Christ to his Disciples, after they had heard the
Parable of the seed, how it fell in four grounds, and but one of the four
brought forth fruit. Here Christ exhorts his Disciples to be that ground,
and we exhort you. As GOD sent his Prophets and Teachers to Jerusalem that was
the chief City of the Jews, where the Temple was built, and where the
Priests, and the Levites and the Doctors dwelt, like an University, that from
it all the Towns and Villages about might receive instruction and light, like
a Beacon which stands upon a hill, and is seen over all the Country: so GOD
has done to this Jerusalem of yours. The city of Jerusalem had never so many
Prophets crying at once in her streets, as this city wherein we dwell,
though the Ox, which treads out the Corn, has often been attempted to be
muzle^ even of those which tread not at all. Yet as the Lambs breed in the
winter, and Quails came with the wind: so Preachers spring in the time of
discouragement more then when nothing hinders them: and whether it be our
ambition (as the kindred of Christ said) they which will be famous go to
great places, or whether GOD would make this city a spring and fountain to
water the Land, as he did Jerusalem: here is the College of the Prophets,
here is the voice of a Crier, here dwells the Seer, though he be hated, and
scorned, and contemned for his pains. When I consider how many laborers God
has sent to this Vineyard, and yet how little fruit it yields to the Sower,
I cannot impute it to the want of teaching, but to the want of hearing, neither
so much to the want of hearing, as to a kind of negligent hearing, like the
high way which received the seed but did not cover it. Therefore when this
sentence came to my mind, me thought I should go no farther until I had
taught you how to hear. I stood in doubt a while whether I should take such a
short text: but when I looked into longer the^ it, me thought this seemed
longer then they, and as I judge a text which should be preached before all
texts, which because it was not taught and learned at the first, a thousand
Sermons have been lost and forgotten, as though they had never been preached at
all: therefore let me say as my text says, before I expound it: Take heed
how you hear, while I teach you how to hear.

There is no sentence in Scripture which the devil had rather you should not
regard then this lesson of hearing: for if you take heed how you hear, you
shall not only profit by this Sermon, but every Sermon after this shall leave
such instruction, and peace, and comfort with you, as you never thought the
Word contained for you: therefore no marvel if the Tempter do trouble you
when you should hear, as the fowls combred Abraham when he should offer
Sacrifice. For be ye well assured that this is an infallible sign, that some
excellent and notable good is toward you, when the devil is so busy to
hinder your hearing of the Word, which of all other things he does most envy
unto you: therefore as he appointed Adam to another tree, lest he should go
to the Tree of life: Genesis 3.
so, knowing the Word to be like unto the Tree of life, he appoynteth you to
other business, to other exercises, to other works, and to other studies,
least you should hear it, and be converted to GOD, whereby the tribute and
reuenew of his kingdom should be impaired: therefore mark how many forces he
has bent against one little scripture to frustrate this counsel of Christ,
Take heed how you hear.

First, The devils sleights against hearing.
he labors all that he can to stay us from hearing: to effect this, he
keeps us at Tauernes, at Plays, in our shoppes, and appoynts us some other
business at the same time, that when the bell calls to the Sermon, we say like
the churlish guests, we cannot come. If he cannot stay us away with any
business or exercise, Math. 22.
then he casts fancies into our minds, and drowsinesse into our heads, and
sounds into our ears, and temptations before our eyes, that though we hear,
yet we should not mark, like the birds which fly about the Church. If he
cannot stay our ears, nor slack our attention as he would, then he tickleth
us to mislike some thing which was said, and by that makes us reject all the
rest. If we cannot mislike any thing which is said, then he infecteth us
with some prejudice of the Preacher, he does not as he teaches, and
therefore we less regard what he says. If there be no fault in the man,
nor in the doctrine, then least it would convert us and reclaim us, he
courseth all means to keep us from the consideration of it, until we have
forgot it. To compass this, so soon as we have heard, he takes us to dinner,
or to company, or to pastime, to remove our minds that we should think no
more of it. If it stay in our thoughts, and like us well, then he has this
trick in stead of applying the doctrine which we should follow, he turns us to
praise and extol the preacher, he made an excellent Sermon, he has a notable
gift, I never heard any like him. He which can say so has heard enough: this
is the repetitio^ which you make of our sermons when you come home, and so to
your business again, till the next sermon come, a breath goes from us, and a
sound comes to you, and so the matter is ended. If all these comers hear
in vain, and the tempter be so busy to hinder this work more than any other,
Christ's warning may serve for you, as well as his Disciples, Take heed how you
hear.

There is a hearing, Mar. 4. 24.
and a preparatiue before hearing, there is a praying, and a preparatiue before
praying, Eccl. 2. 17.
there is a receiving, and a preparatiue before receiving. 1. Cor. 11. 28.
As I called examination the forerunner, which prepares the way to the
receluer: so I may call attention the forerunner, which prepares the way to
the Preacher, like the plough which cutteth up the ground, that it may receive
the seed. As there is a foundation upon which the stones, and lime, and timber
are laid, which holds the buildings together* so where this foundation of
hearing is laid, there the instructions and lessons, and comforts do stay and
are remembered, but he which leans his ears in his pillowe, goes home
again like the child which he leads in his hand, and scarce remembers the
preachers text. A divine tongue and a holy ear make sweet music, but a
deaf ear makes a dumb tongue. There is nothing so easy as to hear, and yet
there is nothing so hard as to hear well. You come not hitherto learn how to
hear, but you come hitherto hear as you were wont: for there is none but
thinks before he come to hear, that he knows how to hear already. But when
I have showed you Christ meaning in this caveat, you shall judge whether you
have heard or not heard, before you learned how to hear.

In the seventeenth Chapter and the fifth verse of Saint Mathewes Gospel, the
Father teaches you how to hear, now the Son teaches you how to hear:
showing (as James says) that hearers only are not blessed, for many shall say
unto Christ, Have not we heard thee in our Synagogues? whom he will answer,
with I know you not: and therefore it is not enough to hear, but you must care
how hou hear, it is not enough to pray, but you must care how you pray, it is
not enough to receive, but you must care how you receive, it is not enough to
suffer, but you must care how you suffer, it is not enough to give, but you
must care how you give, it is not enough to believe, but you must care how you
believe: for God has appointed the way as well as the end. Because Cain
regarded not the manner, Genesis 4.
God regarded not his Sacrifice. It is better to do well than to do good: for
a man cannot offend in doing well, but he may offend in doing good, if he do
not well. Therefore Christ (whom the Father bade us hear) teaches us not only
to hear, Math. 17. 5
but how to hear: in the fourteenth chapter of Mark and the four and
twentieth verse, teaches us not only to read, but how to read: in the four
and twentieth of Saint Matthew, and the fifteenth verse, teaches us not only
to suffer, but how to suffer: in the fifth of Matthew, and the tenth verse,
teaches us not only to receive, but how to receive: Luke 22. 19. teaches us
not only to pray, but how to pray: Luke 11. 1. signifiyng, that more sin in
hearing, and reading, and praying, and suffering, and receiving, amiss, than
in not hearing, reading, praying, suffering, or receiving at all. Therefore Paul
takes the Christian before his race, and gives him this watchword. So run that
thou may obtain. 1. Cor. 9. 24. that is, so seek that thou may find, so
ask that thou may obtain, so knock that it may be opened, so give that
thou may do good, so suffer that thou may have comfort, so hear that thou
may profit. How many have fasted, and watched and prayed more than we, and
yet lost al their devotion? because they thought not of this rule, to do good
in a good sort. The Papists so they pray, care not how they pray, for they
think it enough to pray: and therefore when they have gone over their beads,
their prayer is done, although they never thought what they asked. But Jeremy
says, Cursed be he that does the business of the Lord negligently, whether he
hear negligently, or pray negligently, or receive negligently, or preach
negligently. The Scribes, and Pharisees did fast, and watch, and pray, and
hear, and read, and give, and do all that we can do, and yet Christ
rewards al their works with a woe; Woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees. The
Disciple which betrayed Christ, heard so much as the Disciples that loved
Christ, yet he had no feeling, nor comfort, nor profit of all his company
with Christ, because he did not use it as the rest did. The Jews did hear
more then all the world beside, yet because they took no heed to that which
they heard, therefore they crucified him which came to save them, and became
the cursedst people upon the earth, which were the blessedst Nation before:
therefore the A b c. of a Christian is to learn the Art of hearing. We care
how we sow, lest our seed should be lost: so let us care how we hear, least
Gods seed be lost. There is no seed which grows so fast as Gods seed if
it be sown well: therefore that I may show you that method of hearing,
which Christ commends here to his disciples, it is necessary to observe
five things. Five parts of this treatise.
First, the necessity of hearing: secondly, the fruit which comes by
hearing: thirdly, the kinds of hearers: fourthly, the danger of hearing
amiss: fifthly, that manner of hearing, which will make you remember that which
is said, and teach you more in a year than you have learned all your life.

Touching the necessity of hearing: When Christ says. Take heed how you
hear, he implies that all his Disciples should hear, nay they which were
excommunicate from the prayers, and from the councels, and from the Sacraments
for their sins, yet were not excommunicate from hearing, because they should
learn to repent.

Here that large commandment of our Savior Christ stands, Luke 8. 8.
That which I say unto you, I say unto all, therefore it is a general
Proclamation, Whosoever has an ear to hear let him hear. The place implies
that al should hear, though it imports that al can not hear. When the voice
spoke from heaven it said nothing, Mat. 17. 5.
but This is my beloved son, hear him: as thongh all the duties of man were
comprised in hearing. When Christ spoke but of one thing which is necessary,
he spoke of hearing, Luke 10. 22. As though it were so necessary to hear,
that all necessities should give place unto it. When men would not hear, God
spoke to the ground; Oh earth, earth, earth hear the word of the Lord: Iere*
22. 29. showing that GOD so contemns them which will not hear, that he
regardes the earth and the trees, and the stones being senseless creatures
above them.

When GOD stroke Zacharias he made him dumb, Luk 1. 5.
but not deaf; When GOD stroke Saul, he made him blind, but not deaf; Act.
9. 3. 4.
When GOD stroke Mephibosheth, he made him lame, 2. Sam. 4. 4.
but not deaf. Thus GOD would have them hear which cannot see, nor speak,
nor go. But there is a devil which is called the deaffe devil, Mark 9. 25.
showing that the devil would have us deaffe, because he that hears
instruction is in the way to life, but He which hears not instruction goes
out of the way. Proverbs tenne-seauenteenth. To show the necessity of hearing
the word which we should hear is called meat in the fifth Chapter and the
eleventh verse of the Epistle to the Hebrews, and the want of the Word is
called a famine in the eight chapter of Amos Prophecy and the eleventh verse,
as though it were as necessary for us to hear, as it is to eat.

Although our hearts are contrary to the Word more than to any thing beside,
yet no man can think that this is the Word of GOD, but he thinks it
necessary to be heard. Besides, if Christ be the Word (as Saint John calls
him in the first chapter and fourteenth verse) and the Word is received by no
other means, but by hearing only can any man then receive Christ without
hearing? Let not any be thus fond so vainly to dream: for that were to
receive the Word without the Word.

Therefore, as John wept until the Book was opened, and so soon as it was
opened, all the Elders sung: so we should coumpt it the greatest cause of
weeping when the word is taken from us that we cannot hear it, and the
greatest cause of rejoicing when it is open to us that we may hear without
let. Thus much of the necessity of hearing.

Secondly, touching the fruit that comes by hearing: Of all our senses,
hearing is the sense of learning, and therefore Solomon begins his Wisdom,
with Hearken my son, Prouer. 1. 8. opening as it were the door where
Wisdom must enter. Therefore except in praying, temptations never trouble a
man so much as in hearing, which shows that these two are the destroyers of
the destroyer: therefore as the tempter himself could not abide to hear the
Word when Christ spoke, so he cannot abide that we should hear the Word.
Matthew. 4.
It must needs be good for us which our enemies would keep from us.

Many hearing the Word have met with knowledge, have met with comfort, have
met with salvation, but without the Word never any was converted to GOD.
Therefore whenever the Word is preached, every one may say to himself, as
the Disciples said to the blind man, Be of good comfort, Mar. 10. 49.
he calls thee: be of good comfort, the Lord calls thee. When Christ
heard a woman say, Luke 11. 28.
Blessed are the breasts which gave thee suck, Christ replied, Blessed are
they which hear the Word of God: showing, that his Disciples were more
blessed for hearing him, than his Mother for bearing him. As Isaac gave Jacob a
double blessing, so Christ blesses them again: for in Matthew. 16. 17. he
says, Mat. 16. 17.
Blessed are the ears which hear the things which you hear: showing that the
Jews were more blessed than all the world, because they had this one blessing
to hear the truth. If they be blessed which hear, then you come hither for a
blessing, and he which is blessed, wants nothing. Every privilege does
importe some special good to him which has it: but it is the privilege of
man to hear the Word, and therefore the Word became man, because it
belongs only to man. John 1. 14.
God has given life and light and food to fowls, and fishes, and beasts, but
his Word is the prerogative of man. As to speak is the property of man, so to
hear is the property of man. To show the fruit which comes by hearing,
Christ calls the Word which we should hear, Mat. 13. 14.
Verbum Regni, The Word of the Kingdom, as though it brought a Kingdom with
it: to show the fruit which comes by hearing. The Disciples call the word
which we should hear, Verbum vitae, John. 6. 18.
the Word of life, as though it brought life with it: to show the fruit that
comes by hearing, Verse. 15.
Christ compares the good bearers to the fruitful ground: to show the
fruit that comes by hearing, Paul ^aieth, Faith comes by hearing, in the
^enth to the Romans, there is one fruit: Knowledge comes by hearing,
Matthew the fifteenth and tenth verse, there is another fruit: Comfort
comes by hearing, Psalm one hundred and nineteen, there is another fruit:
the sense of sin comes by hearing, Act. 2.
there is another fruit. As Christ with five loaves and two fishes fed five
thousand men: so Peter with one Sermon converted three thousand fowls. Act. 2.
41.
Agrippa hearing Paul but once, Act. 26. 27.
almost became a Christian, Act. 8. 38.
the Eunuch hearing Philip but once straight received the faith: Zacheus
hearing Christ but once, gave half his goods to the poor: so I doubt not but
some go from our Sermons almost Christians like Agrippa, some whole Christians
like the Eunuch, expressing their faith like Zacheus. Now a little and then a
little the soul grows like the body. If you hear well, our voice is like
the sound of the Rams horns that made the Walls of Jericho to reele, Josh.
6.
nay it will make the walls of hell to reele, for the same Word made the
Prince of hell give back, Matthew 4. 7. Although at all other times we are as
plain and simple as Iaacob, yet at this time we have a promise, and it is
given to us (for your sake) to speak sometime that which we conceive not our
selves, because the hour is come wherein GOD has appointed to call some of
you as he has done some of you before. Therefore as the princely spirit
came upon Saul when he should reign, 1. Sa. 11. 6.
to teach him how he should rule: so the Prophetical spirit comes upon
Preachers when they should teach, to teach them how they should speak.
Therefore, as Christ was contented to be baptized of John, Mat. 3. 15.
so be you content to be instructed of us, that if we be more simple than you,
the glory of God may appear more in converting you by us.

Thirdly, touching the kind of hearers: If all which come to hear, did hear
as they should, Christ need not warn us, Take heed how ye hear. But as we
pray, so we hear, the one is a lip-labor, and the other is an eare-labour.
As children play the trewantes in the school, so men play the trewantes in the
Church: how many come to hear me, and yet (peradventure) some do not hear,
while I speak of hearing? One has no pitcher, another has left his pitcher
behind him, another has brought a broken pitcher which will hold no water,
therefore Christ calls us Fishers: for as a Fisher takes but a few in
respect of those which go by, so we reform but a few in respect of them which
go as the came. First of Paul's hearers, and then of Christ's hearers, and after
our hearers. Acts 17. 32.
When the Athenians heard Paul preach of the resurrection, it is said, that
some mocked; there is one sort, the chair of scorners: Psalm. 1.
some said, we will hear thee of this again; there is another sort, which are
not yet resolved, but desire to be better instructed: some did assent unto him
and received his doctrine, as Dionisius Areopagita, and Damaris a woman; there
is the best sort: we never preach but we have all these hearers, some mock,
some waver, and some believe. Now of Christ's hearers: We find in the Gospel
that Christ had four sorts of hearers: while I count them to you, think of
what sort you are, for I doubt not but that there be here of all sorts. Some
heard him to wonder at him, like Herod, which was moved with the fame that
went of him: some came to hear, because they would know all things, that they
might be able to talk of them. It seems that Judas was such a scholar, for
he had learned to preach but not to follow: some came to cavil and to trip him
in his speeches, of these hearers were the Scribes and Pharisees which would
make him an enemy to Caesar: some were like to the good ground, which came to
know what they might do, and how they should believe, like the humble Scribe
which inquired the way to heaven. Now to our hearers. As there were wise
Virgins and foolish Virgins: so there are wise hearers, and foolish hearers.
Some are so nice that they had rather pine then take their food of any which
is licensed by a Bishop, as if Helias should refuse his food because a raue^
brought it to him and not an Angel: some come unto the service to save
forfeiture, and then they stay the Sermon for shame: some come because they
would not be counted Atheists: some come because they would avoid the name of
Papists: some come to please their friends, one has a good man to his friend,
and least he should offend him he frequents the Preachers, that his friend may
think well of him: some come with their masters and mistresses for attenda^ce:
some come with a fame, they have heard great speech of the man, and therefore
they will spend one hour to hear him once, but to see whether it be so as
they say: some come because they be idle, to pass the time they go to a
Sermon, lest they should be weary of doing nothing: some come with their
fellows, one says, let us go to the Sermon: content says he, and he goes
for company: some hear the sound of a voice, as they pass by the Church, and
step in before they be aware: another has some occasion of business, and he
appoynts his friend to meet him at such a Sermon, as they do at Paul's: all
these are accidental hearers, like children which sit in the market, and
neither buy nor sell. But as many foxes have been taken when they came to take:
so they which came to spy, or wonder, or gaze, or scoff, have changed their
minds before they went home, like one which finds when he does not seek.

As ye come with diverse motions, so ye hear in diverse manners: One is like an
Athenian, and he hearkeneth after news: if the Preacher say any thing of our
Armies beyond sea, or counsel at home, or matters of Court, that is his lure:
another is like the Pharisie, and he watches if any thing be said that may
be wrested to be spoken against persons in high place, that he may play the
devil in accusing of his brethren, let him write that in his tables too:
another smackes of eloquence, and he gapes for a phrase, that when he comes
to his ordinary, he may have one figure more to grace and worship his tale:
another is malcontent, and he never pricketh up his ears till the Preacher
come to gird against some whom he spiteth, and when the Sermon is done, he
remembers nothing which was said to him, but that which was spoken against
other: another comes to gaze about the Church, he has an evil eye, which is
still looking upon that from which Job did auert his eye: another comes to
muze, so soon as he is set, he falls into a brown study, sometimes his
mind runs on his market, sometimes of his journey, sometimes of his suite,
sometimes of his dinner, sometimes of his sport after dinner, and the Sermon is
done before the man think where he is: another comes to hear, but so soon
as the Preacher has said his prayer, he falls fast a sleep, as though he had
been brought in for a corpse, and the Preacher should preach at his funeral.

This is the generation of hearers: is not the saying of Christ fulfilled now,
Hearing you hear not? because we hear and hear not, like a covetous churl,
which goes by a beggar when he cries in Christ's name for relief, and
hears him cry, but will not hear him, because he craves that which he will
not part with.

May we not say again with Christ, What went ye out to see, rather then What
went ye out to hear, seeing ye remember that which ye see, and forget all
which ye hear? So you depart from our sermons like a slidethrifts purse which
will hold no money, and as you go home one says he does not edify: another
says, I cannot profit by him: another says, he keeps not to his text: another
says, he speaks not to the heart: as if the ground should complain of the
seed which will not receive the seed. Is not this the cause why your
Preachers about the City care not how they preach, because their flocks have
no care to hear? Is not this the cause why God does not hear us, because we
will not hear him? Is not this the cause why ye are such Doctors in the world,
and such Infants in the Church? Ye learned your trade in seven years, but
you have not learned religion in all your years. Can you give any reason for
it but this? you marked when your master taught you your trade, because you
should live by it: but you marked not when the Preacher taught you religion,
because you do not live by it. Come now to the danger by hearing amiss.
Christ says, Take heed how you hear: In Deuteronomy. 4. it is said, Take heed how
ye forget that which ye hear. This Take heed awaies goes before some
danger: therefore as Paul says, that men receive the Sacrament to their
salvation, or to their damnation, 1. Cor. 11. so Christ says, that men hear
the Word to their salvation, or to their damnation, The word which I have
spoken shall judge you in the latter day. Ioh. 12. 2. Cor. 2. 16.
It is called the savor of life, because it saves, and it is called the
savor of death, because it condemns. An evil eye ingendreth lust, and an
evil tongue ingendreth strife: but an evil ear makes an heretic, and a
scismatike, and an Idolater. This careless hearing, made GOD take away his
word from the Jews: therefore you may hear the word so, as it may be taken
from you, as the talent was from him that hid it, Math. 25.
for GOD will not leave his pearls with swine: but as he says, What have thou
to do to take my words in thy mouth seeing thou hate to be reformed? So he
will say, what have thou to do to take my word in thy ear, seeing thou hate
to be reformed? If any of you go away no better then you came, you are not
like hearers, but like ciphers, which supply a place, but signify nothing, so
you take a room but learn nothing: and they which are ciphers in the house of
GOD, shall be ciphers in the kingdom of GOD. Therefore, if thou have an evil
eye, and an evil tongue, and an evil hand, and an evil foot, yet have not
an evil ear too: for then all is evil, because the ear must teach all. If
the ear hearken to evil, then the heart must learn evil. Therefore an evil
ear is compared unto a bad Porter, which lets in every one in a gay coat,
though he be never so bad; and keeps out him that goes bare, though he be
never so good: so an evil ear lets all that is evil enter into the hair, but all that is good shuts the door against it, lest it should set the spirit and the
flesh at variance. Oh, if the Adder had not stopped his ear, how long since
had he bin charmed? But the shortest time in Gods service is the lo^gest time
in all the day. The beast came to the Arc to save themselves, and men will not
come to the Church to save themselves. It is too far, says Ieroboa^, but it
were not too far if Ieroboa^ were not unwilling. Luke 10.
One thing is necessary, and all vnnecessaries are preferred before it. The
gretest treasure in the world is most despised, the Star which should lead us
to Christ, the Laddder which should mount us to heaven, the Water that should
cleanse our leprosy, the Ma^na that should refresh our hunger, and the book
that we should meditate on day and night lies in our windows, no man reads
it, no man regards it: Psalm. 1. 2.
the love of God, and the love of knowledge, and the love of salvation is so
cold, that we will not read over one book for it, for all we spend so many idle
times while we live. If Samuel had thought that God had spoken to him; he would
not have slept, but because he thought it was not God but Eli, therefore he
slept: so, because, you remember not yt it is God which speaks, therefore you
mark not: but if you remembered Christ's saying, He which hears you hears me,
and he which despises you despises me, you would hear the voice of yt
Preacher as you would hear the voice of God. Surely (beloved) we know no other
way to save you nor our selves: if we did, how wretched were we to keep it
from you, which have no other calling, but to show you the way of salvation? If
this be the way and no other, if this be shewe^ you and no other, and yet you
will not take it but choose another, then are you not condemned by any other,
but you condemn your selves. He which will not hear is worse then Herod: for
as bad as he was, yet it is said of him, that he heard John. Nay, even those
who^ our Savior Christ in the Parable before this text compares to the
barren, the stony, and the thornie ground, were al hearers, and therefore he
which will not hear, is worse the^ any ground. It is said of Saul, that though
he were haunted with an evil spirit, yet when he heard David play upon the
Harp, the evil spirit departed from him: so they which hear, have some ease
of their sins; some peace of conscience, some intermission of their fear, as
Saul had when he heard the Harp, but they which will not hear, have no
intermission of their fear, nor of their grief, nor of their sins, because
the evil spirit never departs from them. Therefore as all the beasts tremble
when the Lion roareth, so let all men hearken when God teaches.

The end of the first Sermon.
The second Sermon.
IN the end hereof is proved, that none should preach without due meditation:
which is a common presumption in these days, and makes the Word and Ministry
despised.

Now it remains that I should teach you so to hear, that you may remember
that which is said, and learn more by one Sermon, then you reap by ten.
Christ calls none unto him but them which hunger and thirst, as if none were
fit to hear the Word, but they which hunger after it, and bring a stomach
with the^. It is written of the Heart, that when he lifts up his ears, he is
quick of hearing, and hears every noise: but when he lays down his ears,
he is deaf and hears nothing: So it is, when you mark and when you mark
not. They which are quick of hearing, are sure of remembrance: but they which
are dull of hearing, are short in keeping: therefore before I teach you how to
hear, give me leave again to say as my Text says, Take heed how ye hear,
that both our labors be not lost.

As there be two spirits, so there be two doctrines, two wisdoms, and two
counsels. In 1. Timothy 4. 1. There is a doctrine of devils: if you hear that
doctrine, you hearken to the Devil, as Saul did to a Witch. In the fifteenth
of Math. Mar. 10.
there is a doctrine of men, which Christ calls Leaven: if you hearken to
that, you shall err like men, because the blind lead the blind. In Genesis 3.
there is a counsel of the serpent: if you hearken to that, you shall perish
like Eve. In the 2. Sam. 18. there is a wisdom of Achitophel: if you hearke^ to
that, you shall speed like Absolon. Of all these Solomon says, Hearken no more
to the words which make thee to err. Pro. 16. 27.
But there is another doctrine, Act. 13. 12. which is called, The doctrine of
the Lord of this it is said. Luke 8. Whosoever has an ear to hear let him
hear.

Now to show you how you should hear, When Peter and John would make the
cripple attentive, Act. 3.
they said unto him, Look upon us: so, many to sharpen their attention, desire
to stand before the preacher, that they may look him in the face. by this
little help Peter shows, that we had need to use many helps to make us hear
well. In the thirteenth chapter, and fifteenth verse of the Prophecy of
Jeremy when the Lord speaks, it is said: Hear and give ear, as though we
should hear and more than hear. This more than hear, is to mark, and
understand, and remember, and believe, and follow that which we hear: Like the
Jews which said, All which thou speak from the Lord, we will do it: Exodus
24. So all that which we speak unto you from the Lord, you should do it:
Therefore all the commandments but the last are commandments of doing. And
Solomon in the twelfth Chapter of Ecclesiastes, and thirteenth verse, concludes
his doctrine with this, which he calls the sum of all: Fear the Lord and
keep his commandments. In the third Chap- of Exodus, and the fifth verse, God
teaches us how to hear, when he speaks to Moses and bids him put off his
shoes: So we should put off our lusts, and our thoughts, and our cares, and
our fancies, and all our business, when God speaks, for he which thinks or
does any thing else, when he should do that which is better, though it be good
which he does, yet he does sin in doing it.

In the 10 of the Revelation, an Angel teaches us how to hear, when he
willed John to eat the Book: showing that we should hunger after the word,
and digest it into every part as we digest meat.

In Math. 15. Christ teaches us how to hear, when he says, Hear and
understand. And again in Mark. 4. when he says, Take heed what ye hear.
Esa. 42. 23.
And Esaias teaches you how to hear, when he says: Hear for afterward:
showing, that more do hear for the present then for afterward, because they
forget it again, and after a while are never the better. In 1. Cor. 6. 1. Paul
teaches us how to hear, when he says, Receive not the grace of God in vain,
showing that many hear comfort, and are not comforted, many hear instruction,
and are not instructed. James teaches us how to hear, Cap. 1. 22. when he
says: Be not hearers only, but dooers: showing that you should do as you
hear, as you would have us to do as we teach. Math. 22.
In the 10. of Luke, Marie teaches us how to hear, when she leaves all to
sit at Christ's feet and mark his doctrine: showing that we should not say
like the churlish guestes, we have other business; but that this is our
business, as Christ answered his Parents, I must go about my fathers
business.

In Luke 2. the virgin teaches us how to hear; when she heard the sayings of
Anna and Simeon, and Christ, it is said that she pondered them, and laid them
up in her heart: showing that our ears should be but messengers to the heart:
for our treasure should be where the heart is, as the heart is where the
treasure is. In the 17. of the Acts, the men of Boerea teach us how to hear,
when they went home and searched the Scriptures so soon as they had heard Paul
preach, to see whether Moses and the Prophets did teach the same, showing that
the word is our Touchstone to try the Doctrines if we will not cry.

In the 8. of Luke, all the Disciples teach us how to hear, when they noted
Christ's parable, and repeated it again unto him, to know the meaning: showing
that we should not only hear, and the preacher only preach: but if you doubt
of any thing, you should inquire, and they should instruct you again. In the
third of Luke, the Soldiers and the Harlots and the Publicanes teach us how to
hear, when they come to require, and ask, Master, what shall we do? showing,
that we should come to hear some thing which may encourage us to this virtue,
or arm us against that vice, that we go from hearing to doing as John taught
them: all these are glasses in the scripture for the hearer to address
himself by, before he come to the sermon.

Beside these, other things do teach us too. As Solomon says, Go to the
Pismire, and learn to labor: so Christ in the beginning of this Chapter sends
us to the husbandman to learn to hear, as he prepares the ground before he
sow his seed, lest his seed should be lost: so we should prepare our hearts
before we hear, lest Gods seed be lost. In the ^0. of John he sends us to the
sheep: as they know the voice of their shepherd, and will not hear a
stranger, so we should know the voice of Christ from the voice of Popes, or
Doctors, or Counsels, or Traditions, lest we go like Samuel from God to Eli.
When you have bin in the sheep-folds, go to the woods, and learn of the
birds: for they will so listen to him, which teaches them to sing, that they
learn to sing the same note after him, so we should learn to sing the tune of
the spirit: for they which hear the word aright, learn to speak even as the
Word speaks.

Beside these schoolemasters, we have other Teachers too, all the titles which
are given to the Word, do teach us how we should hear the Word The Apostles
call their writings Epstles. The Epistle to the Romans, The Epistle to the
Corinthians, etc. showing that the Word is like an Epistle sent from God to
man, wherein he writes his mind familiarly unto us, and therefore we should
read it, hear it, mark it, and scanne it, as we would scanne a Letter which
comes from some of our familiar and dear friends.

In Mark. 14. the Gospel of Christ is called his Testament or Will, showing,
that our Legacies are written in it, and that we should hear it, and mark
it, and plie it till we be as cunning in Gods will, as we are in our Fathers
will. In the first Epistle of Saint Paul to Timothy the sixth chapter, the Word
is called a charge, and in the second to Timothy the fourth chapter, GOD is
called a Judge, showing that we should hear the word of God as we hearken to a
Judge, when he gives a charge, or pronounces a sentence: for every sentence
in this book is a charge to the King or the Counselor, or the Lawyer, or the
Preacher, or one, or other, let every one hear his charge.

In the fifth Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, ver. 14. the Word is called
meat, showing that we should desire and hunger to hear it. And as the stomach
sends the strength of the meat into every member of the body: so we should send
to the eye, that which is spoken to the eye: and to the ear, that which is
spoken to the ear: and to the tongue, that which is spoken to the tongue: and
to the hand, that which is spoken to the hand. If thou hear comfort apply
that to thy fear. If thou hear a promise, apply that to thy distrust. If thou
hear a threatening, apply that to thy presumption, and fill up the gap still
where the devil enters.

In the parable before my text, the word is compared to seed: the preachers
to sowers, and the hearers to the ground, showing, that ye come hither to be
watered and dressed, and manured: therefore if Gods seed be sown, and the
devils fruits come up: you are like the Jews, which brought Christ vinegar
when he thirsted for wine.

As the little birds perke up their heads when their damme comes with meat,
and prepare their beakes to take it, striving who shall catch most; now this
looks to be served, and now that looks for a bit, and every mouth is open
until it be filled: so you are here like birds, and we the damme, and the
word the food, therefore you must prepare a mouth to take it. They which are
hungry will strive for the bread which is cast amongst them, and think this is
spoken to me, this is spoken to me, I have need of this, and I have need of
this: comfort go thou to my fear, promise go thou to my distrust, theatning
go thou to my security, and the Word shall be like a perfume, which has
odor for every one.

These are good remembrances for all hearers to think that the Word is an
Epstle from God unto them, that it is the Will wherein their Legacies are
written, that it is a charge from the Judge of life and death, that it is the
meat whereby they live, that it is the seed which if it grow they are
fruitful, if it grow not they have no fruit, but these are general matters,
my desire is to teach you a compendious way of hearing, which you have not
heard before, that as the Word is called a brief word, so you may learn it
briefly: for it is not gainful unto us as it is to Lawyers, Physicians and
Surgeons, to keep you long in hand, but to heal you and dispatch you quickly
as Christ healed the Leapers. This Age has devised diverse Methods to learn
many things in shorter time than they were learned of old: A man may spend
seven years in learning to write, and he may meet with a Scribe which will
teach him as much in a month. A Prentice may spend nine years in learning a
trade, and some master (if he were disposed) would teach him as much in a
twelve month. A man may fetch such a compass that he may be a whole month in
going to Barwicke, and another which knows the way will go it in less than
a week: so to every thing there is a farther way and a nearer way, and so there
is to knowledge. You do not remember the hundredth part of that which you have
heard, and to morrow you will not remember the tenth note which you hear this
day. It may be that some will remember more: and why not thou as well as he?
because one uses a help for his memory, which the other uses not. If you
will use his policy, you shall remember as well as he: for let him neglect his
help, and the best memory here shall not carry away half which he marketh
now, until it be night. When the woman of Samaria heard Christ speak of a
water, of which he that drinks shall thirst no more, Oh (says she) give me
of that water: so now you hear of such a way, you would feign know it: but
will you use it? I wish that I were such a messenger, Matthew. 22.
that I could compel you unto it: for truly until you use it, you shall
never learn faster then you do. Now I think you have a desire to hear it, I
will show it unto you. First in mine opinion, two things out of every Sermon
are specially to be noted, that which thou did not know before, and that
which speaks to thine own sin: for so thou shall increase thy knowledge,
and lessen thy vices.

Now if thou would remember both these a year hence as fresh as now, this
is the best policy that ever thou shall learn, to put them presently in
practice, that is, to send them abroad to all the parts of thy soul, and
members of thy body, and reform thy self semblably to them, and thou shall
never forget them, for thy practice remembers them: but before this, you must
use another help, that is, record every note in thy mind as the preacher
goes, and after before thou do eat, or drink, or talk, or any thing
else, repeat all to thy self. I do know some in the University, which did
never hear good Sermon, but as soon as they were gone, they (...) it thus, and
learned more by this (as (...) said) then by their reading and study: for
recording that which they had heard when it was fresh, they could remember all,
and hereby got a better facility in preaching, then they could learn in
books. The like profit I remember I gained when I was a scholar by the like
practice.

The Philosophers and Orators that have written such volumes, have left in
their writings, that this was the keeper of their learning, like the bag
which bears the treasures. Therefore I may say with Christ, that the wicked
are wiser then Christians: for the Orators and Philosophers used this help in
hearing of earthly things, and we will not use it in hearing of heavenly
things. The only cause why you forget so fast as you hear, and of all the
sermons which you have heard have scarce the substance of one in your hearts,
to comfort or counsel you when you have need, is because you went from
Sermon to dinner, and never thought any more of the matter, as though it were
enough to hear, like sieues which hold water no longer then they are in the
River.

What a shame is this to remember every clause in your Lease, and every point
in your Fathers will, nay, to remember an old tale so long as you live, though
it be long since you heard it, and the lessons which ye hear now, will be
gone within this hour, that you may ask what has stolen my sermon from me?
Therefore that you may not hear us in vain, as you have heard others, my
exhortation unto you, is, to record when you are gone, that which you have
heard. If I could reach you a better way, I would: but Christ's Disciples used
this way when their thoughts ran upon his speech, Luke 8.
and made them come again to him to ask the meaning: the Virgin his Mother
uses this way when she pondered his sayings, Luk 1.
and laid them up in her heart: Act. 17.
the good hearers of Beroea used this way, when they carried Paul's Sermon home
with them, that they might examine it by the Scriptures. This difference is
noted between Jacob and his sons, when Joseph uttered his dream, his
brethren gave no regard to it: but it is said that Father Jacob noted the
saying. Therefore this must needs be an excellent way. Genesis 37. 11.
For if Joseph, and Marie, and Christ's Disciples should speak unto you as I
do, and show you a way to hear, they would show you the same way that they
used themselves. You cannot tell how much it will profit you until you
practice it: do but try it one month, and if you love knowledge, I am sure
you will use it while you live. But if you will not use it for all that can be
said, truly you shall be like the old women which S. Paul speaks of, which
were always learning, and were never the wiser.

This is our first lesson unto you, Take heed how you hear: I may say now,
Take heed how you read too. For there are books abroad like Ismaels scoffs,
Esa. 36.
like Rabshekeh his railings, like the songs which were made against David,
which may write for the title of their Books, 1. King. 16. 34.
Fools in print. If Hiel had not built Jericho again, these might be fit
worke-men for such a frame. If you must Take heed how you hear: then we must
take heed how we preach, for you hear that which we preach. Of negligent
preaching.
Therefore Paul puts none amongst the number of Preachers, but they which
cut the Word aright: that is, in right words, in right sense, and in right
method: and because none can do this without study and meditation, therefore
he teaches Timothy to give attendance to Doctrine* that is, to make a study
and labor of it: for as Paul says, that in Peter's Epistles there be many
things hard to understand: so in Paul's Epistles, and John's Epistles, and James
Epistle, there be many hard things too, which David before called, The wonders
of the Law, and Paul calls The mystery of salvation, and Christ calls A
Treasure hid in the ground. Therefore Solomon confesses that he studied for
his Doctrines, Eccl. 12. 10. Although he was the wisest and learned man that
ever was, yet he thought, that without study he could not do much good.
Daniel was a Prophet, and yet he desired respite to interpret Nabuchadnezzars
Dream. Dan. 2. 16.
Is the Scripture lighter then a Dream, that we should interpret it without
meditation? It seems then that Solomon and Daniel would not count them
Sermons, which come forth like untimely births from uncircumcised lips, and
unwashed hands, as though they had the spirit at commandment. Wheat is good,
but they which sell the refuse thereof, are reproved: Amos. 8. 6. So preaching
is good, but this refuse of preaching is but like swearing: for one takes the
name of God in vain, and the other takes the word of God in vain. As every
sound is not music, so every Sermon is not preaching, but worse then if he
should read an Homily. For if James would have us consider what we ask
before we come to pray, much more should we consider before we come to preach:
for it is harder to speak Gods words, then to speak to God. Yet there are
preachers risen lately up, which shrowde every absurd sermon under the name of
the simple kind of teaching, like the Popish Priests, which made ignorance the
mother of devotion: but indeed to preach simply, is not to preach unlearnedly,
nor confusedly, but plainly and perspicuously, that the simplest which does
hear, may understand what is taught, as if he did hear his name.

But if you will know why many preachers preach so barely, loosely, and simply,
it is your own simplicity which makes them think that if they go on and say
something all is one, and no fault will be found, because you are not able to
judge in or out: and so because they give no attendance to doctrine, as Paul
teaches the^, it is almost come to pass, that in a whole Sermon, the hearer
cannot pick out one note more then he could gather himself: and many loathe
preaching, as the Jews abhorred the sacrifice, for the slubbering Priests
which cared not what they offered: and the greater sort imagine that there is
no more wisdom in the word of GOD, then their teachers show out of it. What
a shame is this that the preachers should make preaching be despised? In the
48. of Jeremiah, there is a curse upon them which do the business of the Lord
negligently: if this curse do not touch them which do the chiefest business
of the Lord negligently, it cannot take hold of any other. Therefore let every
preacher first see how his notes does move himself, and then he shall have
comfort to deliver them to other, like an experienst medicine, which himself
has proved.

Thus much of preaching: now to you which hear. Think that you are gathering
Manna, and that it is God which speaks unto you, and that you shall give
account for every lesson which ye hear: and therefore record like Marie when
you are gone, and the seed which we sow, shall grow faster then the seed
which you sow.

FINIS.
THE HEAVENLY THRIFT.
Whosoever has, to him shall be given: and whosoever has not, from him shall
be taken, even that which it seems that he has. Luke. 8. 18.
THe next words before, are, take heed how you hear: the reason follows,
to make us take heed how we hear, he says, Whosoever has etc. This
sentence has two hands (as it were) one gives, and the other takes:
therefore, one calls it a comfortable saying, and a dreadful saying: for it
blesses some, and curses other, like Moses, which saved the Israelite, and
slew the Egyptian, Whosoever has, to him shall be given: there goes the
blessing: Whosoever has not, from him shall be taken: there runs the
curse. Thus looking back to the words before, viz. Take heed how you hear,
This doctrine comes unto us, that he which takes heed how he hears,
sprouteth and flourishes like a twigge which has life in it, till it come to
a tree: but he which takes no heed how he hears, fades and withers like
a stock which is dead, until he has not only lost the gifts which he
had, but till the spirit do leave him too, and he seem as naked to men as
Adam did to GOD. The like sentence in the twenty one of Matthew, where it is
said, The kingdom of heaven shall be taken from you, and shall be given to a
Nation which will bring forth the fruits thereof: there is a taking from them
which bring no fruits, and a giving to them which bring fruits. The like is
in the 22. of the Reuelat. where it is said, Let him which is just be just
still, and let him which is filthy be filthy still: whereby it is meant, that
the just shall be more just, and the filthy shall be more filthy. The like
is in the 15. of John, 2. where it is said, Every branch which brings no
fruit, he takes away, but every branch which brings forth fruit, he
purges, that it may bring forth more fruit. The likeis in the 25. of
Matthew, where this sentence is repeated again after the Parable of the
Talents: as to one servant were committed five Talents, and to another two,
and to another one, to increase and multiply, and he which used his Talent
doubled it, and he which hid his Talent, lost it: even so to every man GOD
has given some gift, of Judgment, or tongues, or interpretation, or counsel
to employ and do good, and he which uses that gift which God has given him
to the profit of others, and Gods glory, shall receive more gifts of GOD, as
the servant which used two Talents, received two more: but he which uses it
not, but abuses it, as many do, that gift which he has shall be taken from
him, as the odd Talent was from the servant which had but one: showing that
one gift is too much for the wicked, and therefore it shall not stay with him.
One would think it should be said: Whosoever has not, to him shall be given:
and whosoever has, from him shall be taken: for, God bids us give to them
which want. But this is contrary: for he takes from them which want, and
gives to them which have. It is said, that our thoughts are not like Gods
thoughts: and so our gifts are not like Gods gifts: for he gives spiritual
things, and we give temporal things. Temporal things are to be given to them
which have not, but spiritual things to them which have. Therefore Christ
calls none to receive his word, and spirit, and grace, but them which
hunger and thirst, which is the first possession of heaven. When it is said,
It shall be given: GOD shows himself rich and bountiful, because he gives
to them which have: that is, he gives after he has given: for What has any
which he has not received? Therefore none can say as Esau said to Isaac:
Have thou but one blessing my Father? For he blesses when he has blessed, as
a spring runs when it has run. First, mark the growthe of Gods gifts in
them which use them, how he waters his seed like a Gardener, until it
spring in the earth: and then he waters it again, until it spring above the
earth: and after he waters it again, until it bring forth fruit upon the
earth: therefore GOD is called The Lord of the Harvest, because the seed, Mar.
9. 28.
and the blade, and the ear, and the corn, and all do come from him. After
you shall see the wan^ and the Eclipse of their gifts which use them not, how
their learning and knowledge and judgment does betray them, as strength went
from Sampson when he had lost his hair: till at last they may say like
Zedechiah, When did the spirit depart from me? 2. Kin. 22.
When did love depart from me? When did knowledge depart from me? When did my
zeal depart from me? The first part of this sentence is like the gratulation
to him which uses this talent in the twenty five of Matthew, Good and faithful
servant, I will make thee Lord over much. The second part is like the
Obiurgation to him which hid his Talent, Naughty and sloathfull servant:
take his Talent from him. So GOD begins here to separate between the sheep
and the Goats. Jacob shall not be cursed, because Esau is cursed. Neither shall
Esau be blessed because Jacob is blessed: But the Lord Knows who are his,
and who are not: and therefore he says, wosoeuer has, and whosoever has not:
as though he knew them all, whosoever they be. This Scripture was performed
before it was written. For when Adam served GOD, God served him: he consulted
for a Mansion for him: he consulted for meat for him: he consulted for a
companion for him, until Adam rebelled against God, we read of nothing that
God did, but his works for Adam six days together, as though he had been
hired to labor for him. But when he left his innocence, then God began to
take again that which he had given: he lost his wisdom, he lost his
quietness, he lost his liberty, he his glory, he lost his dwelling, like
the man which fell amongst thieves. Thus while Adam had righteousness, it
might be said of him: Whosoever has, to him shall be given. And when he had
not righteousness, it might be said of him too: From him which has not, shall
be taken. God is called a Father, because he is like a Father, which takes a
pleasure to see his son thrive, and grieueth to see him an vnthrist. First he
gives us a stock, to prove our husbandry: and then, if we thrive with that,
he does add more unto it, now a little, and then a little, until at last
the inheritance come too: As they which try a vessel, first put water into
it, to see whether it will hold water, then they commit wine unto it: so,
first God gives us one grace, if we use that well, then he gives another, and
another, and another according to that, He which is found faithful in a
little, shall be made Lord over much. My Father (says Christ) is an
husbandman, John 15. showing that as we dress the ground, that it may bring
forth fruit, so God dresseth us, that we may bring forth fruit. All comes
not at once, but as the body grows, so the spirit grows: first good
thoughts, and then good speeches, and then good works: as the blade follows
the seed, and the ear the blade, and the corn the ear. Look how in our
first generation one thing comes after another, so it is in our second
generation: As the child springs in the mothers womb, from a gellie unto
milk, and from milk to blood, and from blood to flesh, and she knows not
how it grows till it come forth: so the spirit grows in us, and we see
not how it grows, but that it is grown. Faith calls to love, and love
calls to obedience, and obedience calls to constancy, and one grace is the
foundation of another. Therefore Paul says, Whom he predestined, them he
called: whom he called, them he justified, and whom he justified them he
glorified. Thus as the rich easily grow richer, so the good easily grow
better: he which has power to ask, has power to receive; for it is said,
Ask, and you shall receive: he which has power to seek, has power to
find: for it is said, Seek and you shall find: he which has power to
knock, has power to enter, for it is said, Knock, and it shall be opened
unto you. As Gods riches are infinite, so he is never weary of giving: when a
man serves God, at last it comes to this, that God delights (as it were)
to do him good, as it is said, Jeremiah 32. and Micah. 7. I will delight to
do them good.

Now when it comes to this pass, that God has a delight to do a man good,
then Ask what thou will (says Solomon to his Mother) and I will not say thee
nay: 1. Reg. 2. 20
so, Ask what thou will, and GOD will not say thee nay. He which has the
Son, may have the Father, he that has the Wedding garment, may have the
Wedding feast, he which has the spirit of Elisha, may have the spirit of
Eliah, he which comes unto Christ, may make Christ come unto him: as when the
Son came toward the Father, the Father met him in the way, showing that God
is as ready to give, as we to ask. When David did well, Nathan said unto him,
The Lord has given thee this, and this, and this: and if that had not been
enough, he would have given thee such and such things: showing us, that the
cause why we have not such and such things, is, for that we are not thankful
for these and these things. When the Eunuch believed, Acts. ^.
he said, what lets me to be baptized? so when thou beleeuest thou may
say, What lets me to be loved? what letteach me to be blessed? What lets
me to be saved? And as Philip said, Nothing: so Christ says Nothing, but Be
it unto thee, as thou beleeuest. From that day righteousness stands over
their heads, as the Sun did over Joshua, and they renew their virtues, as
the Eagle renews her youth. Therefore when Isaac had said, Iaacob have I
blessed: he adds, and he shall be blessed: as if he should say, he begins
to be blessed now, but he shall be more blessed: so they which are blessed of
God, shall be more blessed, rising and rising like the Sun, until it come to
the height.

When God has begun to bless, he says as he said to Abraham, What shall I
hide from him? What shall I keep from him? As though one of his gifts did
bind him to give another: therefore his mercies are called everlasting
mercies, because when they begin, they have no end. So soon as he had moved
Solomon to pray for wisdom, he gave him wisdom: so soon as he had moved
Abraham to go from his Country, he began to guide him: so soon as he had
moved Gedeon to fight, he began to strengthen him. Gods mercies are resembled
to rain, first it raines small drops, and after fall great drops, and the
small are signs of the great. First, you see Elisha with a single spirit, and
after you see him with a double spirit: first you see Paul sitting at
Gamaliels feet, and afterward you see him preaching in Moses Chair: first you
see Timothy a student, and after you see him an Evangelist: First you see
Cornelius praying, and after you see Peter instructing: first you see David
repenting, and after you see Nathan comforting: first ye see the Disciples
worshipping, and after you see the holy Ghost descending: first you see the
Wisemen seeking Christ, and after you see them together with Christ: first you
see the Son coming toward the Father, and after you see the Father coming
toward the Son: first you see the Eunuch reading, and after you see him
understanding, and after you see him believing, and after you see him baptized.
Most notable is the example of Nathaniel, so soon as he believed, Christ
remembered this promise, and said, Beleeuest thou for this, thou shall see
greater things than these: so he gave more to him which had some. That which
he said to Nathaniel, he says to all which are like Nathaniel, Beleeuest thou
this Sermon, thou shall hear other Sermons than this, repentest thou for this
example, thou shall see other examples than this, love thou for one benefit,
thou shall receive more benefits than one, honor thou God for his gifts
upon others, thou shall feel his gifts upon thy self: for He which keeps
Israel does not sleep, but watch. What does he watch? He watches who
seeks for comfort, and who looks for wisdom, and who prays for faith,
and who entreats for patience, that he may give abundantly, to him which
desires fervently.

If he see one pray like Cornelius, he sends another to strengthen him like
Peter: if he see one study like the Eunuch, he sends another to instruct him
like Philip: if he see one mourn like David, he sends another to comfort
him like Nathan: if he see one willing like Esaias, he sends another to able
him like the Seraphim: if he see one that thinks well, he teaches him to
speak well: if he see one that speaks well, he teaches him to do well:
if he see one do well, he teaches him to continue well: if he see one meek
like Moses, he makes him wise like Solomon: if he see one wise like Solomon,
he makes him righteous like Abraham: if he see one righteous like Abraham, he
makes him patient like Job: if he see one patient like Job, he makes him
penitent like Peter: if he see one love one virtue, he makes him love another
virtue: if he see one hate one vice, he makes him hate another vice: if he
see one like one Sermon, he makes him like another Sermon: when he has him
in his school, and he comes once to this, to say like Samuel, Speak Lord
for thy servant hears, 1. Sam. 3.
then he takes him up to the mount like Moses, and opens his heart unto
him, teaching him a way to make use of all that he sees, and of all that he
hears, and of all that he reads, and of all that he feels. Thus when
God has strayned and fined him, he is apt to every good work, and takes all
occasions to do them. If he but see one pray, his heart burns to pray
too: if he see one reading, he has a mind to read too: if he see one
meditating, he has a zeal to meditate too: if he see one sorrowing, he has
a desire to sorrow too: like the Disciples, which when they heard Peter say,
we go a fishing, they said, we will go a fishing too. After this, every
benefit makes him thankful, every instruction makes him fearful, and he is
never well, but when he is walking with God like Enoch, or when Christ is
speaking to him, or when he is speaking to Christ, for when God meets with
his children, like a nurse he emptieth himself of his milk, according to
this text which we now handle, To him which has, shall be given.

Thus when you use those gifts well which you have, the Lord will come unto
you, and say that your heart may hear him, Good servant and faithful, I will
make thee Lord over much: thy seed shall become a tree, thy spirit shall be
doubled. First, thou shall have a love to hear, read and meditate: after thou
shall have a little knowledge to judge and speak of Gods Word, of the
spirit, and of doctrines: then thou shall ascend to faith, which will bring
thee unto peace of conscience: then thou shall meet with good books, and God
will send thee Teachers to instruct thee, and encourage thee like the Angels
which came to Christ when he hungered. Thus a Trauailer passes from town unto
town, until he come to his Inn: so a Christian passes from virtue to
virtue, until he come to Heaven, which is the journey that every man must
endeavor to go till death.

It follows: And whosoever has not from him shall be taken; even that which
it seems that he has.

As the Lord says to his faithful Servant, Thou shall be ruler over much:
so he says of his slothful servant, Take his talent from him. Here is one
like Iaacob whom God loves, to him (he says) shall be given: here is
another like Esau whom God hates, from him (he says) shall be taken: so
one may say like Job, The Lord has given: and the other may say like Job, The
Lord has taken. But from whom does he take? From him which has not. And to
whom does he give? To him which has. In this God seems not to deal his
gifts charitablie: for he, should give to them which want, Joseph maruailed to
see Iaacob lay his left hand upon Manasses, and his right hand upon Ephraim, as
though the younger should be more blessed than the elder. Ishai maruailed to
see Samuel choose the least of his sons before the tallest, as though the
unfittest were the fittest: so it is marvel that he which commands us to
give unto them which want, should take from them which want, and give to them
which have. Isaac would not have blessed Iaacob but Esau, but God would have
him bless Iaacob and not Esau: Joseph would that Manasseth should have more
than Ephraim, but God would that Ephraim should have more than Manasseth. As
God loves not as man loves, so he gives not as man gives. Why should
Abraham have three Angels, and Lot but two, and Balaam but one, and Balaac
none? Why should not Philip go up the mount, as well as James? Why should not
Aaron behold God, as well as Moses? Why should not Moses go to Chanaan, as well
as Caleb?

According to our love is Gods love, and according to our hatred is Gods
hatred. Reuben should have had as good a blessing as Judah, but when Iaacob
blessed him, (Genesis the 35. chapter and 22. verse) he remembered his sin
with Bilhah, and therefore curbed his blessing: for when he blessed him he
said, Genesis 49. 4.
Thou shall not be excellent: as if he should say, Reuben thou shall have
some thing, but thou shall not have so much as thou should have, because of
thy uncleanness with Bilhah. So Moses should have gone to Canaan as well as
Caleb: but GOD remembered his murmuring at the waters of bitterness. And when he
desired to go unto it, God would not hear him, but let him see it from an
hill, and so he dyed. So the third servant should have received as many
Talents as his fellows: but the Lord remembered how he hid the Talent which
he had, and therefore would give him no more, least he should hide them too:
so we should have more understanding, more judgment and more knowledge, but
God sees what we do with this, and therefore stays his hand, lest we
should abuse any more. This is Saint John's meaning when he says, God Gives
grace for grace, Ioh. 1. 16.
That is, where he finds one grace, there he gives another. This is Saint
Paul's meaning Romans 1. where he says, The righteousness of God is revealed
from faith to faith: signifying that they which have faith shall have more
faith. Therefore this is the fearefullest sign, that we have no faith nor
grace, if God do not increase our faith and his graces in us: For to him which
has, shall be given: Therefore, if we had faith, we should have love: if we
had love, we should have knowledge: if we had knowledge, we should have
zeal: if we had zeal, we should have holiness. As he which has broken one
commandment, is made guilty of all: so he which has one virtue, is made
partaker of all. It is said: so long as Iehoiada lived, 2. Chro. 24.
Ioash prospered and did well; because Iehoiada instructed and guided him, but
when Iehoiada dyed, Ioash goodness died with him, and he was never like himself
after, but turned like his fathers: So there is a seed in the heart, which
while it lives and is fostered, we sprowt and prosper as Ioash did; but when
that seed dies for want of cherishing, then we begin to droope and fade,
and decay again as loash did. If one virtue be offended she lureth all her
fellows from us, as many of Ishbosheths friends shronke with Abner.

David sets forth the godly man like a tree planted by the waters side,
Psalm. 1. 3.
Which sprowteth, and grwoeth and brings forth fruit Straight upon this, he
says: It is not so with the wicked. When he spoke of growing and flourishing,
and fructifying, he says: It is not so with the wicked. That is, it is
contrary with the wicked: therefore their gifts are not like the tree planted
by the waters side, but like the Chafe which the wind blows away. Psalm. 1.
5.
Nay says David, themselves are like Chafe which the wind blows away. Luke
16.
If they be Chafe, then their fruit is Chafe. The Gluttons table was for
the ungodly, but the Lords table was for the holy. Matthew. 22.
Therefore he which had not the Wedding garment, had not the wedding feast. For
if the Lord would cast pearls unto Swine, why does he forbid us to do so?
Therefore it is not said, Be it unto thee as thou desire, lest all should
look to receive: but Be it unto thee as thou beleeuest, that all might care to
Believe. It is not said to them which seek not, ye shall find: but Seek, and
you shall find. How should they Enter which have not a hand to knock at the
door? How should they Receive, which have not a tongue to ask the giver? How
should they have wisdom which have not the fear of the Lord, which is the
beginning of wisdom? Prou. 1.
Thus as James says, Show me thy faith, and I will show thee my faith: So God
faith, show me thy love, and I will show thee my love: as Christ was known
at Emaus by breaking of bread, so you may know him here by dealing his
gifts. It is said when Joseph feasted his brethren, Genesis 43.
Beniamins mess had five times more than any of his brethren, because Joseph
loved him more than the rest: so the mercy and graces of God will show to whom
his affection stands. If you see Christ leaning on a man's breast as John did
on Christ's breast, then may you say, this is a beloved Disciple: For as Lidia
persuaded Paul and Silas to come to her house, Act. 16. 13.
saying, If you judge me to be faithful, come to my house: so you may judge
them to be faithful to whose house the Lord comes.

If you ask Solomon to whom the Lord gives wisdom and knowledge, he
answers, To a man which is good in his sight, Eccles. the second Chapter, and
twenty six verse: showing that those men are gracious in Gods sight, as
Joseph was in Pharaohs. Contrariwise, if you see God flying from a man, as
David fled from Saul, that is, withdrawing his spirit as the Master did his
Talent, then you may say, this is not a faithful servant to his Master: for
if he had used his Talent well, the Lord would increase it as he promised, but
because he does abuse it, therefore the Lord does withdraw it again as he
threatened.

To some God gives, and never recalleth again, to some he gives and after
takes it from them: As some Angels went up the ladder, and some went down: so
some men's gifts increase and some decrease. To the Ephesians the fourth
Chapter, you have GOD giving. In Matthew 21. you have him taking. In Genes. 1.
you have God blessing. In Genes. 4. you have God cursing. In Acts 26. you have
God opening eyes. In Esaias 6. you have God shutting eyes. In Dan. 2. you have
God making wise. In Esa. 44. you have God making fools. In John 15. you have
God dressing trees. In Matthew 3. you have God hewing down trees. When one sea
flows another ^bbeth. When one star rises, another sets. When light is
in Goshen, darkness is in Egypt. When Mordecai grows into favor, Haman
grows out of favor. When Benjamin begins Rachel ends. Thus we are
rising, or setting: getting, or spending: winning or loosing: growing, or
fading, until we arrive at Heaven or Hell. As Elisha his spirit was doubled;
so Saules spirit departed. As the Gentiles become believers, so the Jews
become infidels. As Saul becomes an Apostle, so Judas becomes an Apostata.
As John grows in the spirit, so Ioash decaieth in the spirit, As Zacheus
turns from the world; so Demas turns to the world, Acts 16.
As Lidias heart is opened, so Pharaohs heart is hardened: Even as the thorns
burn while the Vines fructify. When Ishbosheth was a sleep upon his bed,
Baanab and Rechab came and took away his life: So while men sleep and do no
good, God comes and takes away their gifts. It was never said, Sampson has
lost his strength, until he harkened unto Dahiah. It was never said, Saul has
lost his spirit, until he harkened not to Samuel. It was never said, Take
his Talent from him, until he hid it in the ground. One sin opens the
door for many virtues to go out. While Iaacob stayed with Laban; Labans
cattle increased, because God blessed him for Iaacobs sake: but when Iaacob
went from him, many of Labans sheep went with him, and he grew poor again:
so while the love of righteousnes^e is with thee, to husband thy knowledge and
wisdom like Iaacob, thou shall thrive in graces, and one day shall teach
another, but when that steward departs from thee, then look that thy
wisdom, and knowledge, and judgment should decrease, as fast as the widows
oil increased: the world will win the flesh, and the flesh will win the
spirit, and one sin will cry to another as the Moabites did at the river,
Now Moab to the spoil, now sins to your spoil: then thy knowledge shall
fly as though it were afraid to be taken captive of ignorance, thy love
shall not abide thy hatred, thy humility shall not abide thy pride, thy
temperaunce shall not abide thy concupisence. As thou see the leaves fall
from the trees in a boystrous wind: so thy graces shall drop away one after
another, as though thou were in a consumption. As the Arc would not stay with
the Philistines, so the grace of GOD will not stay with sinners, but flies
from them like persecutors. David was not so ready to fly from Saul, but the
spirit was as ready to fly from him too. This must come upon all which
sin like Sampson, their strength must depart from them until they learn
like Nabuchadnezzar from whence it came. Dan. 4.
This sentence is such a meditation, that he which would preach it to the
quick, had need to have an eye in all men's hearts, to see how one virtue
dies after another, until the soul die too. As there is a fall of leaves,
and an Eclipse of the sun, and a consumption of the body: so there is a fall
of gifts, and an Eclipse of knowledge, and a consumption of the spirit. It is
strange to see, how wisdom, and knowledge, and judgment do shun the wicked,
as though they were afraid to be defiled. As Barach would not go, unless
Deborah would go with him: so knowledge will not stay unless virtue will stay
with her. To this Jeremy poynted when he mocked the Jews for saying, Iere. 18.
18.
Knowledge shall not depart from the priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the
word from the prophet: to this Esaias pointed when he says, Esa. 26. 14.
The wisdom of the wise men shall perish, and the understanding of the prudent
shall be hid: as if he should say, one day Christ will tell you, that Whosoever
has not, from him etc. And when you hear that saying, then remember these
examples how he has fulfilled it before. After come the apostles, and they
show some hardened some bewitched, some blinded. Paul tells how Demas fell away,
and John shows how many fell away. Thus the Prophets and Apostles on either
side, and Christ in the mids hold up this threatening as if it were a pit, which
all are falling into. 2. Cor. 6. 16.
The soul of man is called the temple of the holy Ghost. As God pulled down
his temple when it became a den of thieves, so he forsakes the temple of the
soul, and takes his graces with him (as from a divorced spouse) when it
lusts after other loves. With any Talent he gives this charge, Use and
increase it until I come: being left, at last the comes again to see what
we have done. The seed was sown, this year the Lord calls for fruit and none
will come, the next year, and the next after, and none comes: at last the
curse goes forth, Never fruit grow upon thee more. Then as the figtree began
to wither: so his gifts begin to pair, as if a worm were still gnawing at
them: his knowledge leeseth his relish like the Jews Manna; his judgment
rustes like a sword which is not used: his zeal trembles as though it were
in a Palsy, his faith withers as though it were blasted, and the image of
death is upon all his religion. After this, he thinks like Sampson to pray as
he did, and speak as he did, and has no power, but wondereth like zedekias
how the spirit is gone from him. Now when the good spirit is gone, then comes
the spirit of blindness, and the spirit of error, and the spirit of fear,
and all to seduce the spirit of man. After this, by little and little first he
falls into error, then he comes unto heresy, at last he plungeth into
despair: after this if he enquire, God will not suffer him to learn: if he
read, God will not suffer him to understand, if he hear, God will not suffer
him to remember, if he pray, God seems unto him like Baal, which could not
hear: at last he beholds his wretchedness, as Adam looked upon his nakedness,
and mourns for his gifts as Rachel wept for her children, because they were
not. All this comes to pass, that the Scripture might be fulfilled,
Whosoever has not from him shall be taken that which he seems to have. As
the ship sinketh upon the Sea, while the merchant sporteth upon the Land and
makes him a banquerout when he thinks that his goods are coming in: so while
we are secure, and the heart spends, and the ear brings not in, by little
and little the stock decaieth, and more become banquerouts in Religion, than in
all trades beside. When a man sins, he thinks with himself I will do
this no more, after another sin promises as much profit as that, and he
says again I will do this no more, presently another sin promises as much
profit as that, and he says again, I will do this and no more. There goes
strength and there comes a wound, so the soul bleedeth to death and knows
not her sickness till she be at the last gasp. Even as a man vndresseth
himself to bed, first he casts off his cloak, and then his coat, and then
his dublet: so when GOD rifleth our hearts, he pulls away one feather after
another: first he wounds his faith, after he strikes his love, then he blinds
his knowledge, the^ he shall have no delight to hear the word, after he shall
grow to hate the Preachers of the word, at last he shall even hate the word it
self. This is the bleeding of the soul, or the spiritual consumption, when
graces drop away, as the hairs fall from an hoarie head before death. Let
Achitophel be a spectacle for all to fear, he was counted a wise man and a
deep Councellor, yet because it was the wisdom of the flesh, the story
says, that GOD turned his wisdom into folly, and that he might seem
foolish (as he was in deed) God made him to hang himself, whereby his folly
was more notorious then his wisdom. But most notable is the example of
persecuting Saul, when he began to fall, he ran headlong. First he fell in
hatred of David, then he fell in hatred of GOD, after God fell in hatred of
him: Anon the spirit departed from him: At last, he sought for help at
Witches, which he had condemned before. This is the property of sin to spur
a man forward, until he commit that which he condemns himself, that he may
be tormented of his own conscience. Now, if I might apply this scripture as
Christ says, are there no mo sinners but they, upon whom the Tower of Shilo
fell? So I may say, is the Talent taken from none but from him which hid it in
the ground? Nay, Saul was but a type of many which should loose the spirit,
Sampson was but a type of many which should lose their strength, Demas was but
a type of many which should embrace the world: as David cries, How are the
mighty overthrown? So we may mourn and say, how are the zealous cooled, how
are the diligent tired? They which should season others are become like the
white of an egg which has no taste: once they seemed to have fruit, but now
they are not hanged with leaves. As God cried unto Adam, Adam where art thou?
so they may cry Zeal where art thou? Learning where art thou? Conscience where
art thou? Love where art thou? They which shined like the Sun when they rose,
seem now to be eclipsed of their light. The world has won the flesh, the
flesh has won the spirit, and Iordaine is turned back. As God took heat from
the fire when it would burn his Children, so he takes knowledge from the
learned when they turn it to evil. Now, when they see such ruins of their
gifts, with what heart can they think, I am the tree whom Christ accurseth, or
I am the servant of whom it is said, Take his Talent from him? Therefore I say
to you as Christ said, remember Lots wife, as her body was turned into salt:
so your wisdom may turn into folly, your knowledge may turn into
ignorance, your understanding may turn into blindness; your zeal may turn
into coldness: therefore let al which have a Talent take heed how they use it.
Three things I note in these words, and then end. First, Christ says not, It
shall be taken from them which have, but from them which seem to have: Lest
they which stand should fear to fall. Paul says not, Let him which stands,
take heed lest he fall, but let him which thinks he stands: so lest they
which have the Spirit should fear, Christ says, It shall be taken from them
which seem to have. Mark how warily the Scripture speaks, for this speech
does show that many shall fall, and yet it does show that none shall fall but
they which seem to stand, that none shall lose the spirit but they which seem
to have it. For if Christ would take from them which have, as he gives to
them which have, he would not say, they which seem to have at his taking, no
more then he said it at his giving. So we have a comfort in this terror, like
the Honey which Sampson found in the Lions jaws: for if God will take from
none but them which seem to have, then we need not fear unless we be
hypocrites: for the threatening is made to none but them which seem. Secondly,
this speech does show that many have that show of holiness which Paul
speaks of, wherewith they would deceive God and deceive themselves: you have
Pilate washing his hands in hypocrisy, as well as you have David washing his
hands in innocence: you have the Sichemits with their circumcision, as well as
the Israelites with their circumcision: you have the Sadduces with their
doctrine, as well as the Apostles with their doctrine: you have the Pharisie
with his prayer, as well as the Publican with his prayer: you have the
Pythonist-with her confession, as well as Peter with his confession: Act. 19.
you have the Exorcists with their Jesus, as well as Paul with his Jesus: you
have Satan with his scripture, Matthew. 4.
as well as Christ with his scripture: you have Judas with his kiss, as well
as Jonathan with his kiss: you have Caine with his sacrifice, as well as Abel
with his sacrifice: you have Esau with his tears, as well as Marie with her
tears: you have Achitophel with his wisdom, as well as Solomon with his
wisdom: you have Zedechia with his spirit, as well as Eliah with his spirit:
you have Iesabel with her fasts, as well as Anna with her fasts: you have the
harlot with her vows; as well as Jacob with his vow. Of all these this
scripture is fulfilled, That which they seemed to have was taken from them.

This is the first note, the very show of goodness shall be taken from them
which have not goodness it self: lest men should content themselves with
shows and shadows, Christ says, That which he seems to have shall be taken
from him: As if he should say, take away his Talent and his napkin too, that
he may not seem to have a Talent. As Moses says, I will not leave a hoof
behind. Thou shall not seem just, nor wise, nor houest, but I will make thee
as naked to men, as Adam was to me. Even as the Fig Tree because it had no
fruit was spoiled of his leaves which showed like fruit: so they which have
made shipwreck of honesty, shall make shipwreck of credit too: Their name
shall go with a brand upon it like Caine the murderer, Achan the thief,
Absolon the rebel, Magus the sorcerer; Judas had for his title, Judas which
betrayed the Lord, Acts. 1. Jeroboam had for his title, Jeroboam which made
Israel to sin. Demas had for his title, Demas which embraced the world. Mark
how sin does persecute and vex the sinner. Indeed Demas had embraced the
world, but he would not have all the world to know it: but see first how
God makes Paul to know it, and after he makes him to proclaim it, that now
Demas is not only an hypocrite, but known to be an hypocrite, like a Rogue
which is burned in the ear. When Ieroboams wife came to the Prophet to enquire
of her son, she disguised her self because she would not be known, yet the
Prophet knew her, for so soon as she knocked at the door, he called, comes
Ieroboams wife: so though men disguise themselves with sober countenances, and
holy speeches, and honest company, because they would not be known, yet when
GOD sees an hypocrite, he will pull his vizard from his face, as Adam was
stripped of his fig leaves, and show the Anatomy of his heart, as though his
life were written in his forehead, and he shall marvel how men know that*
which he scarce though^ had been known to God.

Thus he which has made the day, can bring forth thy righteousness like the
light: he which has made the night can bring forth thy wickedness like the
dark. Therefore Solomon says, The candle of the wicked shall be put out: That
is, the least light that he has shall be quenched, Prou. 15.

Thus you see how God will increase your gifts, if you use them, and how he
will decrease them, if you use them not. Now let us pray that he will teach us
this use, that we may receive his blessing.

FINIS.
The Magistrates Scripture.
Psalm. 82. 6. 7. 6 I have said ye are Gods, and ye all are the children of the
most highest:

7 But ye shall dye as a man, and ye Princes shall fall like others.


I May call this text, The Magistrates Scripture. Considering the state of
Kings and governors, how much good they might do, and how little they
perform, God becomes a remembrancer unto them. And first shows what a high
calling Princes and Rulers have, and then lest they should be proud of it, and
make their Magistracy a chair of ease, he turns upon them again, as though
he had another message unto them, and tells them that though they be above
other, yet they shall die like other, and though they judge here, yet they shall
be judged hereafter, and give account of their Stewardship how they have
governed, as straight as their subjects how they have obeyed. A good Memorandum
for all in authority, so to deal in this kingdom, that they lose not the
Kingdom to come.

I have said ye are Gods, etc. How can he call them Gods, which calls himself
the only God, and says, There are no more Gods but he? Esa. 44. 5. and 45.
21. I have made thee Pharao his God, says God to Moses. Exodus 7. 1. because he
had given him power to speak unto Pharao in his name, and to execute his
judgments upon him: so he calls Magistrates Gods, because he has given
them power to speak to the people in his name, and to execute his judgments
upon them. Out of this name, Rulers may learn how to govern, and subjects
how to obey. As the inferior Magistrates do nothing but as the superior
Magistrate prescribes: so they which rule under God for God, must rule by the
prescript of God, and do nothing but as their conscience tells them, that God
would do himself. Therefore they which use their power against GOD, which
bear the person of GOD, and execute the will of the Devil, which make laws
against Gods Law, and be enemies to his servants: are worse than Balaam, Numb.
22. 18.
which would not curse whom God blessed: and so much as in them lies, make
God a liar, Esa. 30. 33.
because they cannot so well be called Gods, as devils: such Gods go to hell.

I have said ye are Gods etc. First this name enformes us what kind of Rulers
and Magistrates we should choose: those which excel all other men like Gods
amongst men. For a king should be a man after Gods own heart like David, as
appears in the first book of Samuel, the thirteenth Chapter and fourteenth
verse. As all those whom God set over his people in his mercy and not in his
anger, had some note of excellency above the rest, which God chose them by, as
it were the Magistrates mark: the mildest man, Numb. 12. 3. or the wisest man,
1. Reg. 4. 31. or the iustest man, Heb. 7. 2. as though if all these had met in
one, the inquisition should have stayed there, and all give place to him: but
our virtues are so singled, that he which was called the mildest is not called
the wisest, and he which was called the wisest, is not called the iustest, as
though God found some defect in his own election. For when he chose one
mild, another wise, and another just, he showed that he would have one which
is mild, and wise, and just like himself, that is, (as I may say) a man made
even in print.

As Paul bids to choose widows which were widows indeed. 1. Tim. 5. 3.
so we should choose Magistrates which are Magistrates indeed, that is, such as
seem to be sent of God for that purpose, as Pharaoh chose Joseph because he was
the fittest in all the Land. 2. Kin. 2. 9.
Genesis 41. 38. Elisha thought that the single spirit was not enough, but
required that the spirit of Eliah might be doubled upon him, because he was a
Prophet which should teach others: so we should pick out them which have a
double spirit to be Magistrates, because they must govern others, as God
picketh forth Joshua in Moses room: he might have chosen many out of all
Israel which had the spirit of widome: Deuteronomy. 24. 9.
but he chose Joshua, of whom he says, that he was full of the spirit of
wisdom: Deuteronomy. 24. 9. showing, that if one be better than another, he should
be chosen before the rest, because the best have said, Send another: Exodus 4.
14. as though none were fit: but for want of Angels we are feign to make
Magistrates of men. Therefore as Samuel went over all the sons of Ishai to
anoint a successor to Saul, 1. Sam. 16. 5.
and put back one after another which thought themselves fit, yet there was but
one amongst them which pleased God, and the Prophet could scarce discern him:
so necessary it is that this choice be committed to none but to the godly,
because he which would have chosen the best, yet liked another before him.
Therefore there was such a scrutinie amongst the tribes to find out the man
whom God had chosen, Exo. 18. 21.
as Iethro taught Moses to cull out of all the people those which had best
courage, and feared God, and dealt truly, and hated covetousness. Therefore a
wicked man may not supply the place of God, Mat. 23. 2.
as the Scribes and Pharisees sat in Moses Chair: Act. 1. 20.
but as it is said of Judas, Let another take his place: so let better take
their place, for they which are called Gods, must be like God. If all should be
holy as he is holy, 1. Ioh. 3. 3.
how much more should they be pure as he is pure, wise as he is wise, just as
he is just, which bear his name, which supply his person, and guide the world
unto good or evil? If the race should be to the swift, Eccl. 9. 11.
and the battle to the strong, 2. Sam. 9. 2.
then as Saul did exceed all the men of Israel from the shoulders upward, so he
which commands others, should exceed other in gifts of grace, that they may
know him from the rest, and say, this is he, for he exceedes the rest in
virtue, as Saul did in stature, like the King of Bees, which is fairest of all
the hiue. Therefore if Pharao would let none but Joseph govern Egypt, Pharao
shall rise up against those Kings, Genesis 4. 28.
which care not whom they place over their people, imitating Rehoboam, which
made them his companions, whom he should have expelled from his Court. 1.
King. 12. 8.

Secondly, Genesis 48. 16.
this extolleth the calling of Magistrates. As Jacob honored Joseph's children,
when he said they should be called after his name: so God honors the
Magistrates, when he gives them his own name, calling them Gods, as though
there were a kind of Godhead in them. Pro. 24. 23.
These things pertayne to the wise, and they themselves do not always see it,
yet he which has a spiritual eye, and carries the pattern of GOD in his
heart, may see another like nesse of God in Magistrates, than in common persons.
As the builders of the Temple had a special wisdom and spirit, Exodus 31. 3.
and 35. 31.
which God gave them for that work which they were chosen too: 1. Sam. 16. 13*
so when Samuel had anointed David, he says, that the spirit of the Lord
came upon David from that day forward: as though he had anoeher spirit after
than he had before. There is difference between Kings and inferior
Magistrates: 1. Sa. 28. 26
for the Prince is like a great Image of God, the Magistrates are like little
Images of God, appointed to rule for God, to make laws for God, 2. Cro. 9* 6.
to reward for GOD, to punish for God, Numb. 9. 8.
to speak for God, Psalm. 2. 6.
to fight for God, to reform for God: and therefore their Battelles are called
the Lords battles, and their Judgments the Lords Judgments, and their
Throne the Lords Throne, and the Kings themselves his Kings, to show that they
are all for God, like his hands: by some he reaches mercy, Mat. 14. 19.
by some justice, by some peace, by some counsel, as Christ distributed the
loaves and the fishes by the hands of his Disciples. This God requires of all
when he calls them Gods, to rule as he would rule, judge as he would judge,
correct as he would correct, 2. Cro. 9. 8.
reward as he would reward, because it is said, that they are instead of the
Lord God^ that is, to do as he would do, as a Scholar writes by a Copy.
This is a good study for Magistrates in all their judgments, to consider
what GOD would do, because they are in steed of God, I rule for God, I speak
for God, I judge for God, I reward for God, I correct for God: then as he
would do and determine, so must be my sentence. Mat. 11. 29.
As we should think how Christ prayed before we pray, and how he spoke before
we speak, because his actions are our instructions: so they should think how
Christ would judge before they judge, Deu. 17. 10.
because Gods law is appointed for their law. Such a thought must needs
leuel the way before them, and put them in mind of a good and just and holy
judgment, because God is good and just and holy.

Thirdly, they are called Gods, to teach them how they should govern.
Howsoever other care for the glory of God, the performance of his will, the
reformation of his Church, Princes and Rulers which are Gods themselves, are to
do the business of God as their own business, because they are Gods. Gods
business is their business, Gods Law is their Law, Gods honor is their honor.
When the King, or Judge, or Magistrate, does seek the Kingdom and glory of
God, he should think he seeks his own Kingdom and glory. And therefore
seek it, and further it as earnestly and diligently as he would his own, and
rule, and judge, and speak and punish, and counsel as he would for himself.
Psalm. 139. 21*
Even as David counted Gods foes his foes, and Gods friends his friends. And
Moses persecuted them that were Idolaters against God, Exo. 32. 27.
as he did them which were Traitors to himself. Numb. 16. 16.


If this were observed, we should see such a change, that diverse which take
should give, and they which give should take, they which labor should rest,
and they which rest should labor. How can they pray to God, which know that
the laws of God are not obeyed, that his will is not regarded, but the poor
unpitied, because of the remissenes, in not bridling the insolent? It may seem
that in Eliah his answer to Achab, it was prophesied who should trouble
Israel to the worlds end, 1. King. 18. 18.
for speaking to the wicked Magistrate, he said, It is thou which troublest it.
So the ungodly Rulers, and graceless striuers against lawful rule, in their
own hearts calling themselves Gods, not being so called of God, are cause of
all disorder in every Common weal.

Fourthly, they are called Gods, to encourage them in their office, and to
teach them that they need not dread the persons of men: but GOD does that
which is just and good without the jealousy of men, so they, upon the Bench and
in all causes of Justice should forget themselves to be men, which are lead by
the arms between favor and fear, and think themselves Gods, which fear
nothing. This boldness is so necessary in them which should judge all a like,
that in Deuteronomy. 3. 28. Moses encourages Joshua, in Ios. 1. 18. the people
encourage him, in ver. 9. God does encourage him, saying that he will be with
him: but here he is with him: for hearing GOD call them Gods, shows that God
is there, nay, that they are he: which should strike a wonderful mind into
them, As a princely spirit came upon Saul so soon as he he was king, so
hearing that they are Gods, it should change them, and make them excel the
order of men, until they resemble God, Kings. 3. 9*
after whom they are named, as Salomo^ studied and prayed till he was wiser
than all that he governed: King. 4. 30.
then they need not blush to read this testimony, I have said ye are Gods:
Or else it will seem a check unto them like the mock which GOD gave to Adam
when he said that he was become like himself. Genesis 3. 22.
As many sit in Gods place, and yet never knew that the Scripture called them
Gods, nor why they have this name, no more than Nabal: so many play Nabal in
their offices, and are readier to ask, 1. Sa^. 25. 25*
Who is David? Who is Christ? (when his cause comes before them) then speak or
do any thing for him, but the women go before them again like Abigail, as
though GGD would shame them with the weaker vessel. I cannot compare them
fitter then with King Agrippa, who thought it better to be a Christian almost,
than altogether. This is the Religion of these times, they fear nothing more
then to be counted too precise: but God does call them more tha^ precise, for
he calls them Gods, of all men then they should not forget his name. Princes
and Rulers have many names of honor, but this is the honourablest name in
their Titles, that they are called Gods: other names have been given them of
men for reverence or flattery, but no man could give them this name but God
himself. Therefore their name is a glass wherein they may see their duty,
how God does honor them, and how they should honor him. What am I more than
he, that God should set me in his own Chair, and give me his own name more
than others? he has not done so to all: but if they which are called his
children are happy, Matthew 5.
they which are called his disciples are happy, they which are called his
servants are happy: how happy are they whom he calls Gods? It seems, that
if GOD could have called them by a higher name than his own, 1. Sam. 18. 23
he would have called them by some other name, but this word is enough to put
them in mind of all that they should do. Think that ye are Gods, and it
will make you ashamed to obey the devil, for then ye are like Gods no more,
but like sinful men, and the poorest vassal which serves God in a cottage,
is liker God than you. Are they Gods which oppress Gods children? Nay, does
not he lie which calls them worshipful, or noble? If such deserve not their
titles, how can Antichrist of Rome think of his usurped names, and not be
abashed? Can he sit down in Gods place and speak against him, judge against
him, decree against him, even in the Temple of God resisting God?

Again, for another sort of Gods: Does iniquity become Gods? 2. These. 2. 4.
Does partiality become Gods? do bribes become GODS? They are greedy Gods,
1. Cor. 4. 4.
Idol Gods, belly Gods, and may be termed Gods, because they are like the God
of this world, which do but stay (like Nabuchadnezzar) until their
iniquities be full, Dan. 4.
that they may be cast out like beasts, as a derision to them they govern.
But they which regard this honorable testimony of God, Nehe. 6. 11.
as Nehemiah said when he was tempted to fly, Should such a man as I fly? so
when they are tempted with bribes, should such a man as I take bribes? should
such a man as I do wrong? should such a man as I be a liar, or a swearer, or a
scoffer, or a drunkard, or a gamester, or a usurer, or a prophaner, upon whom
all eyes are set to take their example, and would harken sooner than to God
himself? Then he resolves to rule according to his name, knowing that all the
souls which might be won by him, shall be required of him, as the sins of
Israel were imputed to Jeroboam. Thus GOD does catechize them in their own
names, and calls them Gods, 1 King. 15. 30.
to teach them their duty to God. All should be godly, but they should be
like Gods: that is, (as I may say) more then godly, or the next to GOD in
godliness. If any come between them, they lose of their honor, and would
think themselves put down, like a guest which is set lower, or a Justice
which is turned out of office. For so GOD does humble them and disgrace them,
which dishonor their calling, as he did Saul: when the princely Spirit
departed from him, 1 Samuel 22. 7.
his sons, and his daughters, and his subjects did favor David more than
him, 1 Samuel 19. 4
that he could do nothing with them, 1. Sa 18. 7.
because God did not love him, he would not let his servant love him. But
when David came to the Crown, 1. Sa^ 22. 17.
because he had grace with God, 2. Sam. 5. 10
he prospered in all that he went about, and ever reformed what he would: for
the Lord (as he said) subdued the people unto him: Psalm. 18. 48
that is, made them incline to his will: as we read of Saul in the beginning
of his reign before he had rebelled, 1. Sa. 10. 26
a band of men did cleave to him, of whom it is said, whose hearts God has
touched: as though while the Rulers hearts do stand toward God, the peoples
hearts should stand toward them, and they should carry them like God to all
their desires: as it is said of David, 2. Sa. 32. 6.
What soever the King did, pleased all the people.

Therefore looking into this Divine ordinance, what a power they have over the
people, which they should never have got from men, if GOD had not given it
them, I have thought it an easy matter to redress an hundred things which
trouble Christendom without reason, and none would kick against it, if these
Gods would cast down their Crowns, and begin to the rest, for all stay upon
them, like the alarm which sounds first to the battle: for our experience
shows, that there will be no great good done, if the example of the best give
not light unto the rest.

Oh, would that Princely spirit would once come upon them to go before the
people, Numb. 27. 17.
which Moses appointed for the Kings place, and not lagge after them like Herod
which said, Mat. 2. 8.
he would come after the wise men to Christ: Ioh 3. 1.
for if Nicodemus come by night, no marvel though the rest come not at all.
Thus their name tells them how they should rule, and by consequence teaches how
we should obey: God calls them Gods, therefore he which contemns them
contemns God: God calls them fathers, therefore we must reverence them like
Fathers: God calls them Kings, Princes, Lords, Judges, Powers, Rulers,
Governors, which are names of honor: and shall we dishonor them whom GOD does
honor? Our first lesson, is Fear God: Pro. 24. 21.
the next is, Honor the King: that is, (as Paul interprets) We must obey
for conscience, 1. Pet. 2. 17.
not against conscience: Romans 13. 5.
for that were to put a stranger before the King, and the King before God,
which Christ says, have no power but from God: and therefore cannot make
themselves Magistrates, Ioh. 19. 11.
no more then they can make themselves Gods. Heb. 5. 4.
As none could give this name but GOD, so no man which exalts himself can
challenge this honor, no more then Simon Magus was great, Act. 8. 9.
because he called himself a great man. But they to whom GOD says, I have
called ye Gods, as if he had the naming and appointing of them. Romans 13. 2.
Every power is from God, for by nature no man can challenge power over other,
but by the Word, 1. Pet. 2. 13
and therefore every soul which is subject to God must be subject to them, for
he which calls them Kings calls us Subjects: Ier. 27. 12
this is their patent (as the Queen of Sheba said to Solomon) that God had
chosen them kings and set them upon the throne. 2. Cro. 9. 3.
As he said, Genesis 1.
and all things were made, so as he says, al things should be. Therefore unless
ye hear this, I say that ye are Lords, Judges, and Magistrates, ye are no
Lords, no Judges, no Magistrates of GOD. And therefore the Pope and his
Clergy to whom God never said, ye are Lords, or Judges, or Magistrates, are
no Lords, no Judges, no Magistrates of GOD, but that which the Lord says
they are, that they are, and no more, though they put on a triple crown. If
they were worthy to be called as others, Pastors, Doctors, and Teachers, we
would give them those titles. They which give them more then the Lord gives
them, make them proud, and insolent, and tyrannous, more then they which are
Lords; Judges, and Magistrates indeed. But for these usurped titles and
bas-borne honor which they have encroached from men (which puff them up, and
trouble them like Saul's armor) they would have intended the duty of
Ministers and Teachers, 1. Sa. 17. 39.
as the Apostles did, whereas now they are so cumbred and mingled by their
usurping over Princes, that they are neither good Ministers, nor good
Magistrates, but Linsie wolsie, a mingle mangle between both, nay utterly
fallen from both, being no shepherds but woolues, of whose slaughters all
Christian Kingdoms have been the shambles, who seeking a superfluous title,
they have for gone all necessary duties: and but for their formalities, a man
could not know of what profession they are, for they never preach nor write,
but to maintain their kingdom which falls (like the Tower of Babel) faster
then they build. Genesis 11.
Therefore as Naomi said, Call me no more Naomi, Ruth. 1. 20.
which signifies beautiful: but call me Mara, which signifies bitter: so
they may say, Call us no more Bishops, or Pastors, or Doctors, or Preachers,
but call us robbers, and sleepers, and giants, and Pharisees, whom we succeed.
For why should they be called Bishops which do not watch, or Pastors which do
not feed, or Doctors which do not teach, or Justices which do not Justice?
except this be the reason, The Idols were called Gods, Exo. 20. 23.
though they were unlike God. If their bodies had grown as far out of square
since Christ's ascension, as their titles, pomp and honor, they might stand in
the maine seas and not be drowned, for their heads would crow above the water.

It follows: But ye shall die as a man. Here he distinguishes between
mortal Gods and the immortal God. Ye have seen their glory, now behold
their ends, They shall all die like others. Though they be never so rich, so
goodly, so mighty, so honorable while their date lasts, yet they may as
truly as Job call Corruption their father, Job. 17. 14.
and the worm their mother: for the grave shall be the last bed of all flesh.
As they were borne like men, so they shall die like men, the same coming in
and going out is to all: nay, if ye respect but the body, he might say, ye
shall die like beasts: for Man being in honor, (says David) may well be
compared unto beasts that perish: Psalm. 49.
though he be in honor, yet he perishes like the beasts which have no
honor, and death will not take his kingdom for a ransom, when GOD does but
say, his time is come. When Esaias had said, that All flesh was grass: Esaias 40.
as though he would correct his speech, he adds, and the glory of it is as
the flower of the field. As if he should say, Some men have more glory than
other, and they are like flowers, the other are like grass: no great
difference, the flower shows fairer, but the grass stands longer, one sieth
cuttes both down, like the fat sheep and the lean that feed in two
pastures, but are killed in one slaughter. So though the great Man live in his
palace, and the poor man dwelles in his cottage, yet both shall meet at the
grave, and vanish together. Even they which are Lords and Judges and
Counsailers now, are but successors to them which are dead, and are nearer to
death now than when I began to preach of this theme. It had been a great
Sessions for all other to die: but for Magistrates, for Princes, for Kings,
for Emperors to die as they die: What a battle is this, that leaves no man a
live? Shall the Gods die too? He gives them their title, but he tells them
their lot. Though their power, though their wealth, though their honor, though
their titles, though their train, though their friends, though their case,
though their pleasures, though their diet, though their clothing be not like
other, yet their end shall be like other: nay, their ends are like to be
more fearful than other: For GOD makes him examples of great men, as he did
of Pharaoh, and therefore we see so many strange and sudden deaths of
Princes, Exodus 9. 16.
more than of other.

Therefore he spoke here with the least when he said, Ye shall die like
other, for very few of them escape the Swoorde, or knife, or poison, which
other never or very seldom fear. But if all your subjects were your
friends, yet ye shall dye like them: for are ye not cold when Winter comes,
are ye not withered when ages comes, are ye not weak when sickness comes,
and shall ye not go (as well as the meanest) when death comes?

Therefore be not proud of thine honor as though it would last always, for
thou shall dye, and then all thine honor shall forsake thee, and another shall
rise in thy place as great as thou: and when his glass is run, another shall
follow him, and so another, till death have all.

Be not cruel in thine authority, as though it would last always: for
thou shall dye, and then thy Authority shall dye with thee: and they which
remain alive, will send infinite curses after thee, because thy life was as a
scourge unto them.

Be not secure for thy wealth, as though it would last always: for thou shall
die, and then another shall take thy riches, and thou shall go to give account
how thou come by them. How many things does he implie when he says, ye
shall die? This is a Bar in their arms, which makes the proudest peacocke
lay down his feathers when he thinks upon it, though he prick them up
again: whereby the holy ghost would have them learn, that nothing will make
them live, and rule and deal so well in their thrones, as to remember that
they shall die, and shortly give account for all: signifying, that prosperity
makes us forgetful of our ends, and that these mortal Gods, live as though
they were immortal. A hard thing for Princes to remember death: they have no
leisure to think of it, but chop into the earth before they beware, like a man
which walks over a field covered with snow, and sees not his way, but when
he thinks to run on, suddenly falls into a pit: even so they which have
all things at will, and swim in pleasure, which as a snow covers their way,
and dazeleth their sight: while they think to live on, and rejoice still,
suddenly rush upon death, and make shipwreck in the calm sea.

Therefore, as it is good for them to hear they are Gods: so it is meet to
know they shall die. Wherefore ye shall die, says he, in the next words, as
if he would prevent some conceit that they would take of the words which he
cast out before, he cooles them quickly before they swell, and deferres not
to another time, but where he calls them Gods, there he calls them worms
meat, lest they should crow between the praise and the check, I have said ye
are Gods, but ye shall die, etc. but for this die, many would live a merry
life, and feast, and sport, and let the world slide: but the remembrance of
death is like a dampe, which puts out all the lights of pleasure, and makes
him rub and frounce and whine which thinks upon it, as if a moate were in his
eye. O how heavy tidings is this, to hear thou shall die from him which has
life and death in his own hands, when the message is sent to them which
reign like Gods, as if he should say, Even you which glister like Angels, whom
all the world admires, and sues, and bows to, which are called honorable,
mighty, and gracious Lords, I will tell you to what your honor shall come:
First ye shall wax old like others, then ye shall fall sick like other, then
ye shall die like other, then ye shall be buried like other, then ye shall be
consumd like other, then ye shall be judged like other, even like the Beggars
which cry at your gates; one sickens, the other sickens; one dies, the other
dies, one rots, the other rots, look in the grave and show me which was
Dives, and which was Lazarus. This is some comfort to the poor, that once he
shall be like the rich, one day he shall be as wealthy, as mighty, and as
glorious as a King, one hour of death will make all alike: they which
crowed-ouer other, and looked down upon them like Oaks, other shall walk
upon them like worms, and they shall be gone, as if they had never been.
Where is Alexander that conquered all the world, and after sought for an
other: because one would not satisfy him? Where is Xerxes which could not
number his Army for multitude? Where is Nemrod, which built his nest in the
clouds? Genesis 11. 4.
Where is Sampson which slew an army with the iawe of an Ass? Iud. 15. 15.
Where is Constantine, Nero, Caligula, Titus, Vespasian, Domitian, thunderbolts
in their times? One hundred Princes of England are dead, and but one alive,
the rest are gone to give account how they ruled here when they sustained the
person of God.

Who would have thought (says Jeremy) that the enemy should have entered
into Jerusalem, Lam. 4. 11.
and spoiled that fair City? Yet he brake into it, and Jerusalem was ransackt
like other. Who would have thought that Herod, which was honored like a GOD,
should have been devoured with worms, and sauoured that none could abide him?
Yet while he was in his pomp like an Idol, Acts 12. 23.
suddenly he was stricken and all his glory like the snuff of a Candell,
Job. 12. 5.
which all men looked upon even now when it shined, and now it so sauors that
they tread it under foot.

Who would have thought Iezabel that beautiful temptation, 2. Kin. 9. 36
should have been gnawed with dogs? Yet she was cast unto dogs, and not an
ear left to season the grave. What would he think, that had seen Solomon in
his Roialty, and after seen him in the clay? O world unworthy to be beloved,
who has made this proud slaughter? Age, Sickness and Death, the three sumners
which have no respect of persons, made them pay the ransom themselves, and
bow to the earth from whence they came: there lie the men that were called
Gods. How soon the flower of this world is faded? yesterdaie the tallest Cedar
in Libanus, to day like a broken stick trodden under foot: yesterday the
state lies upon earth, to day shrouded in earth, forsaken, forgotten, that
the poorest wretch would not be like unto him, which yesterdaie crouched and
bowed to his knees. Then woe to them which had the names of God, and sins of
men, for the mighty shall be mightily tormented. All their friends and
subjects and servants forsake them, because they go to prison to try the
mercy of hell, and take what the spirits of darkness will heap upon them:
there lie many of the men which were called Gods, and thus ends the pilgrimage
of Kings, Princes, and Rulers. This is our life, while we enjoy it, we lose it,
like the Sun which flies swifter than an Arrowe, and yet no man perceiues
that it moves: He which lasted nine hundred years, could not hold out one
hour longer, and what has he now more than a child, which lived but a
year? Genesis 5. 27.
Where are they which founded this goodly City, which possessed these fair
houses, and walked these pleasant fields, which erected these stately Temples,
which kneeled in these seats, which preached out of this place but thirty
years ago? Is not earth turned to earth, and shall not our Sun set like
theirs when the night comes? yet we cannot believe that death will find out
us, as he has found out them: though all men die, yet every man dreams I
shall escape; or at the least I shall live till I be old. This is strange, men
cannot think that God will do again that which he does daily, or that he
will deal with them, as he deals with other: tell one of us that all other
shall die, we believe it, tell one of us we shall die, and we believe it sooner
of all than of one, though we be sore, though we be weak, though we be
sick, though we be elder than those whom we follow to the ground. So they
thought which lie in this mould under your feet as you do. If wisdom, or
riches, or favor, could have entreated death, those which have lived before us
would have kept our possessions from us, but death would take no bale, we are
all Tenants at will, and we must leave this Cottage whenever the Landlord
will put an other in our room, at a years, at a months, at a weeks, at a
days, at an hours warning, or less: the clothes which we wear upon our
backs, the graves which are under our feet, the Sun which sets over our
heads, and the meats which go into our mouths, do cry unto us, that we
shall wear, and set, and die like the beasts, and fowls, and fishes which
now are dead in our dishes, and but even now were living in the Elements. Our
Fathers have summoned us, and we must summon our children to the grave. Every
thing every day suffers some Eclipse, nothing stands at a stay, but one
creature calls to another, Let us leave this world. While we play our Pageants
upon this stage of short continuance, every man has a part, some longer, and
some shorter, and while the Actors are at it, suddenly death steps upon the
stage like a hawk which separates one of the Doves from the flight, he shootes
his dart, where it lights, there falls one of the Actors dead before the^, and
makes all the rest aga^st, they muse and mourn, and bury him, and then to the
sport again: While they sing, play, and dance, death comes again, and
strikes another, there he lies, they mourn him, and bury him as they did the
former, and play again: so one after another, till the plaiers be vanished
like the accusers which came before Christ, and Death is the last upon the
stage, so the figure of this world passes away. Iona. 8. 9.
Many which stand here, may lie here or elsewhere within this twelve month.
But thou think, It is not I, and he thinks, It is not he: but he which
thinks so, comes soonest to it. If I could make you believe, that ye have
but a year to live, and that all which hear me this day, shall come to the
bar before this day tweluemoneth return again, ye would prepare your
selves to die, and leave your sins behind you, and depart Christians out of
the Church, with a mind to do all that God will have you, that when the
tweluemoneth is ended, ye might live with Angels in heaven, and escape that
fiery lake, where the Glutton begs but a drop of water to cool the tip of his
tongue, and it will not be granted him, least it should ease him. But now
we know not whether we shall live a week to an end, we will do nothing that
he bids us, but abide the venture, and try the marker what God will give for
sin, so one is taken after another, Genesis 19. 26.
and because we are not ready, we go against our will, like Lots wife out of
Sodom. This is our fashion to see the best last, till we can neither forsake
our sin, nor hope of mercy. Thus I have proclaimed to all Kings, 1. Kin. 20. 1.
Princes, Judges, Counselors and Magistrates, that which Esaias foretold to one,
Set thy things in order, for thou shall die: Yet 15. years were behind when
the Prophet warned him to set al things in order. But I cannot promise you 15.
years, for many Princes do not reign so long, for one that does. That which
Esaias spoke to one, God here pronounces of all, ye shall die, therefore the
message is sent to you, and when ye think of your honor, think of your end.
These 2. notes, that ye are Gods, and that ye shall die, the holy Ghost
thought enough to teach you how to live, and how to rule. And that we may be
all like Gods hereafter, let us prepare before the account: for none are in
heaven but they that left the world, before it left them.

Therefore let us pray that GOD would keep us in remembrance of his
judgments that the subtlety of sin never steal our hearts from him, but
that we may count this life a respite to repent before the Judge sit to divide
between the sheep and the goats, when we shall give account of all his
instructions, corrections and benefits, even of this seed which has been
sown since ye came in, how ye have received his word this hour.

FINIS.
The Trial of Vanity.
Eccles. 1. 2. Vanity of vanities says the Preacher: Vanity of vanities: All
is vanity.
THis book begins with All is vanity, Eccl. 12. 13
and ends with Fear God and keep his commandments. If that sentence were
knit to this which Solomon keeps to the end, as the haven of rest, after the
turmoyles of vanity: it is like that which Christ said to Martha: Luke 10.
40.
Thou art troubled about many things, but one thing is necessary. That which
troubles us, Solomon calls Vanity: That which is necessary he calls the
Fear of GOD: from that, to this, should be every man's pilgrimage in this
world: we begin at Vanity, and never know perfectly that we are vain, until
we repent with Solomon. Therefore this is his first greeting and lesson to all
after his conversion, to warn them that All is vanity, as if God had said to
him as he said to Ezechiel, Ezec. 16. 2.
Cause Jerusalem to know her abominations, Job. 15. 31.
as though men did not know their sins how vain they are, as Eliphaz
says, He believes not that he is vain, which makes every man defer his
repentance, until the very hour come that sin makes preparation to leave
him, and then fainting he is unwilling to depart, because he is not ready.
Therefore I have chosen this sentence; which speaks of nothing but vanity, to
show how we take the way to misery for the way to happiness, and turn the
day of salvation to the day of vanity. Let every man think as I go in this
matter, why he should love that which Solomon repented, if he think Solomon
happier after he repented, tha^ he was before. This verse is the sum or
contents of all this book, and therefore Solomon begins with it, and ends
with it, as if he should say, First this is the matter which I will prove,
and after, this is the matter which I have proved, now you see whether I told
you true, that All is vanity. I may call it Salomons Theme, or the fa^dle of
vanities, which when he has bound in a bundle, he bids us cast it into the
fire: for after he has done with them in his last chapter and thirteenth
verse as though he would have no more thought of them, he turns away from
them, as if he had buried them and goes to another matter, saying, Now let us
hear the end of all, Fear God and keeep his commandments: for this is the
whole duty of man: as though he were exceeding glad that after so many
dangers through the rout of vanity, yet GOD let him see the haven of rest,
and brought him to the right end, and set him upon shore, where he might see
his vanities, Exodus 14. 30.
as Moses looked back upon his enemies, and saw them drowned behind him.

The whole narration does show that Solomon wrote this book after his fall.
When he had the experience of vanities, and seen the folly of the world, what
evil comes of pleasure, and what fruit grows of sin, he was bold to say,
Vanity of vanities, etc. which he avouches with such protestation, as though
he would justify it against many adversaries: For all the world is in love
with that which he calls vanity. Therefore he puts to his name in the
midst of his sentence, as if he would defend it against all comers: if any
man ask, who broched this strange doctrine? the Preacher (says Salomo^) To
testify his hearty conversion to God, he calls himself a Preacher, in the
witness of his unfeigned repentance, as if God had said unto him Thou being
converted, convert thy brethren and be a Preacher, as thou art a King: so when
we are converted, we should become Preachers unto other, and show some fruits
of our calling, as Solomon left this book for a monument to all ages of his
conversion. Therefore they which write, that Solomon dyed in his sin, and
that such a famous instrument of God went to the damned, do great wrong to the
worthy King which gives them such an example to repent, and would correct
their rash judgment, if they considered. First, that he was the cleerest
figure of Christ (except Melchisedec) which passed all Kings in prosperity,
and all men in wisdom. Secondly that he was inspired by the Holy Ghost like
the prophets, Psalm. 45. 7.
to be one of the pens of God to write his holy word, the word of salvation,
which was not fit for a reprobate. Thirdly, that GOD promised to his father,
that he would not take his spirit and his mercy from him as he did from
Saul, 1. Cor. 17. 13
nor forsake him as he did Saul but correct him in another sort. Fourthlie,
that GOD is said to love him, 2. Sa^. 7. 13.
therefore as Paul concludes that Jacob was elected, 2. Sam. 12.
because, Nehe. 13. 6
God says, Romans 9.
Jacob have I loved: Genesis 27.
So we may conclude, that Solomon was elected, because God says; Solomon have
I loved. Fifthly, that in Luke 13. 28. All the Prophets of God are said to be in
heaven: and therefore Solomon being an holy Prophet must beholden to be in
heaven. To show that he was a holy prophet, in 2. Pet. 3, 2. Peter calls all
the Prophets which wrote the Scripture, Holy Prophets. Lastly we may gather
out of the seventh Chapter of this book and the thirtieth verse, and out of
the 5. of the Proverbs, and the fourteenth verse that Solomon had left his
concubines and vanities before he wrote this book. 1 King. 11. 45
Therefore to say that the figure of Christ, 2 Cor. 9. 31
the pen of the holy Scripture, the man whom God loved, the wisest man that
ever was, and one of the holy prophets died a reprobate, is presumption
against the Word, impiety against God, 1. King. 11. 4. 5
and wrong to the dead. Although, because of his grievous fall in Idolatry, 1.
Cor. 10. 12.
and uncleanness, GOD left him in disgrace, and makes no mention of his
repentance, where he speaks of his death, that they which stand, may take
heed lest they fall, and see how easy it is to slip, by the example of him
which was wiser than they. Solomon being wicked and yet saved, was a figure of
the Church whose sins are forgiven. Thus having found as it were the Mine:
now let us dig for the treasure. Vanity of vanities, etc. This is Salomons
conclusion, when he had gone through the whole world and tried all things
like a spy sent into a strange country, as if he were now come home from his
pilgrimage, they gather about him to inquire what he has heard and seen
abroad, and what he thinks of the world, and these things which are so loved
among men, like a man in admiration of that which he had seen and not able to
express particularly one after another, he contracts his news into aword:
you ask me what I have seen, and what I have heard: Vanity says Solomon:
and what else? Vanity of vanities: and what else? All is vanity. Eccl. 2. 11
This is the history of my voyage, I have seen nothing but vanity over the
world. Carry this for the news from the Preacher: vanity of vanities, Al is
vanity, as if he should say Vanity, and greater Vanity, and more than
Vanity: so the further he did go, the more Vanity he did see, and the
nearer he looked, the greater it seemed: till at the last he could see nothing
but vanity.

When he was come to this, that he did see all things vain, upon which men set
their hearts, he was moved with compassion and could be silent no longer, but
needs he must write to them which seek felicity (as he did in transitory
things, to warn them that they seek it not any longer in these foolish things,
which have no stability nor contentation, but fly from them to The fear of
God, which has the promises of this life and the life to come. 2. Tim. 3. 8.
Therefore he begins with All is vanity, 1. Ioh. 2. 15.
as if he should say: Love not the world nor the things of the world, For I
have tried that there is no certainty in them.

Thus he withdraws them, First, from the wrong way, Eccl 12. 13
and then sets them in the right way to happiness, which he defines at last, to
Fear God and keep his Commandments. When he had gone through a thousand
vanities, then that comes in at the end, even like our repentance which stays
till death: So his drift is to show that man's happiness is not in these things
which we count of, but in those which we defer: his reason is, they are all
vanity: his proof is, because there is no stabilitie in them, nor
contentatio^ of mind: his conclusion is, therefore contemn the world, and
look up to Heaven from whence ye came, and whither ye shall go.

This is the scope which Solomon aims at, as though we did all seek
happiness: but we go a wrong way unto it: Therefore he sounds a retire,
showing that if we hold on our course, and go forwards as we have begun, we
shall not find happiness, but great misery, because we go by vanity.
Therefore to fright us out of this way, he breaks forth into an exclamation,
Vanity of vanities, All is vanity.

Now, Solomon full of wisdom, and schooled with experience, is licensed to
give his sentence of the whole world. 1. Cor. 2. 15
For the spiritual man judges all things, his judgment is so certain, that
it runs before the Evidence, and condemns al for Vanity, before he convince
them to be vain, whereas we prove first and condemn after, because our
words are no authorities: he concludes first and proves after: never any
judge did condemn so many together. Solomon resolved all the questions of the
Queen Shebah, 2. Cor. 9. 2.
yet Solomon never answered so many questions at once as now: for what can you
enquire, but here you have an answer? Ask him as the Soldiers, and harlots,
and Publicans asked John, What is sin? Vanity says Solomon. What is
Pleasure? Luke 12. 14.
Vanity too. What is Beauty? Vanity too. What is Riches? Vanity too. What
is Honor? Vanity too. What is Long life? Vanity too. This is the state of
all things after the fall, all turn to Vanity. This is no reproach to the
things, but shame to him which so abused them, that all things should be called
Vanity for him. What a testimony is this of him which should be the only
servant of God on earth, whom he created in holiness and righteousness whom he
framed to his own Image, whom he placed in Paradise, and would have raised to
heaven to hear that he has so polluted his life with every sin, that now
there is nothing but Vanity? That is a lamentable song which will make him
weep that tunes it, if he think what he says, how his state is changed
since Adam his father died. Once God says, Genesis 1.
that all was good, and now he says that all is naught and vain, as though he
forbad man, that which he created for man. That is not Salomons meaning to
debar men from the use of creatures: Rom 8. 20.
although all things changed with man, and became worse than they were: yet he
does here rather show, that man reapes nothing but Vanity out of these
things, by reason of his corruption, than that the things themselves are vain,
if they were well used. For even since the creation, Paul says 1. Tim. 4.
That every creature of God is good, and nothing is to be rejected, if it be
received, or used with thanksgiving, for it is sanctified by the word of God
and prayer. That is it, which makes them profitable to us, which because it is
wanting for the most part, therefore Solomon says that all are vain to us, not
vain of themselves, but because they are not sanctified as they should be,
therefore in the 2. 24. the 3. 12. and 22. the 5. 17. the 8. and 15. he shows
a way how we may make profit of all, and rejoice in our labors and find a
lawful pleasure in earthly things, so often he calls to the use lest we should
err as the Monks and Eremits have done before, mistaking these words, when
he says that All is vanity, they have forsaken all company, and government
and office and trade, and got themselves into the wilderness amongst beasts, to
live in quiet and silence, saying, that men could not live in the world, and
please God, because All is vanity: so while they counted all things vain,
they became vain themselves, and left those blessings which Solomon inioyed
after his knowledge, more than he did before. Therefore it is vain man which
Solomon reproves, which is not only called Vanity, but lighter tha^
Vanity. Psalm. 62. 9.
If he did not things vainly, nothing should be vain in the world, whereas
now by abuse we may se sometime as great vanity in the best things, as in the
worst: For are not many vain in their knowledge, vain in their policies,
vain in their learning, as other are vain in their ignorance? Was not the
wisdom of Achitopel a vain thing? The swiftnes of Hazael a vain thing? The
strength of Goliath a vain thing? The treasures of Nabuchadnezzar a vain
thing? The honor of Ammon a vain thing? The beauty of Absolon a vain thing?
The knowledge of the Scribes a vain thing? The devotion of the Pharisees a
vain thing. And so is the learning of all those a vain thing, that do no good
with it, but either it lies under a bushel and mouldes, or else it prattles
like Tertullus always against Paul: Act. 24. 5.
striving to make war between them which love dearer than any brethren.

By this you may see that vanity is bold when she breaks into houses and
Churches and Palaces, and sometime vanity may come to infect, where Truth
may not come to reprove: Is it not high time then to sound this Alarm
again, Vanity of vanities? etc.

If we could hear how vehemently, and how pitifully Solomon pronounced this
outcrie, happily it would move us a little to hear how he did exclame of his
own life and condemned himself, as it were by the sound of a Trumpet that
all might hear: For we are all by nature such deaf Adders, that whether the
Prophets come piping, or mourning, or crying, they go away from us again
mourning like Jeremy, Iere. 5. 9.
we would have cured Babel, but she would not be cured. Nay the City of
Jerusalem would not (says our Savior Christ) when he wept for his Israelites.

Therefore, Solomon speaks thrice, like a Crier, Vanity of vanities: as the
mother which would feign make her son to hear, she doubles and trebles her
words: What my son and what the son of my womb, Pro. 31. 1
and what the son of my desires? So when GOD would stir us up to hear, he
cries thrice to the earth and says, Earth, earth, earth, hear the word of
the Lord: Iere. 22. 39.
so when Solomon would dissuade from the company of the wicked: read Proverbs
4. 1* 4: how often he repeates the charge: Enter not into the way of the
wicked, walk not in it, avoid it, go not by it, turn from it, and pass by,
as though he would never have done, or as though we would never hear. So
Christ when he taught Peter what was his duty, rehearsed it thrice: Ioh. 21.
16.
Feed: Feed: Feed. Joseph shows the reason of these repetitions, when he
tells Pharaoh why his dream was doubled, Genesis 41. 32.
because the matter was important and certain. Therefore when Solomon repeates
this saying so often, he calls for audience, as though he had some weighty
and great matter to utter. Such a point of wisdom it is for every man to
know that All is vanity, if we direct not things to their right end, as when
the Holy Ghost would signify that God is all holy, he repeated thrice, holy,
Esaias. 6.
holy, holy: So when he should show that man is al vain thrice he
repeateth vanity, to show how hardly man believes that he is vain: therefore
he brings in three assertions, Job. 15. 31.
as it were three witnesses to prove it. All agree upon the same words, but
that the last is more plain, and says that All is vanity: that is, that man
is not only changed and become vain: but for the vanity, of man, Romans 8. 20
as the Apostle says, The creatures are subject to vanity, and have not the
glory and liberty which they should have, for the sin of man. A spiritual
eye does see some vanity or other in every thing, as appears betwixt Christ
and his Disciples at Jerusalem. They gazed upon the building of the Temple as a
brave thing, Luke 21. 5.
and would have Christ to behold it with them: but he did see that it was but
vanity, and therefore said: Are these the things that ye look upon? as if he
should say: How vain are you to gaze upon this? If Christ thought the beauty
of his Temple a vain thing, and not worth the sight, which yet was beautified
and built by his own prescription: how should Solomon express all the vanity
of the world, Mat. 24. 1
to which all men have added more and more since the beginning? John. 21. 5.
Therefore as if he wanted words to express it, as he did see it, he
breaks forth into an exclamation, and repeates the same often, Vanity of
vanities: as if he should say I cannot speak how vain the world is, but vain
it is, and very vain, and naught but vain, speaking as if he had the feeling
and sense of it, as though the world stood naked before him, and it grieved
him to see, he cuts his words in chiding manner, and makes short riddance, as if
it irked him to speak all that he knew, therefore that which he speaks he
speaks roundly, that if they read no more, but sleep all the Sermon after:
yet the first sentence shall strike a sting into their hearts, and leave a
sound behind to waken them when they are gone, as many (you know) remember
this sentence, which remember no sentence in all his book beside. Who has not
heard Vanity of vanities etc. Though few have conceived it? This is the
phrase of Scripture, when the holy Ghost would commend the song of Solomon
above all other songs, he calls it the song of songs, so called in the
Hebrewe and mentioned 1. King. 4. 32. When he would exalt the heavenly king
above all, he calls him the King of kings, so when he would note a great
vanity, and yet a greater, and a greater than that, which is the greatest of
all, he calls it Vanity of vanities, as when we would note a great fool, we
will say a fool of fools, a sin of sins, a servant of servants, These are
scornful names to the world, and homely titles, to give our pleasures, to
call them Vanity of vanities, and again Vanity of vanities, and yet again
Vanity, as though we would provoke them to fall out with us, like a man
which sharpens his enemy with taunts, when he would egg him to fight. He
might have mollified his terms, before he condemned the world thrice, but
the world is no changling that Solomon should change his judgment, but vain
it was, vain it is, and vain it will be, and therefore a thrice vain world
he may call it: First, Vanity, straight Vanity of vanities, and suddenly All
is vanity What a transcendent is this? as though it increased while he spoke,
so fast grows this weed to worse and worse, like the Image which appeared to
Nabuchadnezzar, Dan. 2.
the first part was of Gold, the second of Silver, the third of Brass, the
fourth of Iron, the fifth of clay, so by many changes the world grows worse
and worse, and all they which follow it. When a man begins to like of pleasure,
and opens the door to one vanity which he loves, straight as many vanities
floch to him, as Solomon had Concubines, till the Temple of God be like a den
of thieves. Therefore when Solomon beheld such apluralitie, and Totquot of
Vanities, 1. Kin. 11. ^
like Surges coming one upon another in pleates and in foldes, he spoke as
though he would show us Vanity hatching vanities, Vanity of Vanities, all is
Vanity. The first saying does pass without let, but the last rubs and sinks
not into the hearts of men so easily as it is spoken. Me thinks I hear some
dispute for Baal, and bid Solomon stay before he come to All is Vanity. It may
be that sin is vanity, and pleasure is vanity: but shall we condemn all
for sin and pleasure? What say you to Beauty which is natures dowry, and
cheareth the eye, as sweet meat does the taste? Beauty is like a fair
picture, take away the color and there is nothing left. Beauty in deed is
but a color and a temptation, the color fades, and the temptation snareth.
But what say you to Riches which make men Lords over the rest, and allow them
to go brave, and lie soft, and fare daintilie, and have what they list? Riches
are like painted grapes, which look as though they would satisfy a man, but
do not slake his hunger, nor quench his thirst, Riches in deed to make a man
covet more, and get envy, and keep the mind in care. But what say you to
Honor, which sets a man a loft, and makes the knee bow, and the tongue sooth
and the head stand bare, as though they were other kind of creatures above
them?

Honor is like a King in a play: when his part is done, his ornaments are
taken from him, and he which held the basin to him is as good as he. Honor
in deed may command all but life: he makes a fair show now: but when death
comes, all is one.

But what say you to profound Knowledge in deep mysteries, which makes men
sought unto, 2. Sam. 11.
and called deep Clerks, and great Doctors? Knowledge is like the Letters
which Vriah carried against himself: so Knowledge draws a greater judgment,
and oftentimes condemns the bearer. Knowledge without Virtue, leaves a man
without excuse, and is a witness against him, because he understands what is
good, and will not do it. Yet there is another darling of account behind:
Psalm. 128.
what say you to Long life, which causes a man to see his childrens children,
and makes him reverent before the people? Long life is like a long night, when
a man cannot sleep: so age is wearisome with sickness, and strives with it
self because it cannot walk, nor talk, nor hear, nor see, nor taste, nor
sleep, as it was wont: therefore wishes often the night were gone, that the
pain were past. Indeed he that sees many days, sees many miseries: and
therefore what is not vain in life, since life it self is vain? Show me the
light which will not darken, show me the flower which will not fade, show me
the fruit which will not corrupt, show me the garment which will not wear,
show me the beauty which will not wither, show me the strength which will
not weaken, show me the time which will not pass, and I will reclaim that
All is vanity? but if all things vanish, then all things are vain, yet this
will not go for truth, before men have smarted for the trial. Some are so
vain that they count nothing vanity. but that which is vainer than the rest
delights them most, Pro. 12. 12.
for there is as it were acommon weal of vain persons, Pro. 14. 9.
and he which can be vainest, is like a King of the rest. Some are of this
mind, that they think all is vanity but that which they love, and therefore
they call them vain, Pro. 28. 4.
and curious, and fantastical, which speak against their vanities, and say
that it is necessary to be vain, for they cannot live unless they deceive,
they cannot please unless they flatter, they cannot be believed unless they
swear they cannot be esteemed unless they roist, as Demetrius thought that he
should beg unless he might sell Images. Act. 19. 24.
There is another sort like the buier in Pro. 20. which says. It is naught, it
is naught, but when he is gone apart he boasts. So they will say of the
world, It is naught, It is naught, before men and swear that all is vanity,
but when they are gone apart, they reconcile themselves unto it and kiss it,
and promise to be vain still, but they cannot abide to be counted vain, the
vainest man that is. This shows that the folly of the world is so open and
shameful, that her loves must needs condemn her. You shall hear them say
often times: It is a vain world, a wicked world, a naughty world, yet they
will not forsake it to die, like dastard soldiers, who rail against the
enemy, but dare not fight against him. Al is vanity, but this is vanity of
vanities, that men will follow that which they condemn. But this is that every
sinner might condemn himself: for the conscience must judge first and then
God, 1. Ioh. 3. 20
as our Savior says: Out of thine own mouth, and so out of thine own heart
I will condemn thee, naughty servant, Showing that the wicked condemn
themselves before they are condemned of God. These are the worlds fools,
which care not what is their end, so that their way be pleasant.

Oh that here were a full end or conclusion of Vanities, but behold, a
greater Vanity is behind: Mat. 23. 27
for our Religion is Vanity, like the Scribes and Pharisees, as Matthew says
in the 23. Chapter, and 27. verse having a bare show of holiness, as he says,
he could call it but a show of holiness, and scarce that: our vanity is
vanity, but our holiness is but a show of holiness not worthy to be called
holiness but like holiness: yet the most part have not so much as the show of
holiness, as the Pharisees had, but are vain in show, inside and outside too.
Thus we find nothing yet but vanity. I cannot lead you from one unto
another, to show you the several vanities of every person, or every thing,
because Solomon says, All is vanity. How many sins then have we to condemn
us, whose vanities are sprinkeled in every thing? Which have not only so
many vanities as there be things, but many vanities in every thing. As in our
fare, how many vanities be there, which makes us rise sometime sick, sometime
sleepy, sometime drunk? Yet are there more vanities: in our sportes, our
laughing, and swearing and jesting, and scoffing, and dallying, and playing
with the Scriptures, which oftentimes leaves such a sting behind, that we had
rather have lost our sport, than feel the worm that gnaws us for it. And yet
there be more vanities in our apparel, ruff upon ruff, lace upon lace cut
upon cut, 24. orders to the 3. and 4. degree, as though our apparel were
apparelled, until the woman be not worth so much as her artire, that if we
would see vanity her self how she would go if she did wear apparel, she
would even go like our women: for she could not go, nor speak, nor look
vainer. Who does not know that these are vanities, and that they might leave
them, if they would? But that ye might see there is a heart within vainer than
the apparel is without. Therefore when these vanities re worn out, they will
have new, and still new, til all be spent upon vanity, and then they begin
like the prodigal child to see how vain they were, Luke. 15. 12
when they have bought Wisdom with sorrow. What would Solomon say, if he
should see how vanity is grown since his time, what a hight she is mounted,
what a train follows her, that there is no prince in the world has so many
attendants as vanity? She was but an Impe then, but now she is a mother, and
who can number her sons and daughters: the child is vain in playing the
mother vain in dandling, the father vain in giving, the Courtier vain in
spending, the soldier vain in boasting, the suter vain in striving, the
trauailer vain in talking, the merchant vain in swearing, the gentleman vain
in building, the husbandman vain in carking, the old man vain in coveting,
the Seruingman vain in soothing, the young man vain in sporting, the Papist
vain in superstition, the protestant vain in conversation. Every vanity is
so pleasant to one or other, that they cannot miss one. So she gads by Sea and
by land, and still mo disciples flock unto her of gamsters and swearers and
players, and tiplers, and haksters, and Courtiers, as thick as the flies of
Aegipt, which buzzed in their ears, and their eyes, and their necks before,
Genesis 8. 30.
and behind, that a man cannot set his foot but upon Vanity. As the waters
covered the earth, when but eight persons were saved: Genesis 7. 27.
so vanity has covered it again, a worse deluge than the first, because it
has not suffered eight persons to escape, but every man is tainted with some
vanity or other, which God seeing in that place and City which should be best
in the world, Esa. 24. 10.
(that all men in the city were vain) calls it the City of vanity: So we
may say the world of vanity, because she has an interest in every person of
it, she sits upon the earth like a Serpent, and hatcheth all the sins which
you see amongst men. As full as Heaven is of bliss, so the world is fraught
with vanity, Court, City and country, whither does not vanity go, but to
Heaven? Seeing then that vanity is so extolled amongst men, Luke 10. 40
Solomon gives his sentence, that all is vanity. Christ like a Mediator
concludes upon it that there is but one thing necessary: therefore let our
sentence be like theirs: For sure, if we had Salomons repentance, we should
see such an image of vanity before us, as would make us cry again and again
as often as Solomon: Vanity of vanities, vanity of vanities, and all is
vanity. What a sweet sentence is this from a King, who may live as they list
by authority, to say, that all is vanity? Oh, that we might hear Kings
speak so again: for it is a speech which had need of some to countenance it,
for none are counted vain now but they that speak against vanity. Then
Solomon cried it, but now we must whisper it. You may see how times are
changed: Once this was sound divinity, now it is flat railing: to say that
all is vanity, is even the vpshot of a disturber. If ye ask the Athiest or
Epicure, or these rogish plaiers, what is a disturber? you shall see that they
will make Solomon one, because he speaks against vanity: for this is their
definition, he which will not allow men to profane the Saboth but says,
that Cards and dice, and stage plays, and Mai-games and May poales, and May
fools, and Morris-dauncers are vanity, is a pratler, a disturber, and an
Arch-pustan, John. 19. ^
by the law which the Jews had to kill Christ. The reason is, Pro. 13. 1.
because men cannot abide to be controlled of their pleasures. Therefore they
hold it is an offense, to speak against their sports, or their customs, or
their follies, or their pleasures, or their titles, or their toys: and they
which would not be counted precise in these times, must take heed that they
go not so far as Solomon to term all Vanity. But they must say, that the
vanities of great men are necessary recreations, and the vanities of the
people are means to make unity. Greater books are written to maintain this
than Solomon made to refute it, so they have made their wit and their learning
Vanity, and are vain in Printe. But they that would know now of what
standing such precise reproouers are, and how ancient this reproof is, may see
here, that if this be a crime to call Vanity, Vanity: the wisest man that
ever was before Christ was herein criminate, not when he strayed, but when he
repented, in his best mind (when he became like a Preacher) he preached this
first, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity: yet many had rather try it with
Solomon, then believe it of Solomon: and while they are wondering with him, some
are taken out of their way, and cut short of the time which they set to
repent: from others God takes away his grace, 2. King. 17. 13
so they never return because their guide is gone. This the holy Ghost
pointed at, when he says, They followed vanity, and became vain, showing
that the things we follow, will make us like themselves, and lead us whether
they belong, to heaven or hell. In Romans 8. 20. vanity is put for destruction,
but it is never put for salvation. If other creatures are subject to a kind of
destruction for the sin of man, as Paul shows, what destruction shall light
upon man for his own sin? Therefore let our sentence run with Solomon,
Vanity of vanities, all is vanity. We could afford the world better
words and fairer titles, than Vanity of vanities: but call it what we will,
Solomon shows what it is, and what we will say in the end when we have tried
it, then Vanity of vanities: yet it is comfort of comforts, glory of glories,
and life of lives. But as Laban showed himself at parting: Genesis 31.
so at parting you shall see how it will serve you, They seem pleasant
vanities, and honest vanities, and profitable vanities: Psalm. 31. 6.
but David calls them deceiptfull vanities. Iona. 2. 8.
Jonas comes after and calls them lying vanities, that is, which promise
pleasure, and profit, and all, but deceive all, when they should perform.
They play Laban which gave Leah for Rachel. If they be lying vanities and
deceiptfull vanities, then are they woeful and miserable vanities. Therefore,
if we be not come to Salomons conclusion, to think that All is vanity, it is
because our own vanity will not suffer us to see the vanity of other things.
When we have proved like Solomon, as fast as every man grows in knowledge,
and experience, so he begins to cry vanity, and after Vanity of vanities,
and at last, All is vanity: so we contemn not all at once, but one sin after
another, one pleasure after another, till at last we count All is vanity, and
then we are come home with Solomon and may be Preachers unto other. Thus I have
showed unto you as it were a limme of vanity, you may look about you and see
the whole body: for if she be any where in this land, this is her pontisical
seat, where she is never nonresident: now I will leave you to examine these
sayings, whether all things have not been in vain unto you yet. If they have
been vain to you and yet are good in their own nature, then think how vain
you are who have turned so many good things to vanity. Yet to set you in the
way before I end, I will answer them which ask, if All things be vanity: As
Solomon says, Luke 10.
Tell us what we should choose, that we be not vain? Christ says, that one
thing is necessary. Is Solomon contrary to Christ? No, therefore one thing
Solomon excepts too, to fear God and keep his commandments. Therefore if all
be vain but this, Math. 4.
let the Tempter take thee up again, and show thee the Kingdoms of the
world, when he says, All these will I give thee, thou may say, All these I
contemn, for all is vain.

What then? Psalm. 119.
Turn away my eyes (says the Prophet David) and my ears, and my heart too
from vanity. Try and prove thou no longer, for Solomon has proved for thee,
it is better to believe him than try with him. Therefore now it remains that
as they brought forth their vain books ofter Paul's preaching, Act. 19. 19.
and cast them into the fire: so ye should cast out all your vanities this day,
and sacrifice them to God, for they have been your Idols, therefore bury them
as Jacob did the Idols, Genesis 35. 4.
that never man saw them after. And as God gave Job other children, so they
will give you other pleasures, fear not that your joys will go way with your
vanities, as many think they shall never be merry again, if they should be
converted to religion. But as David daunced before the Arc as merrily as
Herodias daunced before the King: 2. Sam. 6. 14
so know undoubtedly that the righteous find more joy in goodness, than ever
the wicked found in filthiness. Nay (says David) more than they can find in
riches or honors, Psalm. 47.
when their wheat and wine abound. Psalm. 53. 17.
As a horse is a vain thing to save a man: so all these things are too vain
to make a man happy. I appeal to your selves, if ye have tried the pleasures
of vanity already, (as I know ye have) whether ye may readily say with
Saint Paul, What profit have we of these things whereof we are ashamed? no
profit but shame and grief, and guilt, and a dreadful expectation of
judgment: Pro. 14. 18.
As Solomon calls folly the inheritance of folly, so vanity is the
inheritance of vanity. Ten times Laban changed Jacobs wages, but ten thousand
times sin has changed your wages, and deceived you with other success than
you looked for, like Shebna which built his Sepulcher in one Country, and was
buried in the other: Esaias. 22.
and yet how many changes are behind, you know not, for if you did you would
make inquisition now and banish them at first, for whenever ye go about to
cast them out, they will say still like the Devils, that thou tormentest them
before the time. It seems that many are touched with compassion of this, and
therefore repriue their vanities, and slack the execution, as though they were
afraid to offend the Devil: Mat. 8. 29
even we perhaps are in the trace of vanity, hunting with Solomon to find
that which we love, and find it not: because we seek it out of the way. What
is the remedy, So run, says Paul, that ye may obtain, you have tried the
evil way to happiness, now try the good way, 1. Cor. 9. 24
and then that which ye love now, shall not only seem vain, but Vanity of
Vanities: that ye will marvel how ye could love them so long, and would not
be in that dotage of the^ again for all the world. Until these earthly
things seem vain, no heavenly things shall seem precious, therefore lose no
more time the day comes when Vanity of vanities shall be turned to misery of
miseries, and All is vanity, to All is misery. There is a certain place
called Hell, where God keeps general Sessions, there Justice shall sit to
examine vanity, who has embraced her and who has forsaken her God, and he
which made his pleasure of sin, so soon as he hears this doom, Depart from
me ye wicked, shall go down by a black way with many a sigh and (...) from
God from the Angels from the Saints, from joy, from glory, from bliss with
the fiends of hell, to (...) Palace of darkness with the Princes of horror, at
the table of vengeance, in the (...) of calamity, with the crown of death
upon his head: and he which tempted him to sin, shall plague him for sinning
until he cry like Gam, My punishment is greater than I can bear for all the
griefs, and fears, and cares, and troubles, which fed upon him while he
lived shall meet in an hour, and exceed them so far, that he suffers for
all, and marvel how any torment can be left for other. What faith or fear
have they, that go dancing and leaping to this fire, as it were to a banquet,
like a fool which runs to the stocks? How happy were it for men as we live
in these days, if there were no judgment at all? What will we answer when he
which made Solomon to write this, 2. Sam. 11. 26.
shall ask why we would not believe it? what shall we say when he which came
from his kingdom to bring us unto it, demands why we did turn the day of
salvation unto the date of vanity? if ye cannot excuse it here, how will ye
defend it there we were borne in vanity, and we live in vanity, but we would
not die in vanity, because no man looks for any good of his sins after he
is past this world, therefore let us remember that whither the vain men are
gone, thither vain men shall go. There be not two ends for sinners, but one:
what a woeful bargain will it seem then to remember that thou did sell they
soul for vanity? If any thing will reclaim us, this will be a terror in our
hearts, to think that we shall give account unto him, which will measure to us
as much misery as we have taken vanity, 2. Sam. 13. 15.
therefore as Abner said to Ioab, know thou not that it will be bitterness
in the latter end? So let every man consider with himself, though his
vanities be swee^ now, yet they will be bitter in the end As Ammon after he
had fulfilled his lust did hate Thamar (which defied her) more than he loved
her before, so when the sport is past, and Death looks us in the face, we
shall hate our vanities more, than we love (...). All this (...) conclude that
our Savior said to Martha, Luke 10. 40.
but one thing is necessary. Which God grant we may choose for his son
Jesus Christ, and then we have learned this lesson.

FINIS.
The Ladder of Peace.
Rejoice ever more, pray continually, in all things give thanks.
WHen I spoke last of these words, I showed you how the Apostle comme^deth unto
us three virtues, of greater price than the three presents which the wisemen
brought unto Christ: the first is, Rejoice evermore, the second is, pray
continually, the third, in all things give thanks. All three are of one last,
for we must rejoice continually because he says, rejoice evermore, and we
must pray continually, because he says pray continually, and we must give
thanks continually because he says, in all things give thanks. These are the
three things which one says, Al men do, and no man does, because every man
does them, and scarce one does them as he should. Therefore the Apostle to
show us, how we should do them well, does put continually unto them, as
though continuance were the perfection of al virtues. I chose this scripture
for a consolation to them which are afflicted in conscience, which is commonly
the disease of the innocentest soul: for they think that they do well to
mourn continually, and Paul says, Rejoice continually: and therefore I will
speak a little more of these words than I did before. If you mark it, it may
well be called, The Ladder of Peace* for it stands upon three steps, and every
step is a step from trouble to peace, from sorrow to joy, for he which can
Rejoice, is past his grief: and he which can pray, is passing from his grief,
and he which can give thanks, has obtained his desire. A man cannot rejoice
and mourn, a man cannot pray and despair, a man cannot give thanks, and be
offended, therefore keep still upon one of these three steps, and you shall
never sorrow too much. If thou can not rejoice as if thy pain were past,
then give thanks, because thy pain is profitable: if thou can not think
that thy pain is worth thanks, then pray that thou may have patience to
bear it: and it is impossible that in praying or thanking or rejoicing, that
any grief should want patience enough to bear it. But when you forget to
rejoice in the Lord, then you begin to muse, and after to fear, and after to
distrust, and at last to despair, and then every thought seems to be a sin
against the holy Ghost. How many sins does the afflicted conscience record
against it self, repenting for breaking this commandment, and that
commandment, and never repents for breaking this commandment, rejoice
evermore.

It is not an indifferent thing to rejoice or not to rejoice, but we are
commanded to rejoice, to show that we break a commandment if we rejoice
not. Oh what a comfort is this when the comforter himself shall command us to
rejoice? God was wont to say, repent and not rejoice because men rejoice too
much, but here God commands to rejoice, as though some men did not rejoice
enough.

Therefore you must understand to whom he speaks. Psalm. 149. 5.
In 149. Psalm. 5. It is said, Let the Saints be glad, not let the wicked be
glad, and in Esaiah 40. 1. Esai. 40. 1.
He says, Comfort my people, not comfort mine enemies, showing to who^ this
commandment of Paul is sent rejoice evermore, it is not in this as Christ
says that which I say unto you I say unto all, but that which I say unto you
I say not unto all. Pro. 13. 9.
Give wine (says Solomon) unto him that is sorrowful; that he may forget his
grief: So give comfort unto him which is penitent that he may forget his
fear. Solomon says five times that this is the portion of man under the
sun, Eccle. 2. 24.
to receive the gifts of God with thankefulnes and to rejoice in them, Leuit.
11.
he which would have us holy as he is holy, 1. Pet. 1. 16.
would have us joyful as he is joyful, he which would have us do his will
upon earth, As the Angels do it in heaven, would have us rejoice upon earth as
the Angels rejoice in heaven, he which has ordained us to the kingdom of
Saints, would have us rejoice that we have such a kingdom to receive.

Therefore he says to his Disciples, Rejoice that your names are written in
the book of life, as B^az said unto Ruth^, go not out of this field to
gleane in any other field, Luke 10. 20.
for here thou shall have enough, Ruth. 2. 8.
so he would not have us go from this comfort unto any other comfort, for
here we shall have enough: the spirit of God is called the Comforter, Ioh. 14.
16.
because we should have comfort in it, I will send you the Comforter says
Christ, to show that they which have the spirit have comfort too, and they
which resist comfort, resist the spirit, therefore the son of GOD is called
the Consolation of Israel, Luke 2. 25.
to show that he brings Consolation with him, and that joy is where Christ
is, as light is where the Su^ne is.

Therefore the chiefest joy is called the joy of the holy Ghost, to show
that they have the chiefest joy, Romans 14. 17
which have the holy Ghost, therefore the greatest peace is called the peace
of conscience, Phil. 4. 7.
to show that they have the greatest peace, which have a good conscience:
therefore the faithful are said, to be anointed with the oil of joy, Esai.
61. 3.
as though joy were in their countenance: therefore they are said to be
clothed with the garment of gladness, Romans 1. 17.
as though gladness did compass them like a garment: 1. Cor. 1. 3.
therefore Paul (in all his Epistels) does join grace and peace together, 2.
Cor. 1. 2.
and show that the peace of God does follow them which have the grace of God.
Gal. 1. 3.
It is not in vain that the holy Ghost when he named Barnabas, Ephesians. 1. 2.
interpreted his name too, because it signifies the son of consolation: Col.
1. 2.
as though he delighted in such men as were the son of consolation. 2. These.
2. 1
Comfort one another says Paul: Tit. 1. 4.
How shall we comfort one another without comfort? Philem. 3.
Therefore Paul says, Act. 4. 39.
GOD comfort us; 1. The. 4. 18.
that we may be able to comfort other by the comfort whereby we our selves are
comforted of God: 1. Cor. 14.
showing, that we cannot comfort other, unless we be comfortable our selves:
and therefore that we may perform this duty, we are bound to nourish comfort
in our selves Paul says, I am full of comfort: who then can say, 1. Cor. 7. 4.
I am full of sorrow, but he must contrary Paul? As the body may not offend
the soul, so the soul may not iniure the body, because it is the bodis
keeper: but a pensive man does iniure the body, and the soul too, Pro. 18. 14.
for Solomon says, A sound spirit will bear his infirmities, but a wounded
spirit who can bear? As if he should say, The heart must be kept courageous,
and strong, and lively like an instrument which is tuned to tune all the rest,
or else every grief will make thee impatient. In Deuteronomy. 30. 9. it is said that
God reioiceth to do us good, and therefore in the 28 of Deuteronomy. the Jews are
reproved, because they rejoiced not in the service of God. As he loves a
cheerful giver, so, he loves a cheerful seruer, and a cheerful Preacher,
and a cheereful hearer, and a cheereful worshipper: and therefore David says,
Let us sing hartelie unto the Lord, showing as it were the tune which
delights Gods ears. If you would know with what tune ye should sing unto
God, Psalm. 95. 1.
David says Heartelie, that is, you must give heartelie, you must love
heartelie, you must obey heartelie, you must pray heartelie: and when you do
all things heartely, then you shall do all things cheerfully.

Therefore now I may say unto them which resist comfort and nourish grief, as
the Prophet says, Isa. 1. 12.
Who has required these things of you? GOD does require no sorrow but the
sorrow for sin, no fear but the fear to sin, no care but the care to please
him, nay he has forbidden al other care: and therefore Peter says, 1. pet.
5. 7.
Cast your care upon him. As though God did not allow us to care, he sent his
Apostle with this charge, Cast your care upon him, As we do cast our sins
upon Christ so we must cast our cares upon him: for God has commanded us to
labor, but not to care, because care hinders our labor, like the
Samaritanes, which seemed to help the Jews to build the Temple and hindered
them to build the Temple: Ezra. 9. 2.
so care, and sorrow, and thought seem to help us in our labors, and our
studies, and our prayers, and our strife, but indeed they hinder us, for they
take all the time from that which we should do, and disable us to do it: and
therefore, when care comes to us, we shall answer it as Christ said unto
Satan. Avoid Satan, avoid care for every care which is not of God, Mat. 4.
is of Satan, and we may not bear that which God commands us to cast upon
him: shall I hang my joy, and my faith, and my hope, because I have sinned, as
Judas hanged himself? The Scripture says not, let him which has stolen
despair of mercy, John. 41.
but Let him which has stolen steal no more, and it is enough. As we are
taught to discern of spirits and of doctrines: 2 Cor. 7. 10
so we must discern of cares and sorrows: for when Paul says, There is a
repentance not to be repented of: He shows that there is a repentance to be
repented of, that is, a repentance which is a sin like the tears of Esau,
which wept not for his sins, but for his patrimony. Genesis 25. 33
When we sorrow for any thing but sin, Genesis 27. 34
as Esau did, then our sorrow is murmuring: and when we sorrow more for sin
then we should as some do: then our sorrow is distrust, which hurts us more
than the thing which we sorrow for: Pro. 17. 22.
For, The sorrow of the heart (says Solomon) is the consuming of the bones:
not only the consuming of the soft flesh, but the consuming of the hard bones,
that is, it will pull down the strongest man that is: and he which
intertaineth it, Ruth. 1. 10,
shall quickly say with Naomi: Call me no more beautiful, but bitter. Call me
no more strong, but weak, for it will change him like a sickness: therefore as
Christ refused the vinegar and would not drink it when he had tasted it: Psalm.
69. 6.
So let no man drink of sorrow before he taste it: But if any thing eat thee
up, let the zeal of Gods house eat thee up: for thy charge is not to get thy
living with the care of thy mind, but with the sweat of thy brows. Now (as
James says) Resist the devil, and he will fly from you: Genesis 3. 19.
So resist sorrow, and it will fly from you. This is all the care, and all
the fear, and all the repentance, which ever I could find in the Scripture.
James. 4. 7.
Therefore let us pray God every day to turn all our joy into the joy of the
Holy Ghost, and all our peace into the peace of conscience, and all our sorrow
into the sorrow for sin, and all our fear into the fear to sin, that so
we may sorrow and rejoice together, fear and hope together: that is, have one
eye to the Law to keep us from presumption, and another eye to the Gospel to
keep us from despair, and then this comfort is sent to us, Rejoice ever more,
or else we have nothing to do with it.

It follows: 1. Kin. 3. 15.
Pray continually. As Elisha would not prophecy until the Musician came, and
while the Musician played Elisha prophesied: so when the heart rejoices in
God, then it is fittest to call upon God, and therefore Paul puts rejoice
before pray, like the Musician which played before Elisha prophesied. After
Rejoice continually, he bids us Pray continually: showing that it must be
such a rejoicing continually, that we may pray continually too, or else he does
not allow us to rejoice. How can these two join together, Pray and Rejoice.
Some if they should pray cannot rejoice for their hearts: Nay their hearts are
sick until their prayers be done, although they pray not themselves, but
hear another pray for them, this is the difference between the rejoicing of
the wicked, and the rejoicing of the godly. The comfort of the wicked, is like
a compound medicine made of many mixtures: for there must be piping and
daunsing, and leaping, and feasting, and dallying, at their game, or else they
cannot be merry. but the comfort of the faithful is like a light in the air,
which shines when no matter is seen: So the godly rejoice when no cause is
seen: if they do but think upon God, they rejoice straight. If there be
but a prayer, and a thankefulnes, and a meditation, there are instruments
enough for them, and they can be as merry as birds in May. The reason of it
is this, John. 4. 32.
as Christ said: I have another meat which you know not of, so the godly
have another joy which the world knows not often of this joy, a man may
rejoice continually. And therefore Solomon says, A good conscience is a
continual feast, Pro. 15. 15.
that is, a continual joy. But of the wickeds joy he says, In laughter their
heart is sorrowful: that is, their laughter is sorrow: as if he should say:
the wicked never rejoice indeed but counterfeit joy, as they counterfeit
virtue. Thus Paul ioineth, Rejoice continually with Pray continually, as if
he should say: by this thou shall know whether thou rejoice well, if thou
can pray too: that is, if thy reioicing move thee to prayer, as the joy of
the Angels makes them praise GOD and sing, Holy, Holy, Holy, unto him. This is
according to that in the 5. of James. Iam. 5. 13.
If any man be merry let him sing Psalms: mark how James joins mirth and
Psalms, as Paul ioineth Reioicing and praying, all this does conclude, that as
we should do Gods Wall in earth as it is done in heaven, Luke 11. 2.
so we should rejoice in earth as they rejoice in heaven, and then this joy is
a sign of another joy, but if we cannot rejoice in praying, how shall we
rejoice in suffering; I am now in a large field* where I might show you to
whom we should pray, and the cause why we should pray, and the things which
we should pray for, and the Mediator which we should pray by, and the
affections which we should bring to (...) but I will keep my self within my
Text, which says no more but pray continually. First we are commanded to
pray, and then we are commanded to pray continually, of all our duties this is
our only duty, which is given to none but GOD according to that, him only
shall thou serve: Such an excellent thing is prayer, Mar. 4. 10.
that it is offered to none but to him which Solomon calls Excellent.

Secondly, it is such a pleasant thing, that Paul ioineth, Pray continually;
with Rejoice continually, Pro. 26. 10
to show that no man has such joy as he which is often talking with GOD by
Prayer, as if he should say, if thou have the skill to pray continually, it
will make thee rejoice continually, for in the company of GOD is nothing but
joy and gladness of heart.

Thirdly, it is such a necessary thing that Christ calls his temple the
house of praeier to show that as we sell in our shops, and as we buy in the
market, and as we eat in our Parlours, and as we sleep in our Chambers, and
as we walk in our Galleries, so we should pray in the Temple, which is such a
necessary Trade for men, that GOD built a house for it and called it the house
of Prayer, as though Prayer brought GOD and us to dwell continually in one
house together.

Further he has made a day for it in every week as though he would bind
us to Pray: and because we can not Pray before we be sanctified, therefore he
set down an order for us to observe and keep, which is this, that before
every Sabbath he appointed another day beside, in which we should provide
ourselves to sanctify and prepare us that we might Pray in so effectual
manner as we ought.

Fourthlie, if we endeavor our selves to live vprightlie and in the fear of
GOD. according to the precise rule of his commandments, we shall find it such
a heavenly life that it will make us like the Angels which are in Heaven, for
when we read, God speaks to us, because we read his word: But when we
pray, we speak to God, because we commence one (...) to him: and so prayer
makes us like the Angels which are always singing to God. Now if the company
of wise men can so change one, that in a short time he represents their,
speeches and qualities: how will them nature and their manners alter, which are
still talking with God, like the beloved Disciple which learned on Christ's
bosom? Ioh. 2. 20.


Fiftlie, it is such a sweet thing above other things that we do for God, that
in Reave. 7. the Prayers of the Saints are called incense; because when they
ascend to Heaven, God seems to smell a sweet savor like incense.

Sixthly, it is such a profitable things, that it does more good than (...): for
with mine alms, I help but three or four: but with my prayer I help
thousands Prayer is the rich-mans alms as well as the poor man's. For Pharaoh
begged for prayers as well as Lazarus begged for cromes.

Lastly, it is victorious and powerful, that it overcomes God himself
which overcomes all things. For if we will overcome our Lord as Jacob did we
must overcome him with prayer. Genesis 22. 38
This God shows when he says to Ieromiah: Ier. 11. 14.
Pray not for this people. Showing that the prayer of the righteous is of such
force and power, that God is feign to forbid them to pray when he would not
grant, lest he should be over come. This Christ shows again, when he
resembles his father to the deaffe Judge, Luke 18. 23.
and his suppliants to the importunate woman which cried upon him, and made him
hearken to her, as if she had compelled him. Therefore one compares prayer
unto Samsons hair: As all Sampsons strength lay in his hair, Iud. 16. 17.
so all our strength lies in prayer. I have read of many which write, that
they did learn more by praying than they could by reading. And I have heard
some say, that they have done that by prayer, which they could not do by
counsel* In the 17. of Exodus, we read that the Jews prevailed more by
prayer, than they could by fight. Therefore one says: that he which can pray
can do all things, because he can overcome God which helps him to do al
things. And he which can overcome God, can overcome the devil too, which
hinders all things.

Whoeuer fell into heresy, or into Apostasy, or into despair, before he
fell from prayer, Mat. 17. 22.
the preservative of the soul? If thou had been here, (says Martha) my
brother had not died: So if prayer had been here, these evils had not
happened.

This is the Holy water which drives away unclean spirits, as Christ
shows when he speaks of the Devil which is not cast out but by fasting and
prayer. Mat. 6. 13.
This is the Cross which saves us from evil, as Christ shows when he
teaches us to pray, as it is wrtten in the 11. Chapter of Luke, Deliver us
from evil. This is the oil which heals our sickness, as James shows in
his fifth Chapter, verse. 15. when he says, The prayer of faith shall save
the sick. It has such a hand in all things, that it is like the sanctifier
of every thing, it blesses our thoughts and blesses our speeches, and
blesses our actions. As Abraham blessed his servant before he went from: so
prayer blesses our works before they go from us. Whatsoever thou do
before thou have blessed it with prayer, Genesis 24.
thou haste no promise that it shall prosper nor do good because he which
should bless it is not made a counsel to it. Therefore we should not presume
to use any of Gods gifts, or any of Gods graces without prayer, lest that
which is good, do not good but hurt unto us.

For this cause S. Paul in the 14. to the Romans and the sixth verse, Act. 20.
36. 38.
teaches us to pray before we eat. For this cause Paul prayed before he
iournied. For this cause Eliah prayed before he sacrificed, as it appears in
1. King. 18. 36.

For this cause the Israelites prayed before they fought: and for this cause
we pray before we preach. It is a good thing to preach, and yet you see we
do not presume to preach before we pray, because Paul planteth, 1. Cor. 3. ^*
and Apollo waters, but GOD gives the increase. Even so, we should not
presume to give Alms, nor to give counsel, nor to give help before we have
prayed that it may do good. Nay, we should not presume to exercise our
faith, nor our repentance, nor our obedience without prayer, because there is
no faith so Perfect, but it had need of Prayer to strengthen it.

Also, there is no love so perfect, but it had need of prayer to confirm it.
There is no repentance so perfect, but it had need of prayer to continue it.
There is no obedience so perfect, but it had need of prayer to direct it.
Therefore he does sin which presumes to do any good work without
prayer, because he seems to do it by his own power, for that he craves not
assistance from GOD which gives power to faith to bring forth works, as well
as he does to trees to bring forth fruits, or to Physic to bring forth
health. Therefore no virtue has done so much as prayer has done: For all
virtues have had their power from prayer: and therefore one says, that prayer
has done as many exploites, as all virtues beside.

The Apostle Paul in the 11. to the Hebrews says, that by faith Noah did
this, and Abraham did this, and David did this, and Enoch did this, but did
their faith any thing without prayer? For their faith was strengthened by
prayer: and therefore the Disciples prayed Christ to strengthen their faith.
Luke 17. 5.
By prayer, 1. King. 18. 14.
Eliah made the clouds to fall. By prayer, Joshua made the Sun to stand
still. Josh. 10. 12. 23*
By prayer Elisha raised the dead to life. By prayer Moses made the enemies to
fly. By prayer Solomon obtained wisdom. 1. King. 4. 33. 34. 35.
So that as Paul in the first to Timothy, Exo. 16. 11.
and fourth Chapter says of godliness: 1. Kin. 3. 12.
Godliness is profitable to all things. So I may say of prayer: Prayer is
profitable to all things. The Dove could find no rest for the soale of her
foot, Genesis 8. 9.
until she returned to the Arc: So the sinner when he can fly no longer,
nor suffer any longer, nor help himself any longer: at last he turns to
prayer, Nu^. 15. 11.
which is like the City of refuge, where no enemy, where no adversity, and
where no temptation has power to hurt him.

Lastly, as prayer is excellent in respect of GOD, to whom only it is
offered, so it is excellent in respect of the godly, who only offer it: For
as Paul says of Faith in the second to the Thessalonians: All men have not
faith: So I may say of prayer, all men have not the gift of prayer, and
therefore Zachariah speaks of a spirit of prayer. Zac. 12. 10.
And when we pray, Paul says, That the spirit helps our infirmities and
prays in us, Romans 8. 26.
as though there were a peculiar spirit for prayer, and none could pray but
they which had that spirit.

I have known many wicked men hear, and I have known many wicked men study:
and I have known many wicked men fast: and I have known many wicked men
preach, and I have known many wicked men counsel: but I did never know any
wicked man that could pray well: nor any that could pray well, live wickedly.
This Peter proves in his first Epistle: and fourth Chapter, when he says,
Be sober and watchful in prayer: showing that all cannot pray, but they which
are sober and watchful.

This Peter the Apostle proves again in his first Epistle, and third
Chapter, when he exhorts the husband and wife to love one another, lest
their prayers be interrupted, showing that sin does hinder our Prayer, and
that a man cannot pray heartily when wrath or malice, or lust does carry his
mind away.

This Paul witnesses again when he says, How should they call upon him
in whom they have not believed? showing, that none can pray but they which have
faith: and that is a sign that the Spirit is within, if he can pray and
therefore one says: so long as God does not take away thy praying, he has not
taken away his mercy. Seeing then that prayer is such a sacrifice, as is
offered to none but GOD: and none can offer it but they which have faith, Exo.
29. 4.
and love, and repentance, to bring it to him: As Aaron did not stand before
the Lord before he was washed: so let no man call upon GOD before he be
sanctified. For as Isaac did first taste Jacobs meat, Genesis 27. 25
and then blessed him when he liked his offering: so God will have an offering
which pleases him before he give the blessing which pleases us. Therefore as
Jacob charged his sons when they went unto Joseph: Take the best fruits of
the land and give unto him: Genesis 43. 11
So I advise my self and you, when we go to GOD, let us take the best fruits
of our hearts and give unto him: that is, not the show of repentance, but
repentance in deed.

As Abraham left his Asses at the foot of the hill when he went to sacrifice:
so when we go to pray, we must leave our passions and affections, and
lusts behind, lest they trouble us, like the fowls which hindered Abraham in
his sacrifice. And when our prayers do please GOD, as Jacobs meat did please
his father, then GOD will hear our prayers, and bless us as his father
blessed him.

Now to inform us what prayer delights GOD, the Apostle Paul in his first
Epistle to the Corinthians, and the fourth verse, sheweing that he had the
mind of Christ, teaches us to pray continually. This he expounds in the
second Epistle to the Thessalonians, the third Chapter and the thirteenth
verse, when he says, Be not weary of well doing. Therefore, if you do well
when you pray, you must not be weary of praying.

The like saying is in the twelft Chapter to the Romans, where it is said,
Continue in prayer, The like saying is in the first Chapter to the Romans,
where it is said, Pray at all times. The like saying also is in the eighteenth
Chapter of Saint Luke, where it is said, Pray always and be not faint. We
are not commanded to preach continually, nor yet to hear continually, nor
to fast continually* nor to Watch continually: nor to gone continually, but we
are commanded to pray continually* as though prayer were more needful than
all the rest. We want continually, and we are tempted continually, and we
sin continually, and therefore we had need to pray to GOD continual^y, that
GOD would supply our wants, and forgive our sins, and prevent our
temptations.

To show that we should pray daily, Christ teaches us in the eleventh
Chapter of S. Luke, to say, Give us this day our daily bread, this day we
ask no more but our daily bread: and if we live till the morrow then we
ask no more but our daily bread: so the word daily, does teach us to pray
daily: for there is great reason, that they which have continually need of
God, should pray continually unto him. But as some answered Christ, as it
appears in Saint John's Gospel: Who is able to do this? So you will say unto
me, Who is able to pray continually.

Saint Paul in his twelft chapter to the Romans, teaches us a reasonable
service of God Here he seems to inioine us an unreasonable service of God,
For who did ever pray continually! Or if we should pray continually, when
should we hear, or Preach? or when should we study, or when should we work,
so one service seems to hinder all services: but indeed it does further all
services, and therefore we are commanded to pray continually, because we can
do nothing without Prayer. But if you imagine that this commandment is broken
if your lips be not always going, which was the heresy of the Messaliant, or
if you dwell not always in the Church like the golden Candlestickes, then you
are out of Paul's mind, for Paul did not pray continually with his lips, and
therefore he does not mean a lip-prayer: neither did Paul live day and night
in the Temple, and therefore he does not mean a Church-prayer: and further, it
seems that the Jews were not appointed to pray at all times, for they had
set times of prayer, and therefore we read how Peter and John went up to the
Temple at the time of prayer, therefore to pray continually, is to lift up our
hearts continually unto God, Act. 3. 4.
and to pray in our thought, as Moses did though we open not our lips, and so
we may pray continually. As when a good man is to answer before the
persecutor, a thought prays in his heart that he may answer wisely: when he is
to give Alms a thought prays in his heart that it may do good, when he is
to give counsel, a thought prays in his heart that it may prosper: when he is
to hear a Sermon, a thought prays in his heart, that he may be edified, and
sanctified by it. Thus we may pray and hear, pray and speak, pray and eat,
pray and study, pray and work together, as the Jews built and fought
together, and therefore praying seems a harder thing than it is, for if it had
been irksome for any to pray, Paul would not have joined praying and
rejoicing together. Nehe. 47.
It is not hard which a man may do and rejoice too. If a man love entirely, he
has no such delight as to talk often and to confer daily with him who^ he
loves, for by this his love is increased, and his joy is doubled, but the
seldomer we common together by little and little our affections abate, til at
last we become strange one to the other, as though we had never been
acquainted. Eue^ so our affections and familiarity does grow toward God by
often praying unto him, Dan. 6. 10.
and when we leave of to pray, Psalm. 119. 164.
then our affections draw from him, and his affections from us, therefore we
read how often the goodmen were wont to pray. In times past Daniel says that
he prayed thrice a day: David says that he prai^d seven times a day: It
is said that Cornelius prayed continually: Romans 2.
It is said that the Disciples prayed continually: and in the first to the
Romans, Paul which teaches us here to pray without ceasing says, that he
himself prayed without ceasing. As Jacob would not let the Angel go before
he had blessed him so a Christian should not let God rest before he hear him:
This is the state that a Christian should strive to, and never think that he
is sound at the heart till all his thoughts be a kind of prayer. Now if we
should examine our selves whether we Pray as we should, 1. Cor. 11. 28.
as Paul teaches us to examine our selves whether we believe as we should: I
am of opinion, that there is no such want in this land as the want of prayer,
for it is neglected as though it were never commanded, as if there were no God
to worship, or as if we had no need of him. In the Papists time none were
called Beads-men, that is, men which were bound to pray but the poor men: as
though none were bound to pray but poor men: but now the world goes as
though neither rich nor poor were bound to pray: one would think that our
deliverance our of Egypt, that our victory against the Spaniards, that the
weather which threatens sickness, that the dearth which threatens famine,
should make us pray, and yet it does not, for where is the person which prays
now more tha^ he did before. Psalm. 141.
Some are like the fool which says in his heart there is no God: for they pray
never, Genesis 5.
though Paul say, Pray ever* Caine was rejected for offering an unworthy
sacrifice: (...) cannot admire but in a circle, so they cannot pray but in the
church, and then they pray when they should hear. Some are like the
Ephramites, Judge. 12. 8.
which can pronounce every word but that which they should, so they never want
words but when they speak to God. It is strange to think how lively they
are to every thing else, and how dead they are to pray, as many come to
Sermons and never mark what the Preacher says until he come to this, To whom
be all praise, power, and dominion for ever: so many pray and never mark what
they say until they come to this, Give us this day our daily bread: Do thou
think that God does mark that prayer which thou do not mark thy self?
Some come to God as if they did fetch fire, a spurt and away like a messenger
which is gone before he have his answer. If God will take a Pater noster of
them and hear them for that, so it is, for they never made any other prayer in
their lives, but even as a child says Grace so they say Our Father: put them
out of that and they cannot pray a word, no more than the child can make a
grace if he be put out of his own. Some are like Nadah and Abihu, which never
look with what fire their sacrifice is is kindled, Number. 3. 4.
so they never respect with (...) sometime they pray or ma^^ce for revenge:
sometime of greedines for riches: sometime of lust for pleasure. Now as no
sacrifice was accepted with God but that which was kindled with the fire which
came down from Heaven: Leuit. 3. 5.
so no prayer is accepted with God, but that which is kindled with some motion
from Heaven. Their prayer never ascends to Heaven: Genesis 4. 4.
for Abels heart made Abels offering accepted. Genesis 11. 13.
Some are like the builders of Babel, which call for one thing when they
should call for another, so they pray for one thing when they should pray
for another: when they called for stones, they brought them timber: when they
called for timber, they brought them stones: so when they call for health, God
sendes them sickness: when they call for rest, God sendes them trouble: when
they call for riches, God sendes them wants: when they call for honor God sendes
them shame: when they call for ease, God sendes them a yoke: For it is a just
thing with GOD, that they which do one thing for another, should receive one
thing for another. Luke 15. 12.
Some are like the prodigal son which prayed but until he had gotten his
patrimony, and then he forsook his father which gave it him: so they pray no
longer but until they have that which they would have, and then they fly from
God as he did from his father, and live like swine in another Country till
extremity and penury (...) them home again. These are the Beadsmen of our age,
and these are the prayers which we offer to him which made heaven and earth.
Would thou regard his suit, which should entreat thee so contemptuously
as thou intrearest God? let us consider how that prayer should obtain
remission of sin which is sin it self. Paul says, Let al which call upon
the name of the Lord, 2. Tim. 2. 19.
depart from iniquity, as if he should say, the Lord will he are none which
pray unto him, but them which depart from iniquity: Pro. 28. 9.
Solomon says, the prayer of the wicked is an abomination: if his best work
be an abomination, what are his worst deeds? And the sinner himself?
Therefore he advises, Prepare thy heart before thou go into the Temple,
lest thou offer the Sacrifice of fools: Eccle. 18. 9.
as if he should say, as he which offers a present unto a Prince which the
Prince likes not, is a fool for his pains. This is the cause says one why
God does not hear our prayers as he did our Fathers, because we pray not with
such humility and perseverance as they did. Many touched Christ, but one drew
virtue out of him, so many pray unto Christ but few draw comfort from him.

Now if you will know what prayer is accepted with God, James says, the
prayer of the just avails much if it be fervent, he says not that the
prayer of the wicked avails any thing though it be never so fervent, James.
5. 6.
but the person must be just, and the prayer must be fervent too, by this thou
know then whether thy prayer be accepted with God. As God sent down fire
from heaven to consume Eliah his Sacrifice, because it pleased him, s he will
send down a kind of joy, and lightness upon thy heart which shall kindle thee
within, as the fire kindled Eliahs Sacrifice and send thee away with such a
joy, 1. Kin. 18. 38*
like a Suitor which comes from the Prince when his petition is granted, this
is the end of every prayer which is made in Faith, as Christ answered the
Centurian, Be it unto thee as thou beleeuest, So thy heart shall answer thee
Be it unto thee as thou beleeuest. When we begin to pray, we are going from
the Devil, and when we end our prayer we are come to God: At first many
temptations will hinder thee, but with earnestnes thou shall drive them away.
Then Make no haste as Solomon says, Genesis 15. 17.
to get out of the kings presence: For the Lord and thy prayer are met
together in heaven, John. 4.
like Christ and the woman at Jacobs well,

Seeing then that prayer is such an excellent thing that it is given to none
but to him which is called Excellent: and such a pleasant thing that Paul
joins Pray continually, with Rejoice continually: and such a heavenly thing
that it makes us like the Angels, which are in Heaven: and such a necessary
thing, that God built a house for it, and made a day for it: and such a holy
thing that none but the holy can deal with it: and such a strong thing that
it overcomes GOD, which overcomes all: How is it then, that our Fathers
spent so much time in prayer, and we make no account of it? Have we nothing to
pray for as well as they? Nay they prayed for nothing, but we had need to
pray for the like. The Turks and Idolaters pray to them which cannot hear,
but he which says I will hear, has not so many Supplications to him as
Noblemen. What will we give God, if we will not afford him thanks? What will
we do for him, if we will not praise him? If thou be wise (says Solomon) thou
art wise unto thy se^fe, so if we do pray, we do pray for our selves. Shall
the birds sing unto God, and not they for whom he created birds? What a
fool is he which will fight and travail, and watch for himself, and will not
speak for himself? If GOD had required such costly Sacrifices of us, as he
did of the Jews, it is to be feared, that he shall not be served at all, for
we are such Gregesites, that we would not part from our beasts to Sacrifice to
him. Therefore let us not say, God will not hear, but let us say, we do not
ask, for God is red^er to give than we to ask: therefore let us pray that our
neglect of prayer may be forgiven.

FINIS.
The betraying of Christ.
Math. 27. 1. 2. 3. 4. When the morning was come, all the chief Priests, and
the Elders of the people took counsel against Jesus to put him to death:

And led him away bound, and delivered him unto Pontius Pilate the Governor:

Then when Judas which betrayed him saw that he was condemned, he repented
himself and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief Priests
and Elders:

Saying, I have sinned betraying the innocent blood: but they said, what is
that to us? see thou to it.


THE last time you heard how a Publican received Christ, now you shall hear
how an Apostle betraieth Christ: But first, here is set down what the
Priests and the Elders did against Christ, of whom it is said, When the morning
was come, all the chief Priests and the Elders of the people took counsel
against Jesus to put him to death. 2. And led him away bound, and delivered
him unto Pontius Pilate the governor. The Priests were Ecclesiastical
persons, and the Elders were civil Magistrates: so they which should have
stood most for Christ, Mar. 15. 5.
stood most against him. Mark puts in the Scribes too, Luke 22. 66
and Luke puts in the whole multitude, as if he should say, The Priests and
the Scribes, and the Pharisees, and the Elders and the people. He which stood
for all had all against him. Here is fulfilled that which was prophesied in
the second Psalm, They banded themselves against the Lord, Psalm. 2. ^.
and against his annonited: But why did they band themselves against the Lord,
or against his anointed? What was their desire of him? To have his goods? nay,
he had non for himself, but they were richer than he: To have his liberty?
Nay, that would not suffice them, for they had bound him before: To bring the
people into dislike of him? Nay, that would not serve them, for they had done
so already, until even his Disciples were fled from him. What would they have
then? his blood? yea they took counsel (says Mathewe) to put him to death:
They had the Devils mind which is not satisfied but with death, and how do
they continue it? He says, They took counsel about it.

When Pharaoh did most foolishlie, Exodus 1. 10.
he said, come Let us work wisely. So when they did worst, then they seem
to do it in best manner, for they will not sin without counsel: a wise
counsel to cousult of murder, like the Papists counsels when they give
license for treason. They may be fitlier said to take arms, then to take
counsel. For Christ says before, that they came with swords and s^aues to
take him. Mat. 16. 25
David speaks of a malignant Church, that is a Church of malicious persons,
such a Church was this, for they called themselves the Church, and went about
to kill the head of the Church. In the beginning of the night Christ instituted
the Sacrament, and consulted how to save them, and at midnight they institued
their treason and consulted how to destroy him. The time which they chose, and
the Judge which they chose, are specially to be noted, the time, In the
morning, etc.

This therefore is not to be expounded of the beginning of their counsel, but
of the end of their counsel: for they took counsel in the night and executed
it in the morning. When they agreed to go unto Pilate it was night, but when
they brought him to Pilate it was morning. But mark how unjustly they handled
him before they brought him to the Judge. They should have done nothing against
him before he came to his judgment: but they did all against him except
condemning him, and crucifying him, before they came to the Judge. For all that
is spoken before of examining him, and mocking him, and reuiling him, and
buffeting him, and spitting in his face, was done before they came to the
Judge, which shows that they were even angry that they could not kill him
without the Judge too.

All this was done in the night, and therefore Christ said to his Disciples in
the Evening: This night all of you shall be offended for me: Mat. 26. 31.
Showing that all these things should be done in the night.

Therefore Saint Mark says, that Peter and James and John where a sleep,
when Judas and his companions came against him, which shows that it was the
time of sleep: and in the one and fiftieth verse, he says, that a young man
ran after with a linen garment upon his bare body: which shows that he
hearing a tumult and an uproar to grow in the night, ran forth of doors in
great have without his clothes, as they do in a fire (to se what was done)
and it is added that they strove to take him, and that he was feign to slip
of his Linen and run away from them naked, as Joseph did when he left his
Cloak with his light Mistress, when he slipped from her, which shows how
void of shame and modesty they were to offer such violence to a stranger,
that he could scarce escape their hands naked, although they had nothing
against him. This I note to show that their conspiracy against Christ was a
night work, like them which hate the light because they do evil. It was not
their wont to sit in counsel in the night but in the day. It would have
troubled them to watch so long for a good cause. but it was fit that the work
of darkness should be done in draknes, and therefore Christ says, This is the
hour of darkness: Luke 22. 53.
the hour of darkness, and the power of darkness, and the work of darkness met
together. When they should rest, malice would not suffer them to rest, but they
became like Owls which watch in the night and cannot sleep. Here was
fulfilled Salomons saying, Pro. 4. 36.
They cannot sleep before they have done evil, so eagre we are upon revenge
more than any thing else. They say that he cannot stay which rides upon the
Devil: for malice draws him, and fury spurs him. Therefore Zacheus went
not so hastily to receive Christ, as his enemies have to destroy him. Nay
rather I may say, to destroy themselves.

For as they prayed at Christ's death, so it came upon them. They said, his
blood be upon us and upon our children, Mat. 27. 29
so his blood is upon them and upon their children, which have been Vagabonds
over the earth ever since and have no country of their own: for if they be
cursed which do the Lords business negligently, they must be cursed too which
do the Devils business diligently. Iere. 16.
If men were so hasty in executing Justice, as they were in executing malice,
so many me^ should not be undone by suits of Law: for in one day they could
apprehend, and accuse, and examine, and condemn, and execute him which was
Innocent: but he which is just cannot be quit in one term nor two: nay if he
have right in a year, it is counted quick dispatch, and he is glad that he
met with such a speedy Lawyer.

How then when they take a bad cause in hand, and prolong it too, which keeps
their Clients in suspense from day to day, and from week to week, in great
charge and sin together. I would to GOD that some did not sit in counsel
against good Christians, as these Priests did against Christ, but GOD in his
mercy does daily confound and bring to nothing the accursed counsels of
the wicked Antichrist, and all his rebellious confederates. So when the wicked
took counsel together, wickedness was the end of their counsayles: for
there is nothing worse to the ungodly than to meet together: for before they
meet, their wickedness is a little hid like the poison in a Serpent: but when
they meet together, one sets on another, and the poison breaks forth into
vile speeches, and detestable works, and ungodly practices, as we see in
Tauernes and such like assemblies as this.

For now they are met together, they have conspired amongst themselves to
accuse unto the Governor the most innocent man in the world, as if he were the
worst man living, they abused him, and mocked him, and reviled him, and
buffeted him, before they brought him to the Governor, which shows that they
would have killed him too, if they durst without the Governor, but sin is
crafty, and therefore they observe the order of law, and form of judgment,
lest they should be taken in the snare which they made for him.

First because Pilate had the authority over judgments of death, and not
they: Therefore they are enforced to seek unto his judgment seat to save
themselves from blame, and to be delivered out of trouble, if they did usurp
any thing upon the Magistrates, Office.

Then because they might not run unto the governor before day without
suspicion of tumult, they staide until it was morning: but so soon as they
could come, they came post have, for the Sun did no sooner peep, but even
at the very break of day, they were all ready to flock unto the Judge
against him.

This they did without knowledge: but God directed every thing unto a right
end. For it was meet that the Son of GOD should be cleared in a solemn
manner, by an earthly Judge, to show how we shall be cleared by the heavenly
Judge: and therefore, as it appears in the seven and twentieth Chapter, and
four and twentieth verse of Saint Mathewes Gospel, Pilate said: that he
found no evil in him before he gave sentence against him, which shows that
he died not for his own sins but for our sins, and therefore though they
went to the Judge to save themselves from blame, yet God sent them to the
Judge, that his word might be fulfilled.

Lastly, this Pilate was a Roman governor, which ruled for Caesar, as Zacheus
was a Roman collectour which gathered for Caesar: For at that time the Romans
had brought much of the world unto their subjection: as since that time, they
have brought much of the world unto Idolatry: and therefore God would have his
son to be judged by the Roman policy, and to be condemned by a Roman
Judge, and to be slain with a Roman death, as it were joining the Jews and
the Romans in impiety together, to show, that these two Nations should be
the odioust people unto him in all the world, and how his servant should be
crucified there, where he was crucified himself: for as the Romans then did
crucify Christ upon a Cross, so they crucify him now upon their Altar, and
resemble the Dragon, Romans 12.
which when he could not prevail against Michaell himself, then he fought
against the woman and her seed, that is, the Church and her children, which are
slain in Rome, as the Prophets were in Jerusalem. Thus Rome began with the
head, and ends with the members. So much of the Priests and the Scribes, and
the Pharisees, and the elders and Pilate, what they did against Christ, Sam.
15. 31.
of whom was fullfilled David's prayer: Lord turn the counsel of Achitophell
unto folly: So their counsel was turned unto folly. For as Paul revived
when he was stoned, so Christ rose again when he was buried, to show, that
there is no counsel against God, and therefore let all our counsels be for God.

Now we come to Judas to aggreuate this tragical counsel. The Evangelist
annexeth unto it, the desperate end of the cursedst man that ever was. Three
things are specially noted of this Traitor: his death, the cause of his death,
and the confession which he made before his death. His death in the fifth
verse: He went and hanged himself: The cause of his death in the 3. verse: For
that he had betrayed his Lord, and now did see him condemned and had no joy of
the money which was given unto him for his Treason. His confession in the
third verse: I have sinned betraying innocent blood. I will speak of every
word as they lie for your memory. Therefore, first of his Treason. When Judas
the traitor: before he was called Judas the Apostle, now he is called Judas
the traitor, to distingish him from other of that name, lest any of his name
should be defamed for him, a brand is set in his forehead like the letter Tau,
Genesis 4.
or Caines mark, to make him hateful like a rogue which is burned in the
ear: so Esau was called Edom which signifies Read, to keep his wickedness in
remembrance, because he, sold his birthright for a mess of red pottage.
Act. 8.
So Simon is called the Sorcerer, as though GOD would note him for the worst of
that name: So God knows Simon Peter from Simon Magus: and Judas his brother,
from Judas his betrayer: and therefore, as Jeroboam comes in with his train
after him: ^. King. 22. ^2.
Jeroboam which made Israel to sin: So Judas comes in with his train after
him: Judas, which betrayed the Lord: For when God said: I will honor them
which honor me, he signified how he would dishonor them which disnour
him, and therefore this name is a word of reproach until this day: and all
Traitors are called Iudasses for his sake: that the Prophecy might be
fulfilled: The names of the wicked shall rot: Pro. 10. 7.
that is, they shall be named with lothsomnes, and remembered with disdain, as
a man passes by a rotten carrion, and stops his nose until he be past it:
This is the just wrath of God. As Christ promised that Mary's good work
should be spoken of to the worlds end: So he has caused Judas evil work
to be spoken of unto the worlds end too. For there were three euilles in
one: First his practice was impudent, because he offered himself to be a
Traitor before he was asked. Then it was Covetous, because he was contented
to betray his Lord for 30. pence. And lastly it was crafty, because he
betrayed him with a kiss, which is a sign of love. Like this traitor do all
other traitors, and therefore are all called Iudasses, that is, impudent, and
covetous, and crafty like their master.

The next consideration is: how Judas his repentance came upon him, in these
words: When he saw that Jesus was condemned, etc. Peter heard three crows
before he felt any remorse, so Judas saw his Lord apprepended, and yet he
repented not, then he saw him accused, and yet he repented not, then he saw
him mocked, and yet he repented not, then he saw him buffeted, and yet he
repented not, at last he saw him condemned, and then says Matthew he repented,
like one which slays his friend in his rage, and sorroweth when it is past.
In the sixth of Genesis, God is said to repent, but GOD repents not like men:
so here the wicked are said to repent, but the wicked repent not like the
faithful: But as it is said of Esau, that he sought repentance, so they may
be rather said to repent, than to repent in deed. For if Judas had repented
like Peter, he should have been forgiven like Peter: but to show that he did
not repent well, when he had committed one sin, he adds another to it: for
when he had murdered his master, he murdered himself too. Therefore, if
you ask how he repented? I think he repented so as most usurers repent upon
their deathbeds. There is a shame of sin, and guilt of conscience, and fear
of judgment, even in the reprobate, which is a foretaste of hell which the
wicked feel: even as peace of conscience and joy in the holy Ghost is a
foretaste of heaven, which the godly feel before they come thither. So Judas
was displeased with the vglines of his treachery, and had a misshapen sorrow
like a Bears whelp, but without any conversion to God, or hope of mercy, or
prayer for pardon, or purpose to amend. Only he felt a shame and guilt, and
anguish in his heart: which was rather a punishment of his sin, than a
repentance for his sin, and a preparatiue to Hell which he was going unto:
for hardness of heart, and despair of mercy are sins and punishments for
sin too: but true repentance is such a sorrow for one sin as breeds a
dislike of all sins, and moves to pray, and resolves to amend, which
falls upon none but the elect, and therefore Paul calls the heart of the
reprobate, Romans 2. 5.
A heart which cannot repent. But if the Papists doctrine of repentance be
true, there is nothing wanting in Judas repentance: for in him may be found
all the parts of their repentance. For we see in this reprobate, contrition of
heart, confession of mouth, and satisfaction of work which is all the Papists
repentance: For contrition it is said, He repented: For Confession, he says,
I have sinned: For Satisfaction, he restored his money again, and yet he is
Judas the son of perdition: and therefore, as Christ told the Lawyer, that
one thing was wanting in his obedience: so Judas tells the Papists, that one
thing is wanting in their repentance, that is the conversion of a man to God,
and change of mind: when a sinner renounceth himself for shame of his sin,
and yields to righteousness with as great love as ever he loved wickedness:
If Judas had repented so, he would rather have suffered pain like Job, than by
unlawful means rid himself out of pain, like Caine which thought to
prevent Gods judgments against him. This was not a sign of repentance, but a
sign of despair. Therefore let every one learn this, that so long as Gods
mercy is greater than man's iniquity, there is no cause to despair, but to
hope* For why did our Savior save Marie Magdalen, which had seven devils, and
spare the thief which never did good, but lest as great sinners as they should
despair of mercy, if they repented. If thou can knock, his promise binds
him to open. Therefore say not, God will not give, but, I do not ask: for God
is readier to give then we to ask. The next consideration is, how Judas
restored his bribe again. In the first of the Proverbs 31. Solomon says, The
wicked shall be filled with their own devises. And in the 14. Chapter 14.
verse, he says, They shall be satiat with their own ways: For Judas has
sinned so long, that now he is weary of his sin, and would restore his bribe
again, even the same day that he took it. It was given him in the night, and
in the morning he brought it back: So soon is the pleasure of sin
ecclipsed. Even now his thirty pence was the sweetest silver that ever he
fingured, and now it is the bitterest money that ever he pursed. Therefore let
all consider what Abner said unto Ioab, Know thou not that it will be
bitterness in the latter end? 2. Sam. 2. 26. The sting of the Serpent is in his
ta^le: so the tail of sin has the sting that is the end. There is no sin
but it has three punishments which follow it like bondmaides: Fear, Shame
and Guilt: Fear of judgment, shame of men, and guilt of conscience. All these
did surprise Judas at once, so studdenlie as Adam spyed his nakedness: and
though they come after every sin, yet they are never looked for. Gehesi
took his bribe merrily, but he did wear it heavily. Iezabel thought that
she had got a Vineyarde for nothing, 1. King. 21.
but she paid more for it than she would give for all the world. So Judas
thought that he was made for ever, when he was undone for ever. Here was the
scripture fulfilled: The bread of deceit is sweet to a man, Pro. 20. 17.
but his mouth shall be filled with gravel: So this gain of treason was
sweet to Judas, but when he digested it, it cracked like grauel in his teeth.
Who would suffer for millions of gold that which Judas suffers for thirty
pence? and yet many are content to sin for less, Judas was a traitor for
thirty pence, but a thousand are liars, and deceivers, and swearers for a
penie. If they can get any thing by lies, or oaths, or wiles, it is like the
mystery of their occupation. Be not deceived, the time comes, when you
would restore this gain again, as Judas did, and peradventure you shall not
find the owners where to make restitution. How many at the hour of death have
offered their prayers and their supplications, and service unto God, as Judas
offered his money to the Priests, and God would not accept it: but they dyed as
they lived, and went from despair unto destruction? Therefore, to day hear
his voice. If you will not be so good as Zacheus to restore four fold for all
that you have gotten by usury, or briberie, or extortion, or deceit, yet be
so good as Judas to bring again so much as you have taken, and if you do it
not with Judas mind, but with Zacheus mind, it shall be accepted as Zacheus
was.

^ The last consideration, is the confession ^^ich he makes before his death. I
have sinned etc. Oh Judas (says one) do thou know that thou have sinned,
and did not know that thou should sin? it is not enough to say, I
have sinned: So said Saul, and Caine and Pharaoh, I have sinned: But who says,
I will not sin? When sin is past, then we know it: but if we did look to
it before, then we need not say, I have sinned: for sin is chosen in the
dark, like bad wares, when the faults are not seen. Sin seems no sin
until it come to I have sinn^d, that is, until it be past. If Judas had showed
his repentance to God, as he showed it but to men, happily his offense might
have found mercy. But he did separate himself further from God by his
despair, than he was separated before by his treason, and chose rather to run
unto them which would mock him than unto him which should succor him.
Therefore his confession was without remission: and though he said, I have
sinned, yet God aunsweres not, I have forgiven, to show that except our
repentance be better than his, it shall not weigh against one sin. Yet Judas
does not only acknowledge himself a sinner, which is the most that many of
us confess, because he would not be counted worse than other, but reckoned
his sin without an accuser, as if one should come forth and (...) I have stolen
an horse, so he says, I hau^^ (...) trayed my master. In what did Judas
sin? in treason: then treason is sin, and yet the Papists count it a
merit, as though they should merit by sin. There was never any heretic
which maintained treason but the Papist. Touch not mine anointed (says God,)
nay kill his anointed (say they.) How far are they from David which would
not lay his hand upon Saul. If he were a man after Gods heart, as he is
called, then they must be men after the devils heart.

After that Judas had reciued meat of Christ, he went about to betray him: So
after they have received Peace and Plenty, and prosperity of their Prince,
they go about to betray her. As David's enemies longed and said, When will
David die, and the name of David perish? So they long and cry, when will
Elizabeth die, and the name of Elizabeth perish? But Elizabeth lives, and they
die which seek her death. John calls the Pharisees a generation of Vipers,
which never are borne, but their mother dies for it.

How right this fitteth with the papists, for they cannot live without the
death of their mother. For the Spaniard which would slaughter them, they would
slaughter the Nurse which cherishes them. Had Zimri Peace (says Iezabel)
which ^lue his master? So I may say, have they died in peace which would have
slain their mistress? they which have not hanged themselves like Judas, have
been hanged by others like Hammon, as though they had been sent over but to
visit Tyborn. So God has blessed them that bless her, and cursed them which
curse her. Therefore some Traitoures have confessed, that they had sinned in
betraying the Lords anointed, as Judas confessed that he had sinned in
betraying the Lord himself. He betrayed him, as though he had not been
innocent, and now he must die, he says, I have betrayed innocent blood.
Innocent in deed: For when he asked his enemies which of them could accuse
him of sin? they had nothing to answer: Innocent in life: Innocent in
speech: and Innocent in thought. The infants which be called innocents were not
so innocent: therefore how should he be innocent which betrayed the
innocentest of all? We are taught to be good unto al, but especially to the
good: but Judas was naught to all, but worst to the best. If he had betrayed
any, he might say, I have sinned, because all dissimulation and guile is
condemned. 1. Pet. 2. 1. But when the innocents are betrayed, nay when the
innocentest is betrayed, it seems more than sin, because never any betrayed
innocent Christ but Judas. Thus Christ was justified of his Disciples, and his
enemies. He which betrayed him said, he was innocent. He which condemned him
said he was innocent. And the Devils which made Judas betray him, and Pilate
condemn him, said before, that he was the son of God, and called him holy.
Thus every sinner shall be condemned of himself before he be condemned of
God that the Lord may be justified when he judges. If Judas could have
said, I believe, when he said, I have sinned: God would have answered him
as Nathan answered David: Thy sin is forgiven: But he confessed and amended
not. What shall be to them which do not confess, but defend their sins? Is
not thy sin worse then Judas? when Judas says I have sinned, and thou say,
I have not sinned. This is our manner to plead not guilty so long as we live.
Sins and excuses are twins, borne at a birth, and one follows the other,
Zarah came after Phares out of the womb. Genesis 38. 30. Judas says, I have
sinned, but we say, I have not sinned, or I have sinned but a little, or I
have sinned against my will, so we minse our sins, as though they needed no
forgiveness. Solomon said, I am more foolish then any man: but we would be
counted wiser than any man. Pro. 30. 2.
Paul called himself the greatest sinner, but we would be judged the least
sinners: so we are ashamed of sin, and yet not ashamed to sin. If we would
judge our selves we should not be judged. Be not deceived, for sin does not
end as it begins. When the terrors of Judas come upon the soul, the tongue
cannot hide his sin: for despair and horror will not be smothered: But he
which has Saul's spirit haunting him, will rage as Saul did. There is a
warning conscience, and a gnawing conscience. The warning conscience comes
before sin: The gnawing conscience follows after sin. The warning
conscience is often lulled a sleep: but the gnawing conscience wakeneth her
again. If there be any hell in this world: they which feel the worm of
conscience gnawing upon their hearts, may truly say, that they have felt the
torments of hell. Who can express that man's horror but himself? Nay, what
horrors are they which he cannot express himself? Sorrows are met in his
soul as at a feast: fear, thought, and anguish, divide his soul between
them. All the furies of hell leap upon his heart like a stage, Thought calls
to Fear: Fear whistleth to horror: horror beckeneth to despair, and faith;
come and help me to torment this sinner. One says, that she comes from
this sin: and another says, that she comes from that sin: so he goes
through a thousand deaths and cannot die. Irons are laid upon his body like a
prisoner. Al his lights are put out at once: he has no soul fit to be
comforted. Thus he lies, as it were upon the rack and says, that he bears
the world upon his shoulders, and that no man suffers that which he
suffers. So let him lie (says God) without ease until he confess and
repent, and call for mercy. This is the goodly way which the Serpent said
would make you Gods, and made him a devil. Therefore at last, learn the
sleight of Satan in this wretched traitor. His subtilties are well called the
depth of Satan: Ap. 2. 24.
for is so deep, that few can sound him. Now he lets Judas see his sin,
before he hid it from him. Until he had sinned, he made as though it were no
sin, but with promises and bribes mufled his face and covered the vileness
of his fact, lest shame should keep him from it. But when he had done, he made
it seem as vile as he could, to make him despair for it. All his baits are
made of this fashion, that the sin is done before the punishment be
considered. Let us not look for Judas to come out of hell to warn us, for
this is written for our learning: and therefore, Be as wise as Serpents, that
the Serpent may not deceive you.

The Petition of Moses to God.
The Text, Deuteronomy. 3. Chap. 23. 24 verse. And I besought the Lord the same time,
saying, O Lord God, thou have begun to show thy servant thy greatness, and thy
mighty hand, for where is there a God in heaven or earth that can do like thy
works, and like thy power.
Here Moses teaches us how to pray, he begins first and tells God that
he has begun to show him favor, and well might Moses so say, for he was
no sooner borne but the Lord began to show him his greatness, in saving
him when he was cast into the River, Exodus 26.
and delivering him unto a Kings daughter to be brought up: and after by his
mighty providence bringing him to his mother to be nursed. If all that the
Lord has done for him till this time be considered, he had great cause to
say, O Lord thou have begun to show thy servant thy greatness. Herein Moses
in some part shows himself thankful, for that he has received, trusting
thereby to entreat GOD to continue his benefits and louing-kindnes toward him,
which is a thing that pleases God, for which of us having a friend, at whose
hands we had received a benefit heretofore, if we should stand in need of
him again, would not say unto him, Sir, you have been my friend heretofore,
and many ways good unto me, the consideration whereof at this time has
imboldened me to come unto you again? Who is it but will account this a
thankful fellow, and say, see, it is a good deed to do for one which
shows himself so thankful? Even so Moses comes to God, he is not like one
who sitting in his door and sees one day by day come by him and salute him,
and yet takes no acquaintance, so that if he stand in need of him either he
knows not where he dwells, or else because he is not acquainted with him, he
is abashed to ask any thing of him. Moses is not such a one, but he is
acquainted with the Lord, who so often passed by him and therefore he now
says, Thou have begun (O Lord) thou have begun to show thy servant thy
greatness and thy mighty hand. Of this is already spoken, what this greatness
and mighty hand which God showed to Moses was, we have already heard: namely,
that mighty deliverance which the Lord even from his birth to this time had
sent him in the time of need.

For where is there a God in heaven or in earth that can do like thy works
or like thy power? Here Moses challenges all the Idol Gods, and tells them,
that amongst them all, there is not one of them that can do like his God.
Psalm. 87. 7.
So God when he is opposed and set against his enemies, is then most glorious
and confounds them all. Now Moses proceeds in his prayer, saying: I pray
thee let me go over and see the good land that is beyond Jordan, that goodly
mountain and Lebanon.

But the Lord was angrye with me for your sakes, and would not hear me, and
the Lord said unto me, Deuteronomy. 3. 25. 26.
Let is suffice thee or be content, speak no more unto me of this matter. Get
thee up into the top of Pisgah, etc.

Herein is four things to be considered: First, the prayer of Moses in these
words, I pray thee etc. Then the answer of God for his prayer, then the
mitigating of his anger set down in these words, Let it suffice thee, or be
content, etc. Speak no more unto me of this matter. Then the promise which God
makes unto Moses that he shall see the land of Canaan, though not possess it?

First for the prayer of Moses set down in these words. I pray thee let me
go over and see the good Land, etc.

Here Moses prays like one of us, who are always craving, but never have
respect to the will of God, to say, Thy will be done: Christ has not taught
us to ask Our daily bread, before he taught us to say. Thy will be done: and
therefore Christ when he went to pray, Mark. 14. 33. 36
after he had prayed that if it were possible that hour might pass from him:
Yet after remembering how he had taught his Disciples before, returned again
and said, Nevertheless, not that I will, but that thou will be done.

And our prayer made after this sort is the cause many time why we are not
heard, therefore let us hereafter learn in our prayers to pray that Gods will
may be done. What this Mountain Lebanon is, surely Moses means the place
where the Temple should be built, and God honored: For after that Joshua had
quietly possessed the Land of Canaan, Iosu. 22. 10.
he builded a Tabernacle, wherein to call upon the Lord, not perfect.

Now it follows in the Text: But the Lord was angry with me for your
sakes and would not hear me, etc.

So soon as Moses changed his prayer, God turns from him and will not hear
him: So soon we make God to forsake us, if we do not according to his will:
Moses shows the cause why God would not hear him, although he were a great
man and in high authority, yet he is not ashamed to confess his fault, which
he might have kept secret if he would: for the people knew not that he had
sinned, because the sin which he committed was not open but secret: yea, it
was but a little repine, as in the eleventh of Numbers the eleventh verse, and
therefore Moses might have kept it from them, Number. 1. 11. 12. 13.
but because he would not justify himself, he tells them that the Lord
was angry with him, Exo. 5. 22
and because he would not have the people to justify themselves, he tells
them it is for their sakes. Thus when Moses changes his prayer, God will no
longer hear him: so we see that where sin is, their prayer is not effectual:
so that if we will hope to receive by prayer any thing at Gods hands, we
must first remove and take a way the cause of our hinderance (which is sin)
before we can receive the thing we pray for. Number. 14. 19.
For here we see that prayer which before pacified the wrath of God: Exo. 31. 14
which healed Meriam being stricken with Leprosy: Number. 12. 14.
which raised the widows Son from death to life, 1. King. 17. 22. 23.
by which David obtained victory: 2. Kin. 4. 25.
which brought down fire from heaven to consume the Idolaters Sacrifices, Act.
20. 19.
which brought Jeremiah out of prison, 1. Cro. 18.
and Jonah out of the Fishes belly, 2. Cro. 7. 1.
and made the Sun to stand still, Iere. 34. 14.
and the rain to fall from heaven, Ion. 1. 2. 10.
and triumphed over all, Joshua. 8. 12.
is here by a little sin, quite overthrown even like a great Monarke
poisoned with a little Spider. But the Lord was angry with me for your sakes
and would not hear me. God when Moses had prayed did not grant his request,
but was angry with him: but lest Moses should be quite discouraged, he
straight ways mitigateth his anger and bids him be content and speak no
more unto him of that matter. God does not bid him that he should not pray
any more unto him, but that he should pray no more for that thing. First God
bids him to be content, as if he should have said, although thou may not
enter into the land, yet I will content thee other ways: thus God would have
us in what estate soever we be, to be content with our calling, for it is his
appointment. And seeing he has in ough to content us all, therefore we
should not murmr nor grudge one at another, but be thankful unto him,
because it is his good will and pleasure it should be so. And surely Moses
would, and was willing that the Jews should profit by his Doctrine, for he
has set it down in the 20. of Numbers, twice, Number. 20. 12* 24. 27. 13.
and in the 27. 13. in the 32. Deuteronomy. 49. and in this place, all to the intent
to show that God is able to content all. Deu. 32. 49.
He is not like to Jacob, Genesis 27. 33
who when he had blessed one of his sons, could not bless the other: but he
when he had blessed the poor, blessed the hungry, and when he had blessed
the hungry, he blessed them that wept, when he had blessed them that wept, he
blessed them that were reviled, and suffered for Christ's sake. There is no
end of his blessing, because his mercy indureeh for ever. God is so
merciful, that though we are nor able to pray aright, yet he considers of
our prayers, and turns to the best for our good, Psalm. 135.
not granting our request many times, but a better thing than we do desire
of him: as when David prayed that the Child gotten in adultery, might live,
God heard him and did consider of it, yet did not grant his request but a
better thing, that was, that his Son Solomon should reign after him: And
when our Savior Christ prayed that that hour might pass over him, God heard
him and did consider of it, yet did not grant his request, but a better thing,
that his death should take away the sins of the world, and here in this place
where Moses priaeth, God hears his prayer, and does consider of it, yet does
not grant his request, but a better thing, that is, that he shall go into
heavenly Canaan. Thus we see that God is so merciful that he can scarce
punish sinners, he is so loving that often he gives us better things than we
can desire, who then will offend so merciful and loving a father? Let us,
seeing God is so merciful unto us, take heed that we abuse not his mercies,
lest in so doing we provoke him unto judgment. Now God has told Moses, that
he shall not go into the Land, he begins to teach him how he shall do to
see it, and bids him go up into the top of Pisgah, and cast his eyes
Estward, and westward, and Northward and Southward, and behold it, etc.

As a Bird stayed with a little string, or a strong man in swimming held back
by a small twig: so a little sin staieth this great Captain that he cannot
come within the land of Canaan. First God is angry with him and enuies him
altogether, as though he were not worthy so much as to go up the mount: thus
we may see how one of the least sins is able to turn from us all the
goodness, and all the favor which God bears to us.

After God commands Moses to go up the mount. Here Moses obeieth Gods
commandment, but if he had bin like many a murmuring man, he would have denied
to go up the mount, saying, what banquet is this to me, but a dainty dish set
before one forbidden to eat? but Moses had rather die than anger the Lord
again, when he had bid him be content. Thus we may learn of Moses to be
content with our calling whether we have little or much: For God contented
Moses as well with the sight of Canaan, as those who possessed it. So when GOD
has not ordained us to see great substance as he has some of our brethren:
yet because we should not be discontent, he will give us as much pleasure at
the sight of them in others, as though we our selves enjoyed them. So GOD
contenth Moses, and he contenteth Joshua: for as Joshua came into the land as
Moses could not, so Moses saw it as Joshua could not. So I say God contenteth
all, that Joshua should not envy Moses, nor Moses envy Joshua. And this was the
great power of God: who although Moses were very old, yet was his eie-sight
most perfect, insomuch that he could see farther than any of all his company:
For, Deuteronomy. 34. 1. 26.
being upon the Mount, he saw all the land of Gilead unto Dan, and all
Nepthalie, the land of Ephraim and Manasses, and all the land of Judah, unto
the uttermost Sea, etc. The like to this did never any see being of the age of
Moses who was 120. years old. Many things might Moses have objected which
might have hindered him from going up the Mount: For surely it must needs be a
grief to him when he considered that great pain which he had taken in
bringing them through the wilderness, and conducting them 40. years together,
and now when he had no further to go but even over Iordaine, to be taken a
way then: and another which never took any pains, possess all his labors.
This I say, must be a great and intolerable thing to flesh and blood: for
when one has laid a foundation, and anothere come and build upon it, surely
he will think himself hardly dealt withal: Or if one have drawn a picture,
head and face, and all saving the legs, if one come and draw the legs, and
so take his labors, he would hardly take it well. You know how they which
were hired and wrought all the day long, Mat. 20. 11
because the had not more than those which began the last hour, murmured
against the master of the house. Such is our nature, and yet notwithstanding
all this Moses is content. He knows that God does him no wrong, Genesis 49. 55
but is just and merciful also. He blesses all alike, as Jacobs children were
blessed.

Moses so long as he was upon the plain ground, could not see the types of
heaven: but when he was upon the Mount, he saw it before he came to heaven it
self: So let us even now seal the Mount as Moses did, that we may see and
consider these joys. Which thing shall be to reclaim our hearts from earthly
matters. As Peter went up the mount to see Christ's glory, and Moses went up the
mount to see the land of promise: so let us ascend from these earthly things
to the contemplation of heavenly. This should be our journey till we come up
to heaven it self, to clime the hill: for we are low men of stature like
Zacheus, who cannot see Christ before we be lifted from the earth, so that if
we will ever possess heaven, we must pluck our hearts from the earth, and
then shall we see God nearer than we can possibly, if we keep our minds
upon earthly matters. God shows himself to some nearer, to some farther
off, and to some in parables: As the Prophets saw God nearer than the
Patriarchs: and the Apostles nearer than the Prophets: Genesis 22. 18
As to Abraham he said In thy seed: Esa. 9. 6.
Esaiah came nearer and said, unto us a child is borne, John 1. 36.
etc. John yet came more near and said, 2. Pet. 1. 18
Behold the Lamb of God.

Get thee up into the top of Pisgah, and lift thine eyes Westward, and
Northward and Southward, and Eastward, and behold it with thine eyes, for thou
shall not go over this Iordaine.

Now Moses is in his prospect, as David was in his Tower. Here he must prepare
him self to die, while he is looking upon the land which so long he has
been in coming to. Who would not but have grieved at this? That after so
long as forty years travail in hope to possess it, should now in the end
be content with a sight of it, and so vanish away. Yet Moses (for all this)
murmureth not, but like Job takes it patiently. And as he was upon the Mount
where GOD vanished: So here he is upon the Mount and vanishes away himself:
as it appears in Deuteronomie the thirty four Chapter, and the sixth verse,
no man knows his tomb, nor which way he is gone, lest the Jews should
have worshipped his Relics as the Papists do theirs. So good Rulers are
taken away in a time when death is least suspected. As Lot was taken away
before the people of Sodom knew as is showed in the nineteenth Chapter of
Genesis, and the tenth verse: So we see that when our time is come, and our
glass run out: that neither our riches, nor our wits, nor our friends, nor any
thing that we have in this world, can carry us no further. No, no more than
Moses could go over this Iordaine.

But Charge Joshua, and encourage him, and embolden him, for he shall go before
this people, and he shall divide for inheritance unto them the land which thou
shall see, etc.

Now Moses faints, here comes Joshua a figure of Christ, who leads the
people into Canaan, as Christ does lead them into heaven. Moses is no sooner
dead, but God chooses another to go in and out before his people. And now God
chooses a governor: See what a man he chooses. O would that God might have
the choosing still, for then all governors should be such as Joshua: for such
is our corruption, Nu. 27. 16.
that if we choose our selves, that we still choose such as God would not have
chosen, and therefore we had need to pray to the Lord God as Moses did, Deu.
27. 16
that he would appoint a man which may go in and out before us, that we be not
as sheep without a shepherd. More was spoken touching this point, which I
have not noted, because I could not set it down in such perfection as it was
delivered.

But Charge Joshua, encourage him, and imbolden him, etc. God would not have
Moses to encourage Joshua words only, but in deeds too: and therefore Moses
gives him all the glory he can, as John gave it unto Christ.

Charge Joshua, encourage him, and bolden him. Here God would have Joshua
encouraged with all the encouragement that may be, as though he could never
be encouraged enough. God had encouraged him himself before, Deuteronomy. 3. 21.
as in the 21. verse. before: And I charged Joshua the same time, Nu. 27. 22.
etc. And in 27. Deuteronomy. Moses sets him before Eliazar the Priest, and he put
his hand upon him, Deu. 31. 23.
and gave him a charge, etc. And in 31. Deuteronomy. 23. GOD bids him Be strong and of
a good courage. Iosu. 1. 5. 6. 7. 8* 9. 10.
And in 1. Joshua 50. God tells him, That there shall not be a man able to withst
and him all the days of his life, For he will be with him and never leave him,
nor forsake him. And again in the 9. verse, he says, Have not I commanded
thee not to fear? for I will be with thee whither so ever thou go. And in
the 31. of Deuteronomy. verse. 7. When Moses prepared himself to die: Deu. 31. 7.
he called Joshua and bid him Be strong and of a good courage. Ios. 8. 10.
And in 8. Joshua, ver. 10. the Lord bids him, Not to fear when his enemies
come upon him. Thus is Joshua encouraged of all: and thus should Joshua be
encouraged still: But who encourages Joshua so? Nay, where is that he, that
does not discourage Joshua? Now Joshua is contemned and scorned of the vilest.
And is this to encourage him? No, Joshua had need of better incourageme^t than
this: else Joshua and all the Iosuas in this land will faint, and so shall the
people be left without a guide to go in and out before them, and then shall
they be ready and a fit pray for the Wolf. Well, we see that Joshua here is
better encouraged, and it is not without a cause that God would have Joshua thus
encouraged. For if he had an ear at every man's mouth, he would rather wish
to die with Moses upon the mount, than take in hand to bring such wicked Caines
into the land of Canaan. That which old Ie^hro taught Moses (that a governor
had need to be a man of courage) here he finds true: for nothing more
burteth Justice than fear. Therefore a Magistrate had need to be such a one as
shall not fear the face of any whatsoever: which caused Moses to speak so
often to Joshua bidding him to be of good courage. And to that end God
commands Moses again and again, to encourage him, using these three words,
Charge, encourage, and imbolden him, as the cock crowed thrice, that if Peter
were sleep the first and the second time, yet he might at last awake him.

Now it rests, that I should encourage Joshua which succeeds me. But how
should I begin to encourage him? or where should I begin? shall I tell him,
that he shall live now at ease and in security? No. Why, how should I encourage
Joshua? shall I tell him, you will love him, and follow him, and that he shall
find you willing and forward in every good action? If I promise it, shall I
not lie? If I become bounden for you, shall I not forfeit? I fear yes. Why,
how then should I incourrage Joshua? shall I tell him, all will speak well of
him? or shall I tell him none will slander him? No. For if he be as righteous
as Christ, yet some of the Scribes and Pharisees will seek to persecute him.
If he will live in quietness, he must not utter all the Counsel of God, though
God command him. Nor he must not reprove some sins, for then he shall be
thought to envy against some persons. Nor he must not keep company with the
godly, for then shall he be accounted a partaker. No, he must not deny the
company of the wicked, for then he shall be accounted a Precisian, a Puritan,
and I know not what. But thou will say: what then, is there no comfort for
Joshua? I answer, yes. And that is: it may be after some 3. or 4. years labor
and travail, he shall win some 2. or 3. unto Christ which shall extinguish
al grief: For God will one day reward him for his labor, and glorify him in
heaven. But if Joshua should be in trouble, as he cannot almost otherwise
choose, if he keep a good conscience and reprove the mighty under his
charge, then he shall see, most of the great ones will quite forsake him which
now seem to favor him, and they will see him persecuted like Christ, and stand
a far off like Pilate, and wash their hands, as though they were innocent,
when it is in their power and authority to amend it.

If he stand out like a valiant soldier and prevail, then all will draw unto
him. But if he faint for lack of strength, although he weep like Peter yet
none will pity him. Therefore stand you to him both in prosperity and
adversity. Love him and obey him in all righteousness as the Jews did their
Joshua, and here I deliver you unto him, and with my love, leave and good will,
I give him my possession, my labors, and my twelve months travails. And here
because I would not keep you ouerlong, like as Joshua kept the people before
his death with an exhortation to fear God: or as one friend holds another by
the hand being loath to part. I will make an end, beseeching you, as Joshua
besought the people of Israel, that you will henceforward fear the Lord and
serve him in truth, and put away all envy and ungodliness, that it may not be
said they have returned, with the dog to his vomit, or with the swine to their
puddle, but that you may go on forward in all goodness, serving the Lord in
spirit and truth. Then shall the God of heaven bless and prosper you in all
temporal graces, and in the end glorify you in the kingdom of heaven: to the
which, the Lord for his mercies sake bring you all, Amen.

This was the last Sermon that Henry Smith made at Clement Danes.

FINIS.
The Dialogue between Paul and Agrippa.
Acts. 26. 27. O King Agrippa, beleeuest thou the Prophets? I know that thou
beleeuest.

Then Agrippa said unto Paul, Almost thou perswadest me to become a Christian.

Then Paul said, I would to God, that not only thou, but also all that hear
me this day were both almost, and altogether such as I am, except these bands.


IN this Dialogue between Agrippa the King, and Paul the Apostle: first you
shall hear what Paul says: then you shall hear what Agrippa aunsweres:
after you shall hear what Paul replies. In Agrippa you shall see what we are,
In Paul you shall see what we should be: For the king shows that he is
almost a Christian, and the Apostle shows that he should be altogether a
Christian. This is the sum of their confession: First, Paul begins, and
speaks, as though he would teach us a way to win sinners, every word is a
motive, and shows that he which fisheth for souls, had need to have many
nets, and observe time, and place, and calling, and fit al words before in his
mind, lest he lose his bait. For unless he seek the vantage, and get the
upper ground of sin before he incou^ter, it is liker to give him the foil,
as the Devils did to the Exorcists, than to be driven out by him. Therefore as
Jacob came to Esa^ with seven courtesies to prepare his heart and turn his
wrath before they met together, Genesis 33. 3.
so Paul uses (as it were) three preambles, before he embrace this King.

First with a reverent title, O King Agrippa, Secondly with a profitable
question. Act. 19. 16.
Do thou believe the Prophets? Thirdly, with a favorable prevention, I know
that thou beleeuest. With these three congies he closes so with King Agrippa,
that he could not start out of his circle, the holy spirit so placed every
word when he meant to do good, that it was not possible to correct them, so
they hit in their speeches which have that pro^pter and seek not themselves,
but would feign speak that which might touch the heart and win the hearer to
God. O King Agrippa I note here a question, and an objection, as though he were
opponent and correspondent too, for he asks the question, and answers
himself: O King do thou believe? Now Agrippa should say I or no, and Paul
takes the word out of his mouth, lest he should say no, he answers for him, I
know thou beleeuest. This is his preparatiue to Agrippa, before he come with
that hard lesson to be a Christian altogether. Before Paul had to deal with
Festus the President of Cesarea, which came now from the Idolatrous Gentiles,
an obstinate brutish and barbarous man, which because he sauoured not the
things of God, but flesh and blood, thought that Paul was beside himself when
he spoke of Christ, and said that too much learning had made him mad as some
giddy spirits think now, that they which are zelouser than themselves know
not what they say nor do, and impute all the troubles of the Realm, and the
invasion of the Spaniards unto the preaching of the word, and the fasts and
prayers that were exercised about that time, like Achab which said that the
Prophet troubled Israel, when he himself was the cause of all their plagues.
What will not dogs spue out, when they are set to vomit? When Paul saw such a
brutish President, he turned his speech from him to Agrippa, in whom he did see
better tokens of faith, thinking to kindle the sparks which he saw in him,
thus boldy he sets upon him.

O King Agrippa beleeuest thou the Prophets? As if he should say, If thou
beleeuest the Prophets, it is easy for thee to believe that which I teach out
of the Prophets: for all that I speak of this Jesus is written in the
Prophets, and fulfilled in Christ. Look upon the Prophets, and look upon him,
there thou shall see all that I say, that it is no report of mine, but that
which I have received from good witness, and thou may hear it of the same, if
thou do but read the Prophets: therefore before other questions, he asks,
Do thou believe the Prophets? Like a wise Schoolemaister which examines his
Scholar, before he begin to teach him, to know what he has learned
already, and how he understands that he may go forward with him. So Paul
examines this king, when he intended to make him a Schooller of Christ, he
asks him what he has learned already, before he teach him farther: and posing
him, he begins at the foundation which is faith, saying, tell me, Do thou
believe the Prophets? Yet if we should ask some of you, before you come to
the Lords Table, do you believe the Scriptures? Do you know Christ? Can you
give a reason of your faith? you will think your selves much disgraced to be
Catechized as this king was, we must not ask you with Paul, Do you believe?
but say with Paul we know that ye believe, before we ask you. Is this like
the child which Christ set in the midst of his Disciples, and said, that
whosoever received the kingdom of heaven, he should receive it as a child?
that is, he should humble himself, and take correction, and learn like a
child, for heavens gate is low, and he must stoop that goes in at it. The
Soldiers and Publicans and harlots had such remorse, that they came to John
before they were baptized, confessing their sins, and asked, Master, what
shall we do? They were not ashamed to acknowledge both their sins and their
ignorance, which made John wonder and ask who had taught them, as though this
should be a strange thing in time to come, and so it is: if ye be not like
Publicans, when will ye be like Christians? They confessed before they were
baptized, but we must think that you know, though you know that we think
wrong: we must take you for religious, though you know we take you amiss. Shame
of face was ordained for sin, but shame is turned from sin to righteousness,
for they which are ashamed of no evil, are ashamed of any good, this is a
bashful Devil.

Now when Paul had asked him, he answered himself, Do thou believe? I
know that thou beleeuest, He asks Agrippa whether he believe, and says he
knows that he does believe. What need he ask that which he knows? Here
you may see that we have need to suspect our judgment, when we conceive not
the cause, when they which are wiser, and holier than our selves, do thus or
thus, speak thus or thus. Let us remember that the Spiritual man judges all,
and is judged of none, because no man knows the counseles of the Spirit, but
he which has it, wise men have large exceptions: and it becomes us to
construe their sayings and doings better than others should construe ours. As
the Disciples reverenced many sayings of Christ when they knew not his meaning:
so we should rather think that we know not the reason, then that they speak
without reason. Christ did know that Peter loved him, yet that he might get a
confession of him and instruct him farther, he did ask him that which he
knew, so Paul catechizing Agrippa, does ask him that which he knew, to teach
him that which he knew not. But why does Paul say flatly, that he knows that
which no man thought of this king before? Either because he did perceive that
Agrippa did believe in part, and therefore he reioiced like the Father to see
his Son coming toward him: So he meets him in the way, and imbraceth him as
it were with this commendation: I know that thou beleeuest, that is, I know
thou have a kind of faith, and beleeuest that the Prophets said truly, as
many of the Gentiles did, though thou can not apply it unto thy self: So to
bring him from faith to faith, from knowledge to knowledge, from love to love:
he co^mends those sparks in him, which served not to be called faith, but
almost faith, as Agrippa says.

Or else he says, I know thou beleeuest, because he would have him believe.
Therefore he preuents him and aunsweres for him, lest Agrippa should go back,
and mislike with his boldenes, and say no, I believe not the Prophets, as it
is like he would have said, if Paul had not spoken mildly to him, therefore he
begges the question and answers him, I know that thou beleeuest: As when we
will make a man our friend and willing to do us a pleasure, as though he were
willing already, and as though we had no doubt of him. Do thou believe? yea,
I know that thou beleeuest. And yet it was but almost believe, as Agrippa
confessed himself, but if he had not believed, this was the way to make him
believe, for this makes many zealous to be counted zealous, and many studious,
valiant, and bountiful, to have a name of more than is in them, as if ye
mark ye shall see generally to speak well of a man rather than evil does stir
him to virtue, and incorage him in virtue for no man is so humble but he
leanes to Fame, and a good report does tickle and please him which deserves
it, and him which deserves it not. Therefore Paul which knew by long
experience what bait was best to catch souls, when he cast forth such a
strange question, anticipates the answer, lest Agrippa should answer
otherwise than he would have him: he will not trust him with such a question,
but speaks for him, I know that thou beleeuest. Solomon says that he is wise
who wins souls, Pro. 11. 30. And so you may see in this example, here
zeal and discretion were met together, the Doves simplicity, and the Serpents
policy kissed each other to win one soul to God, what study Paul took and
how he beat his brain, and picked his words to win a king to religion,
because many turn with their head. He does not so much flatter Agrippa, as
he persuades him to do that which he says he does, this was Paul's drift to
draw him as it were with the cords of joy, and make him confess Christ before
he was a ware, that so he might get more and more of him, even as Nathan made
David by a slight to confess against himself, and repent his adultrie, when
as it is like that plain and blunt speeches, would have done more hurt than
good. This is the subtlety of wisdom (as I my term it) which Solomon
intends when she says, I wisdom dwell with Prudence, Pro. 12. where
prudence signifies Christian policy, which Christ commends when he says,
be wise like Serpents, Mat. 10. 10. Thus you have a pattern before you, they
which convert souls to God, may see how Paul incounters with Agrippa, whereby
no doubt the holy Ghost would have us learn how to gratulate to our brethren
their small beginnings and praise the mite which comes from them that have
learned but a while, and take hold of such as are coming forward, and draw
them further with all the signs of love: and not disdain those which come at
the last hour to the vineyard, though we our selves have labored since the
morning. For he which is first may be last, and he which seems last may be
first. Therefore let no man insult beyond the listes of humility, as many
make themselves unprofitable servants by counting themselves more profitable
than other. It is a fault among the best which are like Aaron and Miriam, a
little proud of the Spirit, and contemn them which are so ignorant as Agrippa:
whom Paul bears in his arms like the lost sheep to the sold again.

Now Paul has spoken, Agrippa answers, Almost thou have parswaded me to
become a Christian. Wherein ye may see how Paul's speech wrought with him, that
he was almost converted with a word, when it was spoken in wisdom and love:
what power is in one Sermon, if ye hear attentively. Agrippa was an heathen
even now, and worshipped Idols, and never heard a Preacher before, yet one
Sermon made him almost a Christian. As Luke says of Steeuen, when he disputed
against the Sirenians, Acts the sixth Chapter, and the tenth verse, they could
not resist the wisdom and the spirit by which he spoke: So Agrippa could
not risist the wisdom and the Spiritte by which Paul spoke, but was so
fettered with the holy chain, that as Paul was captine to Festus, so Agrippa
now was captive to Paul, the word had him in bands like a prisoner, and made
him confess against himself before Festus, that he was almost a Christian.
For Paul's speech to the amase of that obstinate President, and wonder of all
that stood by, to see a King, an heathen, and an Idolatour, which sat to
judge, to be so changed with a word of a captive from his opinion, whom they
though all the words in Gods book could not alter, if Paul and Christ had
spoken to him all his life: Then it was verified which before was prophesied,
They shall bind Kings in chains, and Nobles in fetters of Iron, Psalm one
hundred forty nine, and the eight verse. O the Majesty and force of the word,
when faith does kindle it, and zeal does utter it, it flies like the stone
out of David's sling, and strikes sin and sinner both together at the heart.

This Paul did in bonds: when he was bound, he was stronger than they that
bound him: when he was a Captive, he was ^reer than they which kept him: and
when his Judges examined him, he examined them, and made them free which are
bound to Satan, before he was free from them. Send for Paul out of prison
to instruct Agrippa, and he is in bands which should convert. O that such
Doctors might preach unto the Romish Princes of Europe, or that the Kings that
honor yet the most Antichristian beast, would hear like this King: But they
have some Anasiahs which have an eye to Amos that he cannot speak in the
Court. Go thou seer, fly into the land of Judah, prophecy to the Lambs,
and keep Sheep: Speak no more at Bethel, for this is the kings Chapel and
the kings Court. A goodly reason why none but flatterers should preach to
Princes, because it is the kings Court: Should not Kings hear the truth as
well as others? Must not Bethel hear of salvation as well as Judah, because
Amasiah does fear his fall, lest A^os get his honor from him? When will he
convert Agrippa which will not preach in bands nor in liberty? Happy Agrippa,
not by the name of a King, but by the name of a Christian. Happy Agrippa, not
by the presents which thou receiuedst of Festus, but by the words which thou
heardst of Paul: thou came to see, but God brought thee to hear: thy intent
was to gratulate Festus, but now thou may gratulate Paul. The Captive is
better to thee than the President, for Festus has showed thee but his pomp,
but Paul has showed thee his Savior, and persuaded thee to become a Christian.

Almost says Agrippa, but not altogether. Here you may see your pittance, how
you measure God with almost, and serve him by halfes which has given all,
Acts. 5.
like Ananias which brought a part and kept a part behind. This is our worship
of God: though we will not say for shame with Agrippa that we are but almost
Christians: yet we are not almost, when we would be counted altogether. We go
before him in hypocrisy, and come behind him in modesty, for Agrippa would
not show more than he had, to be counted better than he was. Though
altogether had been as ready as almost, as it is to us, yet when almost was
all, he said almost, not altogether. It seems that the flax began to smoke,
though it did not burn. The first temper is cold, the next is lukewarm, the
last is hot: Almost is first, and Altogether is last: and many come between
before we can go from one to another. Agrippa confesses that almost is all,
and here he stays to hear what Paul will say to instruct him farther. Paul
thou have persuaded me almost to become a Christian. It is like the faint
confession of him that wept and said, I believe Lord, help my unbelief: I am
a Christian, teach me to be a Christian? Therefore they which descant upon his
name, do note that Agrippa is as much as Aegre pario, which signifies him
which hardlye labors, and brings forth with pain as Agrippa did. Nabal is
his name (says Abigail) and folly is with him, So Agrippa is his name and
difficulty is with him: for hard and scarce was his conception in stead of a
Christian, he brought forth almost a Christian.

Shall we now behold our face in Agrippaes Glass, whether we be altogether
like Paul, or almost like Agrippa, or like Festus not at all? Christians or no
Christians, or what kind of Christians are we? There be many degrees upon
earth, but this is the highest degree: There be many names of honor, but this
is the honourablest name: there be many professors of men, but this is the
best profession to be a Christian, that is, the Son of GOD, the fellow of
Angels, the heir of heaven: yet whether we should be Christians, or Christians
almost, or Christians altogether, is a question which troubles every man, and
when altogether is approved for best, yet we choose almost before it.

There is some thing always behind, like the eye which looked to Sodom: as
an Owl peeps at the Sun out of a barn but dares not come to it, so we peep
at Religion and will not come near it, but stand a loofe off pinking and
winking as though we were more afraid of GOD than the devil: For self-love,
and regard of persons, and fear of laws, and sway of time, more are afraid
to be too holy, than too profane, because holiness is worse entreated than
profaneness.

Go away and sin no more, because thou art healed. Nay, go away and sin
again because thou art healed. As Naaman entreated for one sin: that he
might stand before the Idol when his Lord leaned upon his shoulder: So this
sin, and that sin will not let us pass the compass of almost, lest we
should have a perfect reward.

God would have nothing so perfect as a Christian, for whom he has given his
well-beloved Son, his spirit, his Law, and his prophets, That the man of God
may be perfect, as Paul says. Yet every thing grows until it be perfect,
the builder buildes till it be an house: The Tailour sows till it be a
garment: The painter paints till it be a picture: Only the Christian leaves
off before he attain to be a Christian, and makes a full period at almost.

That which GOD would have to be perfectest of all, he had rather have
imperfect than perfect, half than all, a little wealth, a little rest, a
little honor, and a little pleasure seems nothing, but a little faith is enough
although it be never so small a mite.

We have a weight of al kind of metals, a touchstone for gold, a measure for
grame, and we will not take one jot less than measure of any man, only we
cut GOD of his weight and measure, and weigh our service in half balances:
This I will do, and this I will not do, God shall have one part, and the the
world shall have another part, and the flesh shall have another part, and the
devil shall have another part. Thus we have brought GOD to his stint: ask
while he will, he shall have no more but almost: Almost zealous, almost
faithful, almost righteous, as though almost were better than altogether: that
is, the counterfeite than the truth, the shadow than the body. Paul says that
the Athenians were too religious in worshipping an Idol. Act. 17. 22. But
where does Paul find that excess in worshipping God: we are not too diligent,
but too negligent where we should be diligent. James speakeing of our sins
calls them the superfluity of our maliciousnes, whereby he shows that though
our wickedness be a superfluous and vain thing, yet it ouerfloweth, and
exceeds the banks. But Christ speaking of his Disciples progress in
righteousness, calls them all by this name, O ye of little faith, etc. So he
may say of little love, of little zeal, etc. for all our virtues are little
ones, and the waters of life are at such an ebb, that the least temptation may
wade over them and not be drowned. God has a controversy with us, as he says
with Israel: and this is it, we were borne when wisdom cried in the
streets, and yet she may call us fools and say: How long will thou hate
knowledge? Pro. 1. For what could God do more unto this vineyard, that he has
not done? Thirty years we have been dressing, and pruning, and watering, and
yet what is in Jerusalem more than in Samaria? In th Vineyarde than in the
Mountains, which were never tilled nor dressed, How long shall he dress a
barraine fig tree, which is dead at the root? Our Church is in a
consumption: her heads are sick, her members weak, her Physicians fearful.
From little to little, our zeal is come to the last gasp, ready to take her
leave of all, because she see not that we love religion, but chase it from
us. Her enemies are placed about her: she grows amongst thorns: she is fed
with checkes: she mourns in a corner: she speaks on a reed. Her garments
are clipped: Her friends dare not defend her for her enemies. What shall I say?
We had rather be whole sinners than half Christians. White is counted no
color: so zeal is counted no virtue. But mere hypocrisy is counted true
Christianity: and true Christianity is counted by hypocrisy. Our wealth is
in an Epha, our zeal is in a Gomer. Our sin like an Oak, our faith like a
Mustard seed. They which have no religion are counted honest men: for they
count it as easy a matter to be a Christian as to say the Lords prayer, the
Apostles Creed, the ten Commandments, and go to the church, this is
country Divinity, this is City Divinity, and I may say Saint Clements
Divinity. He which can swear that the Pope is Antichrist, and that flesh is
good on Fridaies, is a protestant at least, a Christian every inche: he has
zeal, knowledge and religion in Folio. This is the rampire in our days, like
a Lion in the passages. Almost stands in the way before we can come to
altogether: and they which will go beyond Almost, are counted curious,
factious, precise, fantastical, as though Almost were more than altogether,
and altogether were not so much as almost. If his righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees which is but Hypocrisy, he shall be
punished for his righteousness, Genesis 4.
as if it were a fault, as Caine persecuted Abell because his sacrifice was
better than his. Our savior says, Learn of me to be humble and zealous and
righteous: Matt. 11.
But now we must learn of other, and set a crooked pattern before us, lest we
go too straight. We may preach like John, as in Matthew. 3. Bring forth
fruits, But we may not preach like Christ: Bring forth much fruits. John.
15. For that is counted an unreasonable service of God. If we give him the
seventh day, the seventh part, the tenthes or tithes of our life, and of our
thoughts, and of our speeches, and of our works, it is enough: so we define
Altogether out of measure. Thus we dodge with GOD, and draw back from our
promise which we made in baptism, as though he were not worthy of such a
goodly creature, to have that which he gives. Ever since we were borne we
have served two masters If one foot stand in the Church, the other so^te
sticks in the world. If one hand carry fire, the other hand carries water.
If one word savor of religion, the next word sauoureth whatsoever pride, or
envy or lust.

How few of our thoughts are consecrated to GOD? How few of our speeches
taste of grace? How few of our works are squared to the word of GOD, which
should be the line and level of all our thoughts, speeches, and actions?
Tell thy sins which thou have committed since thou did rise in the
morning, and record thy good deeds which thou have done ever since thou wast
borne, and the first shall exceed the last. Thou which say thou art a
Christian, have rebelled more since thou rose than thou have obeyed since thou
were borne.

Is this altogether like Paul, or like Festus not at all? Now if we be almost
Christians, Let us see what it is to be Almost a Christian. Almost a son is a
bastard. Almost sweet, is unsavory. Almost hot, is luke warm, which GOD
spueth out of his mouth. Revel. 3. 15. So Almost a Christian, is not a
Christian but that which GOD spueth out of his mouth. A Christian Almost, is
like a woman which dies in travail: Almost she brought forth a son, but
that almost killed the mother and the son too. Almost a Christian, is like
Jeroboam which said, It is too far to go to Jerusalem to worship, and
therefore chose rather to worship calves at home. Almost a Christian, is like
Michah which thought himself religious enough because he had gotten a Priest
into his house. Almost a Christian, is like the Ephraimite which could not
pronounce Shibboleth, but Sibboleth. Almost a Christian, is like Ananias which
brought a part, but left a part behind. Almost a Christian, is like Elyes
sons which polled the sacrifices: like the Fig tree which deceived Christ
with leaves: like the virgins which carried lamps without oil: like the
willing unwilling son which said, He would come and came not. What is it to
be borne almost? If the new man be but borne almost, he is not borne. What is
it to be married almost unto Christ? He which is married but almost, is not
married. What is it to offer a sacrifice almost? the sacrifice must be killed
or ever it can be sacrificed. He which gives Almost, gives not but denies.
He which believes Almost, believes not but doubts. Can the door which is
but almost shut keep out the thief? Can the cup which is but almost whole,
hold any wine? Can the ship which is but almost sound, keep out water? The
soldier which does but almost fight, is a coward. The Phisician which does but
almost cure, is a slubberer. The servant which does but almost labor, is a
loyterer. I cannot tell what to make of these defectiues, nor where to place
them, nor how to call them, nor unto what to liken them: They are like unto
children which sit in the market place whereis mourning and piping, and they
neither weep nor dance, but keep a note between both, they weep almost,
and dance almost. Beleeuest thou almost? Be it unto thee (says Christ) as
thou beleeuest. Therefore, if thou beleeuest, thou shall be saved. If thou
beleeuest almost, thou shall be saved almost. As a pardon comes while the
thief hangs upon the galowes, he is almost saved, but the pardon does him no
good: So he which is almost a Christian, almost zealous, almost righteous,
which does almost love, almost believe, shall be almost saved: that is, if
he had been a Christian, altogether, he should not be damned. Thus every man
is a Christian almost, before he be a Christian altogether.

Now I must lead you from almost to altogether, as it were to Christians from
the figure of Christians. This is the step which we must tread at this time. I
would to God (says Paul) that thou were not almost but altogether as I am.
When he saw Agrippa coming on, and said almost, then Paul cast up his lure
again: Come thou Agrippa? Come Agrippa, I will not have thee stay at
almost, if any thing will bring thee to altogether I did not ask thee whether
thou did believe the Prophets, that thou might be a Christian almost but a
Christian altogether. Art thou come thus far, and staiest thou at almost? Nay
Agrippa thou must take out this lesson, for there is no measure in
Christianity. Come unto me says Christ, not come toward me, yet he was glad
like the father to see his son coming toward him, for it was a sign that he
would come to him: he was comforted with almost, but he was not satisfied
without altogether. Is this thy offering Almost? it will not serve Agrippa: it
is light, it is sothered, it is crakt, correct it again: For our master says,
Be ye holy as I am holy: Therefore almost a Christian will not please him. But
if thou be almost a Christian already, how easy is it for thee to be a
Christian altogether. Therefore come Agrippa, let us go forward to heaven.
The seed is sown to grow. Every thing must increase and multiply. Almost is
thy first answer, and altogether thy last. I must not take this for an
answer. Shall I tell Christ, that Agrippa is almost a Christian? O Agrippa,
God would have thee hot or cold, as it appears in the third Chapter of the
Revelation of S. John, and the 15. verse. Cold to him is as pleasing as
lukewarm: he loves altogether, and he will not be loved almost: Who shall
have the other half, if God have but almost? Therefore speak again good
Agrippa. Thus he pleads unkindness with him, like an importunate suter with
will not be answered. Shall I go with almost? then thou use me but hardly, if
thou will give me no more. Thus he stands in argument with him. What shall I
say to Agrippa, if he will give me but almost? I will pray for thee till thou
come off with all. If I can get no more of Agrippa, I will crave more of
God. He which has made thee almost, can make thee altogether. I would to God,
etc.

So now he conuerteth himself to prayer. Thus we must learn to fish for
souls with prayers and entreaties, and questions. Change the bait: cast thy
Lure again: follow the siege: pursue the blow: close with sin: and gather
more of it: at first he will call thee his enemy as Achab did Elias: Art thou
here mine enemy? But if thou will not bow to him, he will bow unto thee,
and hearken what thou say, and change his robes, and put on sackcloth, and
mourme and fast, and do all that thou would have him. A Preacher must not
look to find them Christians, but make them Christians. Thou shall not take
them converted because thou come to convert them. If Paul will not yield to
Agrippa, Agrippa will yield to Paul. But if Paul had fallen to almost, he had
never brought Agrippa to altogether. Therefore they which fish for soul (...)
must take Paul's net, and remember what God says to Jeremy 15. 19. Let them
be converted unto thee. But be not thou converted unto them: for then thou
shall never convert them: Signifiing, that our constancy in goodness shall
induce others to turn from their wickedness, and make him which is but almost
come to altogether. This is the substance of Paul's reply, that it is not
enough to be a Christian almost, that is, to have a kind of religion, a little
knowledge, a little faith, a cold zeal a flattering holiness, like the touch of
the hem: but we must march to perfection, and do his will upon earth, as it is
in heaven, and contend to be holy as he is holy. This is religion (says
James) to keep thy self unspotted, like a glass which is still wiped. To
this end says Paul. 2. Tim. 3. The Scripture does teach, and reprove, and
instruct, and comfort, That the man of God might be absolute. And in the 1. to
the Ephe. 41. To this end we were elected, that we might be holy and
without blame. And Romans 1. He describes our journey from faith to faith, not
from faith to distrust. As David describes the way of the righteous Psalm. 840.
7. From virtue to virtue, as a trauailer goes from town to town, till he come
to his Inn. What a foolish thing were it for the Scribe to stay there, when
our Lord tells him, Thou art not far from the kingdom of heaven? for
therefore Christ tells him, that he is not far from heaven, to encourage
him, lest he should give over before he come to it, So, if ye stay at almost,
and repent in some sort as Esau did when he wept, you may hunt for the
blessing as Esau did, and go without it: for God is not mocked: but God is
mocked if colors and shows will serve.

When GOD said, Seek my face: mine heart answered (said David) I will seek
thy face. Psalm. 27. 8. So we must answer the Lord to that which he
asks: and not when he biddes us seek his face, seek his back: when he
requires al, give him half: God asks, Art thou a Christian? and thou
aunsweres: O Lord, I am almost a Christian. What niggardlie answer is this to
him which deserves a thousand times more than the best can give? If thy
master ask thee, art thou my servant? will thou answer him, I am almost thy
servant? If the Prince ask thee: Art thou my subject? will thou answer, I am
almost thy subject? If thy father ask thee: art thou my son? will thou
answer: I am almost thy son? If thou art but almost his son, then he is but
almost thy father: And so it is with God, a son or no son: half a son, is
a bastard. How do thou know God to be thy God, but as thou art his servant?
How do thou know God to be thy father, but as thou art his son? By thy love
thou shall know Gods love: for according to thy mind toward him, is his mind
of thee, whereby thou may truly judge whether he favor thee or hate thee,
and no way else.

God loves nothing almost, therefore he does not love almost. Therefore, love
as thou may be loved, or else thy love is lost. Thou must seek as thou may
find, or else thy labor is lost. They shall seek and find me (says God)
because they shall seek with all their hearts, as in Jeremy 29. Chapter, and
the 13. verse: as though they should not find him though they sought him,
unless the sought him with all their hearts.

Naaman is not only commanded to wash himself in Jordan, but to wash
himself seven times, and then he shall be healed: So man is not only
commanded to obey God, but to obey him while he lives, and then he shall be
saved. Be faithful (says the Angel) unto death, and then I will give thee
the Crown of life. Revel. 2, 10.

When Saul was commanded to kill the Idolatrous beasts, he was commanded to
kill all: and because he spared some, God rejected him. Yet God has more mercy
on beasts, than on sins. Would he have the beasts of sinners die, and their
vices live? No (says Christ) Make clean within: that is, leave no filth
behind. Whenever Christ cast out one devil, we read that he cast out al,
eue^ the legion together: so when thou castest out one vice, cast out all, for
one is not worthier than another.

The Prophet does teach us to power out our sins like water which leaves no
taste or color or sent behind. There is a whole old man, and there must be a
whole new man. The old man must change with the new man wisdom for wisdom,
love for love, fear for fear, his worldly wisdom for heavenly, wisdom,
his carnal love for spiritual love, his servile fear for Christian fear,
his idle thoughts for holy thoughts, his vain words for wholesome words,
his fleshlye works for righteous works. This is a Christian altogether, as if
he were cast in a new mould. As a Painter would draw a beautiful picture
which should be fairer than all women in the world, he would mark the
special grace of every one, and make one beauty of all: so we must make up a
Christian, and take modesty from him, faith from him, love from him, patience
from him, zeal from him, and humility from him, until it be like the Image of
Christ. This is the building of a Christian. First his foundation is laid, and
then his walls, and then his roof, and then a Christian like Adam in
Paradise. Genesis 2.
God made all things good: Genesis 1.
therefore if we be but almost good, all things are better than we. The
wicked man speaks out of the corruption of his fleshly heart, and shall not
the righteous speak of the abundance of his spiritual heart? He which is
merry would be merrier if he knew how. He which is envious would look sterner
if he could. He which is proud, would go brauer if he had it: and all if we
could be worse, we would, but let them amend which look to die. For what
kind of man should he be which must bear the Image of God, be the Temple of
the holy Ghost, and inherit the kingdom of heaven? Who is fit for these
things (says Paul?) Nay, who is fit for these things? Do ye know no enough in
riches, nor pleasure, nor sin, and think that you have enough of religion,
before ye have any? The good are known because none but they which are good
strive to be better. We are invited to a banquet, and shall we go but half
the way unto it? Were it not better that the fig tree had borne fruits than
leaves? that the Virgins had carried oil than lamps? So is it not better for
us to be vessels of gold that come to the Lords table, than like the image in
Daniel, part of gold, part of silver, part of brass, part of iron, and part of
clay, which was after broken? If the crown did lie in the midde way, then thou
need run but half the way: but to show that there is no reward for them
that begin well, all the promises are made to him that continues to the end.
He is cursed not only which does evil, but he which does the work of the
Lord negligently, or by halfes, that is, he which offers a maimed sacrifice
for a sound, almost a Christian, for altogether. Therefore David before he
prays, summoneth his thoughts, his speeches and actions, and says: All that
is within me praise the Lord, as a man gives that which he thinks will be
accepted, that he may be welcome for it. If we did serve an ungrateful master:
then we might think almost enough. But Christ did not love almost, when he
shed his heart blood for us, and therefore he cannot ask more than he gave,
and yet the inheritance of his blessings is behind: why should not thou
give as much for them as Abraham or David or Simeon, which would have served
God till this time if they had lived, and still reformed themselves, and yet
thought they had done nothing, as Jacob counted his service for Rachel nothing,
because he loved her: but thou think that if thou give thy pleasures, thou
shall want thy pleasures. No, as Abraham did not lose his son when he would
have sacrificed his son, so God can keep his pleasures when thou resignest
thy pleasures. Thou think that God will not miss it, as Ananias thought
that Peter would not miss it: but if Peter did miss it, will not God miss
it? So we pare the offering like Elies sons, which kept the best and fatest
to themselves, which made the people abhor the sacrifices: and shall not God
abhor such sacrifices? If Ely reproved his sons? how will God reprove them,
which reproved Ely for not reproving the^ enough? A spiritual ear can hear
GOD reproving this land, for this mincing of his worship. Can the preaching of
the word, the signs of heaven, the shaking of the earth, the victory of your
enemies, and all the blessings of God make you but almost Christians, almost
religious, almost thankful?

Is this my reward (says God) as though you were afraid to be too good? If
you think that you shall be mocked if you be too zealous, as Micholl scorned
David when he daunced before the Arc: David tells you how you shall stop such
scorners mouths: O (says David) I will be more humble yet before my God. When
Michol saw his resolution, she mocked him no more, but reverenced him ever
after. So tell the Devil and all his mockers, I will be more zealous, more
fervent and more holy yet, until I be like him which said, Follow me, and they
which mock thee shall reverence thee as Michol did David.

This when thou art in the way to heaven, remember that thou must go forward
or backward: for Jacob did see none stand upon the ladder which ascended up to
heaven, but either thy went up or down: they which go not forward, go backward.
They which will not come so forward as altogether, shall not stay at almost,
but fall from their faith, and love, and knowledge and zeal, by descents, till
Christ's threatening be fulfilled. That which they seem to have shall be taken
from them, as though they never had any taste at al.

Thus I have set you a glass to behold whether you are in almost or
altogether. Yet Paul lured for Agrippa. Now he sues to the people. When he had
caught the King, he spread his net for the people.

I would to God, that not only thou but all that hear me, were not only
almost, but altogether as I am. He might wish rather than hope and therefore
he prays, I would to God that all were Christians: As Moses wished that all
could prophecy. Peter was taught both to feed the sheep and the lambs,
great and small, and old an young, rich and poor: So Paul prays for the King
and for the people too, and wishes that they were all Christians. This prayer
we may say for them that do not pray for themselves, to make them ashamed,
when they see other more careful for their souls than they themselves. The
Pastors care extends to all, although some are more to be labored, yet none
is to be despised, which is but a lamb of the flock. Paul does not wish
Agrippa more honor, or more wealth, or more friends, but more religion, which
is the greatest want of Princes. Although they have received a kingdom, yet
they are not so thankful, as they which have received nothing, but from hand
to mouth. Though they have done a thousand times more evil, yet they are not so
penitent as he which has done least of all: They sit in Gods seat, and are
called Gods, but are not like God, but like Mammon, more than their names, and
their Crowns, except David, or Solomon, or Joshua, a few which remember whose
person they bear: the rest are like Herod, and Saul, and Nabuchadnezzar, which
know not from who^ their kingdoms come.

As I am, says Paul directly. Paul should have replied, altogether a
Christian, and not altogether as I am: but who shall teach the Spirit to
persuade? He chose to say, as I am that Agrippa might see his single heart and
love toward him, who went not about to seduce him, but wished it unto him as
unto him self: Even as I am. If any thing will persuade, most fit is the
example, when he which teaches us goes before us, for then we see that he
deals plainly, and speaks of love, and means no deceit, when we see him do
as he says. Saul has slain his thousand, but David his ten thousand. So
where another conuerts a thousand, he shall convert ten thousand, which can
say like Christ Follow me. Oh what is this when a Christian and I am all one,
that ye might say to your children, I would to God thou were a Christian, when
you say, I would to God thou were like me.

The king should be like Paul by this saying: How then do some say with
Festus? Too much zeal has made thee mad. If the people know the Lords prayer,
the ten co^mandeme^ts, and the Articles of belief, it is enough, is this to be
like Paul? No Festus, the knowledge of the word does not make a man mad, but
makes him wise to salvation. Can that which makes a man wise, make him mad

Therefore they which say that we are the worse for knowledge, or worse for
religion, or worse for zeal, are like Festus which had neither knowledge,
zeal, nor religion in him. And they which teach the people that they shall not
need to be as Paul, but that a mediocritie will serve, incur that curse of
Paul: He which teaches another doctrine than that which ye have received of
us (which wished all as perfect as himself) Let him be Anathema, that is,
accursed. They which love you like Paul, do not wish you zeal by weight, and
knowledge by ounces, and works by number, a Sicle, or an Omer, or an Epha: but
that ye abound in all knowledge, and all zeal, and let them be lukewarm
which will be spued out.

Except my bands: yet Paul excepteth something, not his knowledge, nor his
zeal, but his bands, Not altogether as I am, but altogether as I am, except
these bands. He excepteth nothing but his troubles. Charity had rather suffer
than other should suffer, as David prayed God to turn his wrath from the
Israelites upon him. Now if ye ask me, who can love his neighbor as
himself? Here is one that had rather suffer himself, than Agrippa should
suffer: he would have him partaker in all his good, but not in his troubles: As
I am, except these bands.

Paul glories in his bands, and shows his chains like his Ensigns: these are
the marks of Christ: this is the cognizance of my Lord, his sweet yoke and
easy burden. But he wishes faith to them without a burden, the battle is to
the strong and the Cross is not to be wished for, but to be borne.

Thus the spirit of wisdom has set us an example how men are won to the
truth, and led forward by little and little with lenity and softnes, putting
difference between them which know not the truth, and them which resist the
truth. Paul did not speak so to Elimas the Sorcerer which withstood the truth.
Act. 13. 16. But set his eyes upon him and said, O full of all subtlety and
mischief, the child of the Devil and enemy of all righteousness. Neither did
Peter speak so to Simon Magus* Act. 8. 23. But as Solomon says, A wise man
knows the time and place, and as Paul says, the Spiritual man discerns
all things, so he knows when to be soft and when to be rough. They which
resist the truth as Elimas, and labor to keep the Rulers from it as Elimas
did Sergius Paulus the Deputy of Cyprus, and many like him now, must not be
entreated like Agrippa which is coming to the truth, but as Elimas was. He
which has Paul's Spirit knows how to handle both in their kind. Though we may
not discover the nakedness of some, yet we may not hide the nakedness of
other: An humble heart is a good Schoolmaister both to apply comfort and
reproof. Now the Lord Jesus which has made you Christians almost, make you
Christians altogether.

FINIS.
The humility of Paul.
Romans 12. 1. 2. verse. I beseech you therefore brethren by the mercies of God,
that ye give up your bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, and acceptable unto God,
which is your reasonable serving of God.

And fashion not your selves like unto this World, but be you changed by the
renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is the good will of God, and
acceptable and perfect.


PAul an Apostle to the Gentiles, writing to the Romans which were Gentiles,
To. 11. 13.
after he had showed what God had done for them in receiving them into his
covenant which were out of his covenant, and making them his people, which
were not his people, that the Gentiles might triumph now over the Jews, as
much as the Jews triumphed over the Gentiles, because the Jews were rejected,
and the Gentiles received in their place. Now he shows what they should do
for God. Give your bodies a Sacrifice to him: that is, as Christ gave himself
for you, so you must give your selves to him: as he was sacrificed for you, so
you must be sacrificed for him, not your sheep, nor your Oxen, nor your
Goats, but your selves. You must be the Sacrifice: this Sacrifice, Paul
calls a living, and holy, and acceptable sacrifice, a living sacrifice,
because the Jews sacrifices were dead sacrifices: an holy sacrifice, because
they might sacrifice beasts and not be holy: but they cannot Sacrifice
themselves, but they must needs be holy. An acceptable Sacrifice, before the
sacrifices of beasts did not please God, unless they did sacrifice themselves
too. But if they sacrifice themselves it does please God, though they do not
sacrifice beasts. It is true that God did require this sacrifice of the Jews
as well as the Gentiles, for in Deu. the tenth Chapter and the sixteenth verse,
he says, Circumcise your hearts, and in the first of Samuel the 15. Chap. and
22. ver. he says, Obedience is better than sacrifice, which shows, that even
then God did require the sacrifice of the body, more than* of beasts: but
although God did require this of the Jews also that they should sacrifice
their bodie^ too, yet Paul signifies that God requires larger of the Gentiles,
Mat. 11. 11.
because a Christ says, we have a greater light. The Gospel is a greater
benefit than the law, and therefore our thankfulness should be greater than
theirs.

First here is an exhortation to sacrifice our bodies to God. Then an
explication what this sacrifice is. It is your reasonable service, and not
fashioning your selves to the World: and the renewing of your minds to the
image of GOD, in which they were created. Then follow two reasons to persuade,
one drawn from the mercies of God, I beseech you brethren by the mercies of
God: The other drawn from the fruit of our regeneration, that ye may prove what
that good and acceptable, and perfect will of God is. The exhortation is to
sacrifice our selves to God. It seems that the Jews grudged to sacrifice
their beaster, therefore Paul thought that the Gentiles would grudge to
sacrifice themselves, and therefore mark how he prepared himself for them.

Brethren I heseech you by the mercies of GOD. Math. 1. 7.
This is his preparatiue, First, he calls them Brethren, which shows his
affection to all Christians, which after Christ were called brethren. Secondly
our adoption by Christ which makes us brethren. Thirdly the duty which we
own one to an other, as if we were brethren. The Apostles do not use this name
so lightly as we, as you may see here, for Paul made it a preamble to persuade
the Romans to godliness: So Abraham made it a mediator to keep peace between
Lot and him, Are we not brethren says Abraham? as if he should say, shall
brethren fall out for trifles like infidels. This was enough to pacify Lot,
for Abraham to put him in mind that they were brethren, Genesis ^3. 8.
when he heard the name of brethren, straight his heart yielded, and the
strife was ended: so this should be the Lawyer to end quarrels between
Christians, to call to mind that they are brethren. And they which have spent
all at law, wished that they had taken this Lawyer, to think with Lot whether
it were meet for brethren to strive like enemies: with such reverence then
they did use the name of brethren, but now there is no reverence in naming of
GOD: For many speak of him when they do not think of him, and many never
speak of him but when they swear by him.

When he had called them brethren, then he beseeches them, Brethren I beseech
you. This is the Apostles style. If God did humble himself for man, much more
should man humble himself for men, therefore though Paul speak of a matter,
wherein he might command, as he says to Philemon I might command thee: yet
as he did rather beseech him, so he does rather beseech them. Mark the
subtlety of wisdom (as I may call it.) As the serpent did use policy to
tempt, so the Preacher may use policy to convert, Genesis 3. 1.
and so Paul won Agrippa to believe, by persuading him that he did believe.
Acts. 26. 27.
It was Paul's Office to teach the Romans, but it was Paul's policy to beseech
the Romans, until compulsion need, gentleness is better than bitterness:
Lenity deserves to go first, and correction has no place if persuasion will
serve.

I beseech you brethren, we do not use to entreat and beseech, but for our
profit, but Paul did beseech them for their profit. We would have other
humble themselves to us, but Paul humbled himself to his inferiors, to make
them humble themselves to God. Here the Preachers may take example of the
Preacher of the Gentiles, Romans 11. 13
the loving phrase is the Apostles phrase, and he which beseeches shall
persuade easier than he which thundereth. Many have been drawn with the
cords of love, which could never be haled with the chains of iron. God is
love, and his Ministers must speak like love or else they do not speak like
Paul: he which fisheth for souls and does not take his Net, shall fish all
day, as Peter fished all night and catch nothing. Although a temperate
Preacher be a wise Preacher, and this be our policy to entreat and beseech
you like Paul, Math. 22.
yet you should not look to be entreated like the guestes which would not
come, but to be compelled like the guests which came to the banquet: For you
must be entreated to your profit. It is no reason that Christ should pay, and
pray: the servant prays, but the master commands.

Yet Paul has not done his preparatiue: he is loath that his suite should
take the repulse, and therefore he uses a Mediator unto them: and beseeches
them by the mercies of God. I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God:
mercy is a loving soliciter and worthy to be heard, because it hears again.
God does entreat us by the same Mediator that we entreat God, we entreat God
for his mercy, and God entreats us for his mercy. So that mercy is like a
sign between us, which calls God to hear us, and us to hear him. What
will not a good subject do for a merciful Prince? Many sweet things are in
the word of God, but the name of mercy is the sweetest word in all the
scriptures, which made David harp upon it 26. times in one Psalm, six and
twenty times he repeats this in the hundred thirty and sixth Psalm, For his
mercy endures for ever. It was such a cheerful note in his ears when he
stroke upon mercy, that like a bird which is taught to record, when he had
sung it, he sang it again, and when he had sung it again, he recorded it
again, and made it the burden of his song, For his mercy endures for ever.
Like a Nightingale which when she is in a pleasant vain, quauers and capers,
and trebles upon it, so did David upon his mercy, For his mercy endures for
ever. But here Paul speaks in the plural number, not by the mercy, but by
the mercies of God.

There is a plurality of Gods mercies, his lesser mercies in his corporal
blessings, and his greater mercies in his spiritual blessings: his temperall
mercies in earth, and his everlasting mercies in heaven: his preventing mercies
in delivering us from sin, and his following mercies in pardoning of our
sin. Genesis 3.
How many sins came with Adam, and how many curses came with sin, so
many mercies came with Christ to answer the^ both. Therefore when Paul
could not number them for multitude, he was feign to lay them down together
in the gross sum, and in a word called them mercies: as if he should say,
I cannot number the mercies of God, but the less I can number them, the more
they are. Thus much why Paul calls them brethren, and why he beseeches them,
and why he remembers them of Gods mercies.

Now he has prepared the way, he commenceth his suite, that they would give
their bodies to God, he speaks not here of the soul, though he would have
them give their souls too. As you may see in the next verse, but he speaks
here of the body, to show that the body is a servant to God as well as the
soul, both are too little, and therefore one is not enough. And therefore Paul
says, Glorify GOD in your bodies and in your souls too, 2. Cor. 6. 20
but here he speaks the rather of the body, to show that their battle will
be with the flesh, and that the flesh will be unwilling to this Sacrifice, as
Christ says, the spirit is willing but the flesh is frail. Mat 26. 43.
That is, the flesh will not afforde any thing to GOD, though he do never so
much for her, yet she is like churlish Naball, which will do nothing again.
Therefore the Apostle urges so to give the body, as if he should say, draw
forward that which he draws backward, and let the conversion begin where
sin has his root: if you can win the flesh which is like Nabal, the
soul will come like Abigail, and bring her train with her.

Now to show how we should give our bodies to God, the Apostle says give your
bodies a Sacrifice to God. That is, you must give your bodies to God, Leuit. 1.
9. and. 13.
as if you did Sacrifice them: The Law appointed a Sacrifice, in which all the
members were offered together: So ye must give your members to God, for the
body is all, all is but parts of the body, therefore if you must give your
bodies, Romans 8.
you must give eye, and ear, and tongue, and hand, and feet unto him, For the
heart (says Paul) does but believe, because it is not enough to believe,
therefore he adds, the mouth does confess as it is as necessary to confess
unto Salvation, as to believe unto Justification: So it is as necessary to
sacrifice the tongue as the heart.

What then, is the tongue enough? Nay, (says Christ) he which has an ear to
hear let him hear. Mat. 11. 15
Is the ear enough? Nay, (says David) Lift up your hands to his Sanctuary.
Psalm. 134 2.
Is the hand enough? Nay, (says Solomon) Let thine eyes behold the right.
Pro. 4. 25.
Is the eye enough? Pro 4 27.
Nay, (says Solomon) Remove thy foot from evil. So the word passes like a
Collectour from one member to another, to gather tribute for GOD, until the
body have paid as well as the soul. Therefore in Deuteronomy. 6. 5. GOD commands,
not only Thou shall love the Lord with all thy soul, and with all thy mind:
but with all thy strength that is, if thou can do any thing for him with the
strength of thine hand or the strength of thine eye, or the strength of thine
ear, or any part else: Thou art bound by this commandment, to do it with
all thy strength. Therefore when David went about the service of God, he called
al his powers together, summoning them like a Crier, All that is within me
praise the Lord. If every part look to be glorified of GOD, it is reason
that every part should glorify him: for this is all that they pay. As every
subject owes loyalty unto his Prince: so every member owes a duty unto his
Creator. The heart to love him, the tongue to praise him, the eye to mark him,
the ear to attend him, the hand to serve him, the foot to follow him, and
every part should serve GOD as it serves us: Nay, more than it serves us,
because we are bound to love GOD more than our selves: For it is said, Love
God above all: therefore we must give more to Gods desire than to our own
desire.

Christ has a part in every part: Nay, every part is his part, because he
gave all for all. Shall the hand say to the heart, serve thou him, or the
heart say to the tongue, serve thou him, or the tongue say to the eye, serve
thou him, or the eye say to the foot, serve thou him? Nay, if Christ be the
head, every part will serve him, for all the body is ruled by the head: and
therefore if he be the head, every part of the body will serve him like a
head.

Now if you will know how every part may be a sacrifice, Luke. 1. 46.
thus it is. When thou can say with the Virgin, Mine heart does magnify the
Lord: then thine heart is a sacrifice to God. When thou can say with
Samuel: speak Lord for thy servant hears, then thine ear is a sacrifice
to God. 1. Sam. 3. 9.
When thou can say with David, Psalm. 25. 11
Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord, then thine eye is a sacrifice unto God.
When thou can say with David: All the day long I stretch out mine hand to
thee, then thine hands are a sacrifice to GOD. When thou can say with David,
Psalm. 88. 9.
as it appears in the 25. Psalm, and the twelfth verse: My foot stands in
vprightnes, then thy feet are a sacrifice to God: So at length by following of
these examples, every member is a sacrifice.

He which offers this sacrifice, is freely excused of all sacrifices
besides. For since Christ sacrificed himself, God has required none other
sacrifice of Jews nor Gentiles, But that they sacrifice themselves. Now when
God does require of thee to sacrifice thy body, he does but require thee to
sacrifice the sins of thy body, as you may pick out of the next words, Be
changed, that is, change thy thoughts, change thy words, change thy
works: Let thy tongue speak no more idelly: Let thine eyes look no more to
vanity: Let thine ears hearken no more to folly: Let thine hands work no
more iniquity, and then thou have Sacrificed thy body.

This seems a dear sacrifice to sacrifice the body, yet thou see it is but
a cheap sacrifice, for it is nothing but to sacrifice thy sins, which would
Sacrifice thee. If GOD had required thee to Sacrifice thy Son to him as he
required Abraham Genesis, the twenty two Chapter, and the second verse:
Would thou not give him? But now he requires nothing of thee but thy
sins, it is as if he should sue unto thee for thy shame, and thy trouble, and
thy guilt, and thy fear, that he might have all which hurtes thee. What will thou part from if thou will not part from thine hurt? Therefore sacrifice thy
body, and thou have Sacrificed all that hurts thee.

Here Christ is the alter, and we the sacrifice, and the fire which kindles
it, the love of God, and the smoke which goes up, the co^sumption of our
sins, but a worldly man killed, and a spiritual man revived, and the
sacrifice is ended.

This sacrifice goes under three titles, living, holy, and acceptable. Every
one persuades with the Apostle, that they should offer it: for in it is a
holy sacrifice, it cannot but please, because he is holy which takes it: in
that it is a living sacrifice, it cannot lose them any thing, because there is
no death nor loss in it, as there was in the Jews sacrifices: in that it is
an acceptable sacrifice, it must needs benefit the^, for when the sacrifice is
accepted, the sacrificer is accepted too: as Abel pleased, Genesis 4.
when his sacrifice pleased.

First, it is called a living sacrifice, because the beasts died, when they
were sacrificed, but men live when they are sacrificed, nay they die unless they
be sacrificed. As Abraham did not lose his son, Gen 32.
when he was content to sacrifice him to God, so me^ do not lose their
pleasures, when they sacrifice the^ to God. But as Christ says, He which
leaves father or mother for me, shall receive an hundred fold: So he which
leaves any comfort for God, shall receive an hundred comforts for it. For Gods
demands are not only demands, but gifts. He bids thee sacrifice thy body,
that thou might partak the sacrifice of his body. Here then is but one
Sacrifice for an other, one body for another, a beggars body for a Kings body:
Well may he require a living sacrifice which has given a dead sacrifice. 1.
Cor. 6. 19.
Christ died for us, but he desires not our death, but our life, that we
would serve him with our life. It is called an holy sacrifice, because our
bodies are the temples of the holy ghost that is, if they are not, they
should be the Temples of the holy Ghost. But as the Jews abused the Temple of
stone, so we have abused the Temple of flesh, and there is no way to make it
holy again but for the holy ghost to dwell in it, that is to sacrifice it to
God, and then it is holy, because as virtue came out of Christ to heal the
woman's disease, so holiness comes out of Christ to heal every man's sins,
and then they are holy.

As nothing does please us, unless it be some way like us, and agreeable to
our nature: so nothing does please God, but that which is like God, therefore
because God is holy, no sacrifice does please him, but the holy sacrifice,
therefore holy goes before acceptable, 1. Sam. 15. 72.
to show that our sacrifice is not acceptable, unless it be holy. Aliniug,
holy and acceptable sacrifice.

3 It is called an acceptable sacrifice, because no sacrifice is so accepted,
as when we offer our selves. Therefore Sa^uel says, obedience is better than
sacrifice: Genesis 4. 5.
that is, it pleases God better than sacrifice? Now if we must sacrifice to
God, we should do as we do to Princes, that is, offer that which may be
accepted, Genesis 4. 5.
that we may be accepted for our gift: or else better undone than done. When
Caine had sacrificed to God, because his sacrifice was not accepted, therefore
Moses says that his countenance was cast down: but if we sacrifice our
bodies, our countenance need not be cast down: for Paul says, that this
sacrifice is accepted. 1. King. 18. 39
All other sacrifices were kindled with the fire of the Temple: but this
Sacrifice is like the sacrifice of Eliah, which God kindled himself with fire
from heaven, and therefore this must needs be acceptable, which man does not
only offer, but God himself does offer.

When the Apostle ends our Sacrifice, with this clause acceptable, he means
that this should be the level of all our thoughts, that whatsoever we think,
1. Chro. 17. 1. and 16.
or speak, or do, be acceptable and liking unto God. As David thought to
build the Temple, but would not build it, Acts. 9.
when Nathan told him that God would not have him build it: As Ananias would
not baptize Saul, Act. 9. 13.
but did baptize him when he understood that God would have him baptized: Mat.
5. 16.
As Joseph would not take Mary to wife, so long as he thought God did disalow
his marriage, but did marry her when the Angel told him that he should marry
her: so a good man will do nothing before he do consult with Gods word: all
that he does he approves unto God before he do it, if it be not his Word
and Will, then he turns back, as if the wind and weather were against him,
always refourming his own will to Gods will, that his thoughts, and words,
and works may be acceptable. If reason teach us this, that when we offer
unto God, we must give him an acceptable sacrifice, an acceptable honor, an
acceptable service: then why do we not give him that which he asks, for he
knows what is acceptable to him. If he ask the first fruits, we must not
offer him the last fruits, for the first is acceptable: So if he appoint his
discipline, we may not set up our discipline, for that is not acceptable to
him, but to us.

Now Paul shows what this Sacrifice is, it is your reasonable service of GOD,
lest they should grudge to sacrifice their bodies, he shows that he means
but the sins of their bodies. For this sacrifice (says Paul) is your service,
your reasonable service. He calls it a reasonable service, because it is not
in ceremonies like the Jews service, but in spirit (as Peter says:) the^
because it is that service, which every man's reason and conscience does tell
him that he owes unto God, wherefore it may well be called a reasonable
service, because it is so reasonable. Therefore if we will not serve God thus,
that is, as our reason teaches us: Then we serve him not like me^, but like
beasts void of reason, whom God may be said to rule, but they cannot be said
to obey, because they are ruled perforce. All things do yield a service to
God, but all things do not yield a reasonable service, which he requires of
man: here was no reason why Christ should serve us, but there is great cause
why we should serve Christ, because he served us without cause, so that I may
say, Christ requires but a reasonable sacrifice, for an unreasonable
sacrifice, a living sacrifice, for a dead sacrifice, a cheap sacrifice, for a
precious sacrifice, counting us as it were like the poor widdowe, of whom he
is content to take a mite, because we are needy, thus much of our reasonable
service.

The law of this service is laid down in these words: Fashion not your selves
to the world, the world follows the world, Ioh. 15. 19.
but I says Christ to his Disciples, have chosen you out of the world,
therefore do not you follow the world. The world is taken sometime for heaven
and earth, Acts. 17. 24.
and sea which are parts of the world: sometime for the men of the world,
Math. 16. 7.
sometime for the elect in the world: John. 1. 24.
but most commonly it is taken for the wicked in the world, John. 7. 7.
because the wicked are most common, John. 8. 23.
like a man which by often faulting is grown to an evil name, so the world
which does not signify evil of it self, yet is taken for evil, because it
is accustomed to do evil, and therefore the Devil is called the God of this
world, 2. Cor. 4. 4.
because the worlds fashions are the Devils fashions, Therefore fashion not
your selves unto the world, lest you be in the Devils fashion. Then you must
not pranke up your selves like Plaiers, for this is the fashion of the world:
then you must not respect persons more than justice, for this is the fashion of
the world: Then you must not flatter to Please, for this is the fashion of the
world: Then you must not deceive to grow rich, for this is the fashion of the
world, then you must not seek revenge for every word, for this is the fashion
of the world, then you must not take scorn to be told of your faults, for
this is the fashion of the world, then you must not give alms to be seen, for
this is the fashion of the world, then you must not obey for fear of the law,
for this is the fashion of the world, then you must not receive the sacrament
for order, for this is the fashion of the world, then you must not come to
church for custom, for this is the fashion of the world, then you must not
make religion but a table talk, for this is the fashion of the world, then you
must not turn with the time, for this is the fashion of the world, then you
must not defer to do good till you die, for this is the fashion of the
world. The world is a badde pattern to follow, because as the flesh
follows the devil: so the world follows the flesh. Therefore say no
more we must do as the world does, but rather we must not do as the world
does. You say you go so, because it is the fashion, God says go not so,
because it is the fashion. If you come but in the fashion, you shall be in the
abuse: There is no man that wears the cutters fashion, but he is a cutter,
none which cutteth his hair like them which are proud, but he is proud: none
that colors her face like them which are wanton, but she is wanton: none
which swears like them which lie, but he will lie as well as swear.

Therefore make not your life of the worlds fashion, Mat. 22.
the wedding garment was of an other fashion than all the rest: therefore if
thou fashionest they self like the rest, thou have not on thee the wedding
garment, for this was nothing like unto the rest. John. 19. 23
Christ's garment was of another manner of fashion differing from the world,
so thy life must be of another fashion than the worlds: or else as the
fashion of the world passes away, so thou shall pass and perish with it. God
does not like the fashion of the world and surely he likes as ill the
fashion of Idolatry, or the fashion of Antichrist, as the fashion of the
world. He which bids us to refrain from every show of evil: would have
us refrain from the show of Idolatry, 1. These. 5. 22.
and the show of Heresy: for these are the greatest evils. But if we be not
Idolatours, yet we have the show of Idolatry. If we be not of Antichrists
religion, yet we be of Antichrists fashion, so long as we show forth the
same badge, and cognizance, you know what I mean. This is to iumpe with the
world and leap to hell. This is not to be in fashion, but out of fashion,
therefore now ye shall hear the best fashion. It follows, Be you changed,
by the renewing of your minds. This is the second part of your reasonable
service: The changing and renewing of the mind to the likeness wherein it was
created. As before he required you to give your bodies, so here he requires
you to give your minds. Outward service is like a tinckling Cimball, though
it has never so pleasant a sound, yet it does not please God, because it has
no mind to please him, so is the service of the eye, or the ear, or the hand,
or the foot, if the mind be away: it may please other like the Cimball, but
it pleases not God.

The body is a servant as well as the soul, but there is no promise made to
the bodily service, but to the Spiritual service: For unless the mind
work, the body will serve but a while: Therefore make clean within, says
Christ. Mat. 23. 26
Sanctification begins within, until the mind be renewed, the body is never
sacrificed. Therefore now Paul shows as it were the knife that must kill this
sacrifice, that is the mind, the mind must sacrifice the body. Genesis 11.
Be ye changed, as if he should say, Suffer your selves to be changed as Noah
suffered himself to be covered, that is, Grien^ not the spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
do not resist God, be not against your conversion, and GOD will convert you,
God will comfort you, God will renew you. By this renewing of our minds, Paul
calls to our remembrance, that once we had a pure mind, and that we come the
nearer unto God, the nearer we draw to that similitude again. And therefore
the Scripture calls so often for a new man, a new creature, Psalm. 51. 10
a new heart: As ye may read, Psalm. 51. 10. David prays the Lord to create
him a new heart, not to correct his old heart, but to create him a new heart.
Showing that his heart was like an old garment so rotten and tattered, that he
could make no good of it by patching and peecing, but must even cast it off,
and take a new. Therefore Paul says, Cast off the old man: Not pick him and
wash him till he be clean, but cast him off, and begin a new as David did.
Will ye know what this renewing is? It is the repairing of the Image of God,
until we be like Adam when he dwelt in Paradise: As there is a whole old
man, so there must be a whole new man, the old man must change with the new
man, wisdom for wisdom, love for love, fear for fear, his worldy wisdom
for heavenly wisdom, his carnal love for spiritual love, his servile fear
for Christian fear, his idle thoughts, for holy thoughts, his vain words
for wholesome words, his fleshly works for sanctified works.

If the mind must be so renewed, I would know of the Papists where are their
pure naturals, if our naturals were pure, our minds need not to be renewed,
for it is good to be pure, and evil to change it: but because there is no
pureness in us, therefore the Apostle would have us changed. Again, let them
tell me why our minds should be renewed, if we have free will to do good if
we list: But because our minds are so corrupted, that we have no free will
to good, nor will to do good neither, therefore the Apostle would have our
minds renewed. Thus one word of God has battered two Castles of Antichrist.

FINIS.
A looking Glass for Christians.
Romans 12. 3. I say through the grace that is given unto me, to every one that
is among you, that no man presume to understand above that which is meet to
understand, but that he understand according to Sobriety, as God has dealth
to every man the measure of faith.
FIrst of the Preface, and then of the counsel. In the first verse of this
Chapter, Paul persuaded the Romans, by the mercy of GOD toward them, here
he persuades them By the grace of GOD toward him. Paul speaks like a man
in his deathbed. which is set to give good counsel, and goes from one lesson
to another, as though he would speak al with a breath. First he counseled
them to make their bodies serve God, because the body is a servant as well as
the soul, then he forbad them to fashion themselves to the world, because no
man can serve two contrary masters. Then he advised the^ to renew their
minds, because except the mind be reformed, the body will serve but a while.
And he sets them to seek Gods will, because the will of man does seduce
him. And now to make up this Testament (as it were) he admonishes them to
rest in the knowledge of Gods will, and not to search further nor to be proud
of their knowledge, but to use their knowledge to humble their pride. This
lesson may seem vain to the Romans: for they were not yet come to be wise,
and he councelleth the^ not to be too wise. Paul says; That the Gentiles
sought after wisdom: 1. Cor. 1. 22
but he says there, That the preaching of the Gospel seemed foolishnes unto
them, which was wisdom: and therefore God calls them a foolish nation,
because they counted the true wisdom foolishnes, Deuteronomy. 32. 21.
and their own folly wisdom. For this cause there was such emulation
between the Jew and the Gentile, one despised another, because they did not
accord what wisdom was, although both sought for it. Therefore that ye may
not only seek wisdom as the Gentiles did, but find wisdom as Solomon did,
A word of his preface.
Paul lays a foundation for wisdom to stay upon, which he calls Sobriety.
Be wise according to Sobriety, which is this, By the grace of GOD which is
given to me. Because he speaks to all, and his charge is of great moment, and
they which think themselves wise, will hardly be persuaded but that they are
wise: therefore he comes with authority like an ambassador from GOD, and
says, By the grace of GOD which is given to me, that is, by the virtue of
mine Apostleship, which I have not received from men, but from GOD, nor from
earth but from heaven, I charge you that no man among you, whether he be
learned or unlearned, whether he be an hearer or a teacher, presume to know
above that which is meet to know: that is, make himself wiser than he is, or
boast of the graces which GOD has given him, or despise the gifts of God in
other, or rome beyond his calling, or trouble his head with curiosities, but
that he be wise according to sobriety, that is, walk within his vocation,
be humble in his knowledge, and use his gifts to the profit of other, as GOD
has given to every man the measure of faith: that is, remembering that it is a
gift of God, which has dealt gifts to other as well as to him, that they might
do him good, as he may do them good, so that if you ask Paul as the Jews
asked Christ, By what authority do thou this? he shows his letters
Patents from the King himself, by the Grace of God, etc. Well does he call his
Apostleship the grace of God: for he was a persecutor of the same doctrine
which he preached, and therefore if it had not been Gods marvelous grace, he
should never have bin an Apostle. It was as strange to hear that persecuting
Saul was among the Apostles, as to hear that King Saul was among the
Prophets, Act. 13.
but by the grace of God (says Paul) so it is. I did not usurp this calling,
but it was given me. I came not from men, as I did before when I persecuted,
but I am sent from God. do not count mine office a labor or a burden, but I
esteem it a grace, The grace of God both to me and to you. By this Paul
teaches us to receive the ministry of the word as a grace from God: For if
Paul speak by grace, then you hear by grace, as he said, I speak by the
grace of God which is given to me: so you may say, We hear by the grace of
God which is given to us: and therefore I exhort you, as he did the
Corinthians. Receive not the grace of God in vain. 1. Cor. 9. 1.


Now to his counsel: Let no man presume to understand above that which is
meet to understand, but let every man understand according to sobriety. When
the Apostle speaks of things meet to understand, he signifies, that it is
not meet to search all things. It seems that many among the Romans were
sick of our disease, which is, to think our selves wiser than we are:
therefore he which taught them to be wise in all his exhortations before,
teaches them here not to be ouerwise, but sober wise. As God appoints the
Jews a measure, how much Manna they might gather, so Paul appoints the
Romans a measure, how much wisdom they might gather. The Jews measure of
Manna was so much as an Homer would hold, the Romans measure of wisdom is so
much as sobriety would hold. For as the Manna which the Jews gathered over
an Homer did them no good but mold and fuste: so the wisdom which men gather
more than Sobriety, does no good, but puff them and corrupt them, and turn
them either into pride, or into envy, or into wiles, or into strife, or one
cogitation or other, as their superfluous Manna turned into worms: When Paul
entered into this sage doctrine, which I may call the lopping or pruning of
wisdom, which must be kept low, like a man which is given to be pursie and
gross, he summoneth all sorts of men to hear him, as though he spoke of a
fault, like the darkness of Aegipt which went over the whole land: therefore
he exceptes no calling nor person, but cries, I say unto every one, etc. The
wise and the ancient and the learned are to learn this lesson. One thing is
behind says Christ to him which thought be had done all: So one thing is
behind to him which thinks that he knows al. Art thou wise? be not too wise
like thy mother Eve, which would know as much as God. Paul has two suites to
move unto you, The first is, Genesis 3. 7.
that ye would be wise, the other is, that ye would not be too wise, for too
good (we say) is stark naught: So he which is too wise, is a very fool. Nay
(says Solomon) there is more hope of a fool, than of him which is wise in his
own conceit: there is hope of a fool that he may be wise, because he will
hear instruction, but of him which is wise in his own conceit, there is no
hope to make him wise, because he thinks he knows that which he should
learn. For this cause Christ pronounced his woes to the Pharisees, and his
doctrines to the people: Because the whole (says Christ) have no need of a
Physician, that is, they that think themselves wise like the Pharisees, think
they have no need of a teacher, and therefore Christ did not teach them, but
rate them, and teach them which did not think themselves wise. Therefore if we
will be Christ's scholars, we must be Paul's scholars, that is, Presume to
know no more than is meet to know, and then he will teach us as much as is meet
to know.

There is as much need to warn men with Paul, that they be not over wise, as
to warn them with Solomon, to seek wisdom, for there is an error of the
left hand, Prou. 4.
and of the right hand. A man may be as well too wise as too simple, too
careful as too careless, too hasty as too slack, and therefore Solomon
says, Turn not to the left hand, nor to the right. Prou. 4. 27.
And again, Be not too just, neither make thy self too wise, Eccl. 7. 18.
And again, If thou have found honey, eat not too much. All which places do
show, Pro. 25. 16.
that men are given to over reach, like Moses, which when he had heard God,
would needs see him too, which was not possible for man to behold. This is the
last sleight of Satan when he cannot keep men from knowledge, then he casts
how to puff them up with their knowledge, which makes them as vain, as
ignorance made the^ before. Festus did not apply truly, when he said, Act. 26.
that too much learning had made Paul mad: but it is true, that too much
learning has made other mad, and would have made Paul mad too, if he had been
as proud of his learning, as Festus was of his honor: and for all that he was
an Apostle, yet it began to work upon him: 1 Cor. 12.
As he says, I was almost puffed up with the multitude of revelations, he was
not wise above sobriety, but he was almost wise above sobriety. And therefore
he might well sound the retire of wisdom:

Look to your wisdom, and learning, and knowledge, for I my self was almost
puffed up with it. If Paul might learn his own lesson, then it is like that
none here have learned it. The Scribes and Pharisees did not come to Christ,
as the people came to John to ask, Master what shall we do? But these
Rabbis might have come to Christ as well as there scholars came to Christ
disciples: to whom he would have answered like Paul, Be wise unto sobriety.

Five things in my judgment, are to be noted in these words. The first is,
that wisdom is a thing to be desired, for when he says, not above
sobriety, he would have us wise within sobriety. The second is, that every
man affects a kind of wisdom, either according to sobriety, as Paul
counseled the Romans, or above sobriety, as the Romans did before. The third
is, few are wise, as God counts wisdom, and therefore Paul speaks to all,
as though all were to learn this lesson. The fourth is, that sobriety does
show like a glass who are wise, and who are not The last is, that the wisdom
which goes. beyond sobriety, does hurt him which has it, and other. For when
Paul says be wise to sobriety, he implies that who is not so, is in a kind
of distemperature, like one scarce sober. As the meat which is not digested
with exercise, does rumble in the stomach: So the knowledge which is not
digested with sobriety, troubles the brain.

Touching the first point, the forbidden tree seemed to Eve a tree to be
desired, because it would teach them knowledge. Nature taught her that
knowledge was a thing to be desired: Though the Serpent pointed her to a wrong
tree. For in deed the tree of life was the tree of knowledge. and when they
went to the other tree, they changed their knowledge for ignorance, Prou. 4. 7.
as they changed their holiness for wickedness. Beside all other virtues are
called wisdom, to show that wisdom is the bond of virtues, and as much to
be desired as all the rest. Beside, God himself is called wisdom, Prou. 5. 7.
to show, that in nothing we can come nearer God, than in the study of
wisdom. Beside, the word, the spirit and the ministry, are all appointed to
teach wisdom, because other things are not so necessary, Prou. 2. 15.
therefore they have not so many schoolmasters.

Solomon speaking of wisdom, prefers it before silver, to show, that we
should desire it before silver: then before gold, to show that we should desire
it before gold: then before precious stones, to show that we should desire it
before precious stones. Therefore Solomon prayed for wisdom, and Moses studied
for wisdom, and the Queen of Sheba traveled for wisdom, to show that
wisdom will requit all the labors and pains that are taken for her. As
wisdom is excellent above all, so it is affected of all, as oil was, both of
the wise Virgins and the foolish Virgins: Nay, the very name to be wise, is so
plausible, that Paul says the Grecians sought after wisdom, they whom God
called a foolish nation, 1. Cor. 1. 22
The foolish nation (says Paul) sought after wisdom, though he do not say
that they found wisdom. Deu. 32. 2.
And in the second of Matthew we find, that the Gentiles called those men that
were singular amongst them, Math. 2.
by the name of wisemen, as we call them noblemen which are fingular amongst
us, showing that wisemen should be noblemen, or noblemen should be
wisemen, according to the saying of David: Psalm. 2. 10.
Beewise ye which judge the earth. And likewise in Paul, we read that they
which never knew what wisdom meant, yet named themselves Philosophers: Col. 2. 8.
that is Lovers of wisdom, as though there were such a thing behind which all
men should love. Thus wisdom has been a mark, which every man has shot
at, ever since Eve sought to be as wise as her maker. But as an hundred
shoot, and not one hit the white: so some come short of wisdom, and some fly
over, and some go beside, like the arrows which Jonathan shot at David.
Therefore Solomon speaking of wise men says, I have scarce found one among a
thousand. Eccl. 71. 30
Therefore Paul makes a general charge, Isaie to every one, be wise according
to sobriety, as though every one had too much wisdom, or too little. Virtue
is a mean betwixt two vices, which couch so close beside her, that one can
scarce see her. Covetousness on the one side, and prodigality on the other
side, and charity in the midst: pride on the one side, rusticitie on the
other side, and comelines in the midst: Flaterie on the one side, malice on
the other side, and love in the midst: carefulnes one the one side,
carelesnes on the other side, and diligence in the midst: difference on the
one side, presumption on the other side, and faith in the midst: superstition
on the one side, Atheiseme on the other side, and religion in the midst:
ignorance on the one side, curiosity on the other side, and knowledge in the
midst. So that there is but one virtue still for two vices, therefore
extremities bear rule in this world. Either we cry Hosanna, or else
crucifige, either Christ must not wash our feet, or else he must wash our
feet and body too, Act. 28. 3.
either we will have Paul a God, or else we say he is cursed of God, either we
say, touch not, taste not, for it is unclean, or else we say, let us eat and
drink for to morrow we shall die. If we love, we do ouer-loue, if we fear,
we do over fear, if we be careful, we are over careful, if we be merry,
we are over merry, if we be solemn, we are over solemn, if so we cannot be
wise, but we are over wise, so soon as we are thought to know some thing, we
would be thought ignorant of nothing. There is a kind of down or curdle upon
wisdom, like the train of Gentle women, which is more then needs, which we
call the crotchets of the brain which must be weeded out as the tree is lopt
when it grows too thick, or else they will perish the brain, like the skim
which seatheth into the broth. The Scripture speaks of many ancient, and
many rich, and many strong, and many mighty, but of one wise man, and yet that
wise man too before he died, s^ept beyond sobriety. Therefore even as ye
look lest other men's wisdom should deceive you, so look lest your own
wisdom deceive your selves: there is a kind of wisdom, which is more
contrary to wisdom then ignorance, as good corn and bad corn come both to
the market to be sold, and the bad would have as much money as the good: so
true wisdom and false wisdom come both, show both, offer both, praise both,
and as Jacob took Leah for Rachel: so many take the worse for the better. Exo.
7. 70.
Pharao said, Come, let us do wisely: when he went about that which
destroyed him. The Scribes, and the Pharisees and the Elders, took counsel
against Christ, as though they would most wisely prevent their salvation.
Judas would betray his master wisely, and therefore he came with a kiss, and
said, Hail Master, when he betrayed him. Genesis 4.
Cain thought to murder his brother wisely, and therefore he called him a side
into the field, as though he would walk with him, that none might see. Iezabel
thought to kill Naboth wisely, and therefore she suborned false witnesses, and
proclaimed a fast before the murder. Eve thought it wisdom to eat the
forbidden fruit. Genesis 3. 5.
Absalon thought it wisdom to lie with his fathers concubines. 1. Kin. 23. 5
The idle servant thought it wisdom to hide his talent, The false steward
thought it wisdom to deceive his master. All these were wise above sobriety.
Of whom we may say with Paul, Romans (...)
presuming to be wise, they became fools: because they were wise to evil,
their wisdom had but an evil end: All these examples are recorded to give
credit unto this doctrine, Be not wise about Sobriety.

As Paul would have the Galathians zeal according to knowledge, so he would
have the Romans knowledge according to sobriety. He which forbids us to
trust in our riches, and in our friends, and in our strength, forbids us to
trust in our wisdom, Trust not in thine own wisdom. We count the simple,
fools, but God countes the crafty, fools. He which thinks himself wise, is
a fool ipso fact^. And to show that they are most fools of all; the Apostle
says, that God chooses the foolish to confound them. 1. Cor. 1.
It is said, Be merry and wise: but it may be said, Be wise and wise: for
every wisdom is not wise. As the wise men went no further than they were
guided by the star; so a wise man should run no further than he is led by
the word. Mat. 2.
When God has brought thee unto goodness, he says acquiese: set down thy
rest: go no further than goodness: So when thou art come to wisdom, rest
where thou are well, as the Dove did in the Arc. The first blessing which
Christ pronounced to any, Mark 3.
is to the poor in spirit. As Paul would have you rich in knowledge: so
Christ would have you poor in spirit, that is humble in your knowledge, for
the proud knowledge is the diuelles knowledge: and wisdom to the wicked, is
like the Arc unto the Philistines* which did them more hurt than good:
Therefore as God appointed the people their bounds, which they might not
pass, when he talked with Moses in the Mount: so he has appointed certain
precinctes of wisdom, which when we transgress, we may be said to exceed
our commission, like Shemei when he went beyond the river which Solomon forbad
him. The Rail or Pale of wisdom is Sobriety. As wisdom is made ouerseer of
all other virtues, so Sobriety is made ouerseer of wisdom, to measure it
forth in even portions and due reasons, that none of Gods gifts be lost, as
water is unto the wine, to delaie the heat of it, and salt is to meat, to
make it sauourie: So Sobriety is to wisdom, to make it wholesome and
profitable to him which has it, and them which seek it of him. If thou have
found honey (says Solomon) take not too much lest thou surfeit. Pro. 25. 15
Nay if thou have found wisdom, take not too much, lest thou surfeit. There is
a surfeit of wisdom, which is the daungerousest surfeit of all other. When a
man begins like Paul to be puffed up, Number. 12. 3
which was Aaron and Miriams dis^ase, when they murmured against Moses, because
they thought themselves fitter to govern than he. No virtue is better than
wisdom and humility, but if a man be proud of his wisdom and humility:
then the virtue is turned into a vice. If the light be darkness (says Christ)
how great is that darkness? So if our humility be pride, how great is that
pride? If our knowledge be ignorance, how great is that ignorance? Therefore as
we remember, Bewise as Serpents: so let us remember, Be simple as Doves, or
else we drown in our wisdom, like a light that quenches in his own tallowe.

Now that ye may know how to be wise according to Sobriety, there be
certain properties of his sober wisdom, which I will show you. The first,
is not to arrogate to our selves more than GOD has given us. As the man said,
I believe, Lord help my unbelief: Five marks of a wise man.
So the wise man may say, I understand, Lord, help mine ignorance: For one
thing which we know, we are ignorant of a thousand things which we should
know: yet the foolish virgins would be thought as wise as their sisters.

No man can abide to be disgraced of his wit: we had rather seem wicked than
simple. As every bird thinks her own birds fairest: so every man thinks
his own wit ripest. Pro. 30. 12.
There is a generation (says Solomon) which are pure in their own conceit,
but they are not cleansed from their filthiness: So there is a generation, which
are wise in their own conceit, but they are not cleansed from their
foolishnes.

There is a generation of such wise men: but he which is wise in deed says, I
am more foolish than any man. Pro. 20. 2.
He which is called wisdom says, Mat. 11. 29
Learn of me to be humble. And he which was counted the wisest man before
Solomon, Number. 12. 3.
is called the midest man upon the earth. Therefore James describing the
wisdom which is from above, says, that it is a gentle wisdom: the gentle
are not arrogant but the scornful.

The second property is not to glory of any thing in our selves, as James
says, Let him which is merry sing Psalms: So Paul says, Let him which
glories, glory in the Lord: For as we say, Thine is the kingdom, so we
say, Thine is the glory: and therefore David says, Not unto me Lord, not
unto me, etc. Oh (says Satan) this is a thing to glory of, knowledge and
learning and wisdom, or else what should a man be proud of? But when Christ
heard his disciples glory that they had the gift of miracles, which is a
greater matter than knowledge: yet he said, Glory not in this that ye can
work miracles, therefore glory not in this, that ye know him which can work
miracles. If thy wisdom be given thee, then thou have received it, if thou
have received it, then I say with Paul, 1. Cor. 4. 7*
Why do thou glory, as if thou had not received it? Wisdom is not so
base a thing that thine own glory should be the end of it: but as Hester
thought that her honor was given her for the glory of God, so the learned
should think that their learning is given them for the glory of God, the
rich should think that their riches are given them for the glory of God, the
wise should think that their wisdom is given them for the glory of God: the
value and praise and honor of wisdom is to do good, if we be wise to do
evil, we are not as wise as serpents, but wise serpents.

The third property is not to despise other: therefore James calls the true
wisdom a peaceable wisdom, James. 3.
because it makes no strife, as he which had five talents, did not disdain
him which had but one, so they which have more gifts should not contemn them
which have few: For as the Unicorn does more good with one horn than other
beasts do with two, so some man does more good with one gift, than other do
with five, because they choke them with pride. When the Pharisie said, I am
not like this Publican he said true, for then he was not like the Publican in
deed, because the Publican was better than he.

The fourth property is to keep within our calling, he which medleth with
that he has not to do, is compared to one that catches a dog by the
ears, and dare neither hold him still, nor let him go, so he can neither go
forward for want of skill, nor backward for shame. Paul says, he was set a
part to preach the Gospel, so to every work God has set some men apart, and
fitted them to that work, as he did Bezalred to the building of the tabernacle,
and therefore unless a man set himself apart to this work, he should think of
Peter, which when he stroke with the sword was bid to put up his sword again,
for the sword was not committed to him, but the ^eies. In Exodus 17. 11. we
find Joshua fighting, and Moses praying, Exo. 17. 11.
and Aaron and Hur holding up his hands, so every man should have a several
work. God has given certain gifts to certain callings, as no man can
exceed his gifts, so no man should exceed his calling. It is not meet that he
should be a free man, which was never a prentise, nor that he should leap into
Moses chair, that never sat at Gamaliels feet: If thou do never so well,
and be not called to it, the Scripture says straight, Who has required this
of thee? thou art an usurper of another Office. A fool (says Solomon) is
meddling, showing that a wise man medleth not, but where he has to do. We are
compared to a body, some men are like the head, and they must rule: some are
like the tongue, and they must teach: some are like the hand, and they must
work: when this order is confounded, then that comes to pass which we
read of Eve, Genesis 3.
When the woman would lead her husband, both fell into the ditch. Luke 12.
Therefore as Christ said, Who has made me a judge over you? so they which
are not Judges should say, who has made me a Judge? he which is not a teacher
should say, who has made me a teacher? he which is not a ruler should say,
who has made me a ruler? And this is a better peacemaker than the Lawier.

The first property is not to be curious in searching mysteries: this Paul
means, when he says, let no man presume to understand, above that which is
meet to understand: the star when it came to Christ stood still and went no
further, so when we come to the knowledge of Christ, we should stand still and
go no further: for Paul was content to know nothing but Christ crucified: It
is not necessary to know that which God has not revealed, and the well of
Gods secrets is so deep, that no bucket of man can sound it: therefore we must
row in shallow waters, because our boats are light and small, and soon
ouerturned. They which have such crotchets and circumstances in their brain, I
have marked this in them, that they seldom find any room for that which they
should know, but go too and fro, seeking and seeking like them which sought
Elias* body and found it not.

Let men desire knowledge of God, as Solomon did, but not desire knowledge as
Eve did. For these aspiring wits fall again like Babell, and run into doubts,
while they seek for resolutions. As the Jews when they hard the Apostle
preach, burnt their curious books, and had no more delighte to study such
toys, so as men come to the truth, they are content to leave these fancies,
and say with Paul, I know nothing but Christ crucified, Curious questions and
vain speculations are like a plume of feathers, which some will give any thing
for, and some will give nothing for. Paul rebuked them which troubled their
heads about Genealogies, how would he reprove men and women of our days, if
he did se how they busy their heads about vain questions, tracing upon the
pinacles where they may fall, while they might walk upon the pauement without
danger? Some have a great deal more desire to learn where hell is, than to
know any way how they may escape it: to hear what God did purpose before the
world began, rather than to learn what he will do when the world is
ended: to understand whether they shall know one another in heaven, than to
know whether they belong to heaven: this rock has made many shipwracks that
me^ search mysteries before they know principles, like the Bethshanites which
were not content to see the Arc, but they must pry into it and finger it:
commonly the simplest men busy their head, about the highest matters, so that
they meet with a rough and crabbed question, like a knob in the tree, and while
they hacke and hew at it with their own wits, to make it plain, their saw
sticks fast in the clift, and cannot get out again, at last in wrath they
become like male contents with God, as though the Scripture were not perfect,
and either fall into despair, or into contempt of all. Therefore it is good to
leave off learning, where God has left off teaching: for they which have an
ear where God has no tongue, hearke^ not unto God, but to the tempter, as Eve
did to the serpent. This is the rule whereby a man may know whether his
wisdom stand right: as a covetous man is needy in the midst of his riches,
so a proud man is ignorant in the midst of his knowledge. Now, if our
wisdom were examined by these properties, I fear, as the Angel said, Thou
have examined them which called themselves Apostles, Reave. 3.
and found them liars: so I might say, I have examined them which call
themselves wise men, and found them liars. In deed Solomon says, many boast
of their goodness, Pro. 20. 6.
but who can find a good man? So many boast of their wisdom, but who can
find a wise man? They are wise (says he) in their own judgments, but he
says not that they are wise in others judgments, As Paul told the
Athenians, that they were too religious: so he would tell many now that they
are too wise, so wise, that they are fools again. The Galathians zeal was
without knowledge, Col. 2. 3.
but our knowledge is without zeal, having a show of holiness as Paul says: So
they have a show of knowledge. But as the show of holiness is hypocrisy, so the
show of wisdom is vanity. If they which think themselves wise, be wise;
then we have more wise me^ then beggars, and peradventure here be more wisemen,
then of any other beside.

As you have heard the notes of them which are wise according to sobriety: So
if you would know such as are wise above sobriety, you shall discern the^ by
these marks. First, they will have all the talk wheresoever they come, like
parrats. Secondly they contemn other like the Pharisees. Thirdly, they spurn
at him which tells them of their fault, like Abner. Fourthly, they iumpe with
Caesar, like the Herodians. Fifthly they turn with the time, like Demas.
Sixthly, they seek their own credit by the discredit of others, like the
enemies of Paul. Seuenthlie, they love to hear their own praise, like
Herod. Eighthly, above al things they would have their own will, like Iezabel.
Whenever these eight marks meet, there is a wise man, and a fool, a wise
man in his own conceit, and a fool in proof: these are the wisemen of the
north, and the Philosophers of England.

Thus you have heard the wisdom which is according to sobriety. If any man
do see the spots of his own face in this glass, let him wash and be
clean. He that is wise (says Solomon) is wise to himself, but he that is
over wise, is wise against himself: here you may see: that note above Ela is
a iarring note and always maks a discord in the harmony. Christ would not have
us wise Serpents, but as wise as serpents, lest they which are like serpents
should circumuent us, to be wise to evil is an evil wisdom, and there is no
such enemy unto knowledge, as the opinion of knowledge: for one which is
wedded unto his own wit, will never be counseled of any. Therefore how
necessary it is to remember this doctrine, and God grant we may remember it.
I cannot tell how, no man can serve GOD, unless he know GOD: for none do
obey him except they which do know him, and yet it is said that there was
never so much knoweledge and so little goodness. Surely as Christ said to his
Disciples, O ye of little faith, so he might say to us, O ye of little
understanding: for there is not too much wisdom, but too much ostentation,
Humility is none of our virtues. They which should teach others to be wise
according to sobriety, pass the bonds of sobriety themselves: every man
has a commonweal in his head, and travels to bring forth new fashions. As
the Jews were not content with such rulers as God had appointed them, but
would have a king like the Gentiles. As the Papists are not content with such
laws as God has appointed them, but they will have traditions like the Jews:
So the wisdom of this world is, to devise better orders, better laws,
better titles, better callings, better discipline, than God has devised
himself. Every plant says Christ, which my father has not planted shall be
rooted up, that is, every title, and every office, and every calling, which
God has not planted, shall be rooted up: to be wise according to this book,
is to be wise according to sobriety. Therefore seek the wisdom of Christ,
for the wisdom of the serpent is turned to a curse, the wisdom of the
Pharisees is turned to a woe, the wisdom of Achitophell is turned to folly,
the wisdom of Nimrod is turned to confusion, the wisdom of the steward is
turned to expulsion, the wisdom of Iezabel is turned to death. This is the
end of the deceivers wisdom, of the extortioners wisdom, of the usurers
wisdom, of the persecutors wisdom, of the flatterers wisdom, of the
sorcerers wisdom, of the hypocrites wisdom, of the Macheuelians wisdom. As
Moses serpent devoured the sorcerers serpent: so Gods wisdom shall devour
man's wisdom.

Wherefore by the grace of God which is given unto me, I say unto every one of
you with Paul, Be wise unto sobriety, be not ashamed to seem ignorant of
some things, but remember that it is better to seem ignorant, than to be
proud. Thus you have heard what wisdom is, now let us pray unto God for it.

Food for newborn babes.
1. Pet. 2. 2. As newborn babes disire the sincere milk of the word, that ye
may grow by it.
THis Scripture (beloved in the Lord) contains an exhortation to in^^re and
stir up the believing Jews, that as God had illightned them with some
knowledge of his truth, and sanctified them in some measure with the grace of
his spirit: so they would proceed and grow on and daily increase more and more
in the faith and fear of Jesus Christ, like the glorious sun which still
augmenteth and redoubleth his heat and light, till it be come to the midst
of heaven, where is perfect day. Now the means whereby we receive all our
grouth and increase in God, is the lively preaching of the word of truth. And
therefore the Apostle by a figurative, and borrowed kind of speech, earnestly
pressing them to thirst and to long for the word of God, even the food of
their souls, as little infants (which are newborn) cry for the mothers
milk to nourish and sustain them. For there are two birthes mentioned in the
Scripture: the one fleshly, and natural by propagation from the first Adam,
whereby original and our birth-sin, as it were a Serpents poison, passes and
transfuseth it self into us: the other heavenly and spiritual by renouation,
from the second Adam which is Jesus Christ, whereby grace and holiness is
derived and brought unto us.

In this latter and better birth, God is our Father to beget us, the Church his
spouse our mother to conceive us, 1. Pet 1. 2.
the seed whereby we are bredde and borne again, Gal. 4. 6.
is the word of God, 1. Pet. 1. 29.
the Nurses to feed, and to weane, 1. These. 2. 7
and to cherish us, are the Ministers of the Gospel, and the food whereby we
are nourished, and held in life, is the milk of the word, as in this place.
And therefore in as much as children which are new borne, cannot increase in
grouth and stature, but must needs die, and come to dissolution, unless they
be continually fed and nourished with wholesome food: it behooves all the
faithful and godly, who are quickened and revived in the life of God, as newborn babes to desire the sincere milk of the word, that they may grow by it.
I think we need not many words to clear the general drift and scope of this
Scripture, as we need not many fingers to point at the shining sun. Let us now
therefore descend to the particular doctrines which issue and spring from the
several branches of this scripture.

First here is noted a preparation, if we will be bettered and increased by the
word, we must be as newborn bares. Secondly, our affection and duty
when we are new borne we must desire. Thirdly the matter and object of our
desire, the milk of the word. Fourthly, the quality of the milk, it must
be sincere. Lastly, the end and use for which we desire it, Mat. 18. 4.
that we may grow thereby. For the first point we must be as newborn babes:
1. Cor. 14. 20
Children we know are principally commended for simplicity and harmelesnes:
and therefore all those which will profit in the school of Christ and receive
light and comfort by the preaching of the word, are here taught to become as
babes, to lay aside all maliciousness, and to bring holy and sanctified
hearts to the hearing of it. Luke 18. 29
Suffer the little babes to come unto me (says our savior) and forbid them
not: for of such is the kingdom of heaven: as if we were never fit to hear
and learn of Christ, til we be reformed and newly changed into little babes
again. For the secrets of the Lord (as the Psalmist speaks) is with them
that fear him: Psalm. 25. 14
to teach us, that as David would admit no vile person into his counsel: So
God will admit no sinful soul into his secrets. If any man will do Gods
will, (says our Savior) he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of God or
no, John. 7. 17
because no man can learn this doctrine, but he that does it, Reave. 14. 3
as no man could learn the Virgins song, but they which sang it. And Solomon
to the same effect says, The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge,
Prou. 1. 17.
as if the first lesson to be wise, were to be holy: and therefore Christ is
said to have expounded all things to his Disciples apart, to show, that if we
will have Christ to teach us, we must go a part from the world. So that as a
man slippeth off all his clothes, when he goes into a bath to wash him: So we
must slip off all our sins, when we come to the word to feed us: for wisdom
will not rest in the defiled soul, nor in a body that is subject unto sin.
As the Devil would not dwell but in a house that was swept from godliness:
Luke 11. 25.
so the graces of God will not come unto the heart which is not cleansed from
wickedness, for God will not power new wine but into new vessels: therefore
unless ye have prepared new hearts, Math. 9. 17
look for no new blessings to be powered on you. The Jews read the Scriptures
daily in their Synagogues to find Christ, but all in vain, because the veil
is not taken away in reading them: Even so do we preach in vain, and you
hear in vain, because the veil of sin which is drawn like a Curtain over
your hearts, hides and eclipseth the glorious light of the Gospel from you.
And therefore (beloved brethren) if you will have the Lord to bless your
hearing, and to prosper our preaching, you must wash and rince out the dregs of
sin that are frozen in you, you must purge the leaven of maliciousnes that
sowreth your souls, you must cast up your covetousness, and your pride, and
your slothfulnes, and your partial prejudice, like the serpent which spues up
his poison when he goes to drink: For this is the cause why there are so many
fruitless and non-proficient hearers, because there are so many sinful and
wicked hearers. It is said of Christ, Mat. 13. 11
that he did not many great works in his own country for their vnbeliefs
sake: so it may be said, that GOD concealeth many great mysteries of faith from
us for our sins sake. Our wickedness stops Christ's mouth that he will not
speak, as the Jews incredulity chayned his hands that he would not work.
Will an Embroderer teach an other man's servant his trade, if he know he will
hurt him? No more will God teach the Devils servants his truth, because he
knows they will offend him. The seed which fell into the thornie ground,
sprang up very cherefully for a time, that it might seem to give great hope of
a joyful harvest: but because thorns grew up with it, Mat. 13. 22
at length they choked it: so that unless we cut up the thornie sins which
naturally sprout and spring up in us, they will overthrow all the good plants
of holy doctrine that are graffed in us: and therefore the Prophet Jeremy
wills us to break up the fallowe ground, Iere. 4. 4.
and not to sow among thorns, as if the heart must first be sanctified, and
afterward instructed, as iron must first be heated, and afterward be
fashioned. In regard whereof, I beseech you (my beloved) in the fear and
reverence of Gods blessed name, look to your feet when ye enter into the
house of GOD: press not into this marriage feast without a Wedding garment,
tread not into the holy Sanctuary to hear the word, with an unsanctified,
and a defiled, and a filthy soul.

A man will not keep the Sabbath in his working apparel, but will put on his
richest iewelles, and array himself in his best attire, and yet we make it no
seruple at all to come unto the Sabbaoths exercise with a profane, and a
wicked, and our workie day heart. When Nadab and Abihu offered strange fire
before the Lord, Leu. 10. 3.
God said, I will be honored in them that draw nigh unto me, to show that
the Lord does then look for more holiness at our hands, when by practice of his
service, and the duties of holy religion, we approach to draw more near unto
him. Wherefore, to shut up this point; as the beggar (in the Gospel) cast off
his cloak to come to Christ: so must we cast off the cloak of our wickedness,
when we come to hear. We must be as babes, Mat. 11. 25
if we will be Christ's pupilles; because he reuealeth knowledge and wisdom
to none but babes. And yet we must not be babes only, but new borne babes,
which have a new soul, a new life, new members, new affections imparted to
them. Whereby we learn, that it is not enough in our regeneration, to
redress and reform some one disordered affection in us, but we must be
changed and new fashioned in every part. 1. Sa. 10. 9.
As Saul when the kingly spirit came upon him, was turned as it were into
another man: So we when the word begets us a new, must be turned and
changed into other men, and therefore they which are implanted into Christ, 2.
Cor. 5. 17.
are called new creatures, because neither the old hearn, nor the old hand,
nor the old ear, nor the old eye, will serve the turn, but all must be
(...) and new framed again. Ioh. 3. 6.
For whatsoever is borne of the flesh, is flesh: If we will have it spirit,
that is fit for Gods worship, who is a spirit, Ioh. 4. 24
and will be worshipped in spirit and truth, it must be borne again of the
spirit. The sense hereof made the Prophet David cry out, Psalm. 51. 10
Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me: and
therefore we must not patch and piece up our hearts for GOD like a beggars
cloak which is made of shreds, but we must be renewed and thoroughly changed in
the spirit of our minds. When Naaman the leper had washed in Jordan, his
flesh came again like the flesh of a young child: If the leprosy of sin be
washed and purged from us, al our affections, and all our desires will be
altered and changed like the flesh of a child. And therefore if we will fit
our selves to be good hearers, we must not entertain friendship with any
sin. As the Adder slippes off her skin, and the Eagle casts her bill: so
we must quite slip our selves of all our lusts, when as new borne babes we
come to hear.

Touch no unclean thing, 2. Cor. 6. 17
says the Lord, because sin will cling to the conscience like bird-lime to a
feather, therefore we must not touch it: it must not have a finger of us. When
the Devil made his reentrie, he took unto himself seven other spirits worse
then Ioh. 15. 5.
himself. Thus one devil brings more devils, and one sin pulles on more
sins, as one crow calls many crows to a carrion: and therefore as the
leaven was hid in the meal till all was sowred: so let us never rest seasoning
our souls till all be sanctified: for then we be fit to understand every
part of Gods will, when we be in every part new borne again.

Furthermore, this point discovers and descrieth a gross error in Popery,
concerning the works of nature, which are wrought and effected by the single
virtue and power of our own free will without the finger and grace of GOD. For
whereas the Papists acquit many of them, and clear them from sin, as if an
unregenerate man, by the strength and ability of his own will, as it were
mounted upon his own wings, were able to aspire to the accomplishment of holy
desires: we see that the Apostle in this place makes no other account of the
unregenerate, Ephesians. 4. 14.
then of dead men: and therefore that they must be quickened and newborn
again, before they can practice or perform any vital action in the life of
GOD. Christ is resembled to a vine, and we to the branches: for that all the
juice and sap whereby the branches spring and live, issues and arises from
the root of the vine: so all the grace and goodness that is in us, droppeth
and distilleth from the riches of the person of Jesus Christ. Before GOD
blessed Sara, she was barren, and childlesse: so until God bless our hearts,
they be wicked, and fruitless. And therefore as an unclean fountain cannot
send forth sweet water, nor a bad tree bring forth good fruit: no more can
the corrupt and wicked heart of the unregenerate, bud and bring forth any
good and virtuous actions. Thus much of our condition and preparation, whereby
we have learned with how holy, and with how sanctified affections, we ought
to repair to the hearing of the word. Now follows our duty and affection
when we are new borne.

As new borne babes desire. We must not be children in wavering and
inconstancy, because the Apostle says, that GOD has furnished his Church
with Pastors and Teachers, Mat. 12. 41
That we be no more children wavering and carried about with every wind of
doctrine, reeling from faith to faith, from religion to religion, like a
drunken man from wall to wall. Nor we must not be children in understanding and
knowledge, because the same Apostle says, 1. Cor. 14. 20.
Brethren be not children in understanding, but concerning maliciousnes be
children, but in understanding be of a ripe age. But we must be children in
an ardent and burning affection, in thirsting and longing for the word of God.
Blessed are they which hunger and thirst after righteousness, Matthew. 7. 6.
for they shall be filled, because God filles the hungry with good things,
but the rich and the wealthy he dismisseth empty. The kingdom of God
suffers violence, because none can enter at the narrow gate, but such as
strive, and throng and thrust to enter. And therefore as when the damme feeds
her young, every bird gapeth, and struggleth, and stretches out the neck to
receive the food: So when we come to hear, every man must reach, and stretch
out his heart to receive the word. For then indeed the word works most
effectually in us, when our hearts before are kindled and inflamed with desire
of it, like wax which receives any stamp after it is heated. The Shunamites
child which was raised by Elisha, so soon as his flesh began to wax warm,
neesed, and opened his eyes, and revived again: So when we wax warm in the
spirit, and conceive a desire and a thirst of the word of GOD, it is an
undoubted token that we are borne again, that there is breath and a soul
within us, and we are not utterly dead in the life of grace. As contrariwise,
they which have not a sharp and hungry appetite to be fed and satisfied
with the milk of the word, are but dead carcasses, and skins full of rotten
bones: so that this City which should be the glory of the kingdom, may
well be termed Golgotha, The place of dead men's skulles, in regard there are
so many thousand souls dead in sin, dead in desire, who have no thirst and
hunger for the word of God. If they have a bare reading Minister, as children
have a puppit to play with, they think themselves in a happy state: as if
Elishaes staff could raise the dead child without Elisha, and the word give
life without a preacher. It may be they can be content with Micah, to accept
a Leuite if they light upon him: But who will send to Jerusalem the school
of the Prophets, as Saul sent to Bethelem to fetch David for his comfort? I
think you know my meaning. I would not wish you wait till preachers offer
themselves to instruct you, but to send to the schools of learning, to
provide godly and able men, who may minister the word in due season. Balaake,
because he longed for Balaam, went to the utmost coast of the country to meet
him. The father, because he longed for his prodigal son, ran to kiss him
a great way off. David because he longed for the Arc, went and brought it up
from Kiriathaim: So then indeed we desire the word of God, when we will not
stay till it come unto us, but we will prevent it, and go to the utmost
borders of our country to fetch it home unto us. We must desire the milk of
the word, and we must desire it as babes, that is, in three respects.

First they say children so soon as they are borne into the world, presently
cry out for the mothers dugge: so must we so soon as we feel the grace of
God to have renewed us, while we are yet hot from the womb, hunger and
thirst for the milk of the word. If the mother should defer to give her
child suck, were it able to live a month, or a week, or a day? No more is
our faith able to sustain and support it self, unless it be presently
nourished with the food of life. Mar. 5. 46.
Christ so soon as he had raised up Iairus daughter, commanded her meat, as
if it were in vain for us to be quickened by the finger of his power unless we
be fed by the word of his grace: and therefore Eden was watered so soon as it
was planted, Genesis 2. 6.
to show that we must be strengthened so soon as we are instructed: so that it
is a great fault among us, when GOD has quickened us with his spirit, and we
perceive his graces to budde and to blossom in us, that we presently provide
not moisture to nourish and to preserve them. We count it a miracle that Elias
lived forty days without food: and yet we after many years of famine still
post off the feeding of our souls. We think it always too soon to begin,
though we begin then when we are ready to end, as the rich man, who then went
in hand to enlarge his barnes, when he was even at deaths door to resign his
life. As Christ was then sent for to heal the Rulers daughter, Mar. 7. 23.
when she was ready to depart: so, many never desire the preachers company
till they be ready to die. They say that the time is not yet come that the
Lords house should be built: not yet time to sanctify their souls for God;
not yet time to provide for the milk of the word. And thus we post off from
day to day, from year to year, till we be arrested by death: As the bad
Lawyer drives off his Client from term to term, till the suite be lost. Lot
was so long loytering and trifling in Sodom, that the Angel was feign to
pluck him out with violence; and certainly unless the Lord by the good
means of his providence should pluck us out of ignorance and darkness
wherein we use such trifling, and plunging, and delaying, that scarce one of a
thousand would be saved.

Wherefore (beloved in Christ) if Paul have planted you in the true faith,
desire also an Apollo to water you: If the foundation be laid by a master
builder: seek out a skillful workman, who may roof it also: if ye have
received one grace, speedily desire the preaching of the word, that it may
increase and grow up by dressing and manuring unto a double grace: for even the
best gifts will wither and decay in you, unless they be presently watered
with the word.

Again we know, that children are so greedily carried with a desire of the
food, that when hunger assayles them, they neither regard leisure, nor
necessity, nor willingness of the mothers, but all excuses and business set
apart, so soon as they cry for it, they must be fed; Even so we must not
think it enough to desire the word, but we must be earnest and fervent, and
importunate in calling and crying for it. A notable parable is in Luke, Luke
11. 5.
how one called for bread in the night, the other answered that he was in bed;
which seemed a reasonable answer, and yet it would not serve: So we have long
called (my brethren) and we have a great while craved the bread of life,
though it may seem a reasonable answer, that they cannot give it us without
impouerishing themselves and their children, who are fat and enriched with the
Ministers mayntenance: yet we ought not to be daunted and discouraged so, but
to continue asking still, as Peter continued knocking til the door was opened.
Act. 12.
For as Iehu was known by his furious marching; so you may know a faithful
and true Christian, by his zealons perfecting of holy purposes. The mother does
not always feed her child for love, but many times to keep it still and
quiet, is constrained to leave all, and give it suck: So if our mother neither
reverenced God, nor feared men, yet if we would be earnest and importunate with
her, if we would continually cry and call for it, as babes do for the milk,
she would feed us at last, if not of love, yet at least to be eased of us. It
is an old saying, that he which asks faintly teaches us to deny him: If we
will teach men to grant us, we must ask it with courage and constancy. And
therefore as Jacob wrestled with the Angel and said, I will not let thee go
until thou bless me: so must our requests wrestle with the Governors of our
land, and say, I will not let you rest until you hear me.

This doctrine enditeth and conuinceth a great number of us, who though we have
a desire to the word, yet we are so chill and so cold, and so loose in it,
that in every cross event, we stand stone still. If it be but a straw it is a
block in our way, Ier. 9. 3.
because as Jeremy speaks, We have no courage for the truth upon earth: we
have some love to the truth, but we have no courage to labor and adventure
for it, as a merchant that would gladly gain, but dares not venture the seas
for fear of drowning. If the people be somewhat backward or a Preacher cannot
be procured at the first dash, while the fit is fresh upon us, we take our
discharge, and cast off the care for ever after. The slothful man says,
There is a Lion in the way: And so we discourage our selves in seeking good
things, because there is pains in the way. But if we desire the word, as babes
do milk, we must never rest to desire it, until we have it.

Lastly, we know, children are continually craving food; a little pause, and
then to the breast again: and therefore we must not be gorged and glutted
with once serving, but continually desire it: We must be of Elias diet, bread
and flesh in the morning, and at evening too; So morning and evening our souls
must be fed. The Apostle exhorts, Let the word of GOD dwell in you, Col.
3. 16.
because it must not take up a nights lodging and so be gone, but it must be a
continual residence and abode in our hearts. Though the ground be good, yet it
must have the former and the latter rain to make it fertile, and yet many of
us think to grow green with one shower, and to go unto heaven with one
sermon. It is reported of the faithful, that they continued daily in the
temple, as if a Sabbath days exercise would not serve the turn, Act. 2. 6.
unless we had some ordinary repast in the work days also: and therefore as
the lamp burned continually in the Temple without quenching: So the word must
continually sound in our ears without intermission. Thus you see (beloved)
that if you will desire the milk of the word as new borne babes, you must
desire it presently without delay, importunately without fainting, and
continually without loathing, and being satisfied with it.

Now we come to the matter and object which we must desire; namely, our food
and nourishment in Christ, which is here called the milk of the word. To this
our Savior recalleth us from al our dayn^^^s, Ioh. 6. 27.
Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for the meat which endures to
eternal life. For the word is everlasting food and immortal seed, because it
makes us immortal, 1. Pet. 4. 23.
and to last for ever. We desire wealth, honor, and pomp, and pleasure, and
every thing, save the milk of the word which we should desire, like Adam who
had al trees, and yet liked none but the forbidden tree. Mat. 13. 22
There is a desire of the word, but it is a tare to choke the good corn;
There is a desire of money, but it is the root of al evil; 1. Tim. 6.
There is a desire of the flesh, but it fights and wageth war against the
spirit; Iam. 4. 1.
There is a desire of pre-eminence, but it is swelling and ambitious; There is
a desire of revenge, but it arises from a rash and carnal spirit; There is a
desire of praise, but it is cursed and pharisaicall; Luke 9. 54
the blessed and holy desire is, to desire the milk of the word. When Jonathan
saw the honey dropping, he must needs be licking: so when ye see the milk of
the Gospel ye must desire to be sucking. Of all the blessings of Canaan this was
the chiefest, that it flowed with milk and honey; and this encouraged the
Israelites to trauail to it, in the desert to possess it. The word is a land
flowing with better milk and honey, and we must not think any pain or toil
too much to attain it. Ioh. 12. 45.
God has many names in Scripture to make us conceive more honorably of him: so
has the word many titles to make it more amiable: It is called a lantern to
direct us, Psalm. 119. 10
a medicine to heal us, a guide to conduct us, a bit to restrain us, a sword
to defend us, water to wash us, fire to inflame us, salt to season us, milk to
nourish us, wine to rejoice us, rain to refresh us, a treasure to enrich us,
and the keye to open and unlock heaven gates unto us. Thus the word is named
in all things, that we should only desire it in stead of all things. And surely
therefore the word is in so small request among us, because we know not what
blessings it brings with it. It is the word of salvation, because it saves
the soul from pyning, as the corn which Joseph sent, did Jacobs house from
famine. So that as Elisha said of Jordan, wash and be cleansed; so may we say
of the word, Hear it and be saved. It is called the word of life, because it
reuiueth the spirit, as Elishaes bones revived the Israelites. It is called
the word of reconciliation, because it is like a golden chain to link GOD
and us together. And in regard hereof, Mat. 13. 16
it is called a jewel of inestimable price, as if all the treasure in Egypt
were not wealthy enough to buy it. And therefore, as David longed for the Well
of Bethlehem; so must we long and languish for the milk of the word.

The Word is resembled to milk in three respects. First, because it is the
only food of the faithful, as milk is the only and proper food of babes.
Secondly, because it is not hard and intricate, but plain and easy to be
conceived, as milk is easy to be digested. Thirdly, because it is sweet and
comfortable to the soul, as milk is sweet and pleasant in taste.

For the first point, the Lord charge the Israelites, Deu. 12. 32.
to do whatsoever he had commanded, and not to add or diminish any thing.
And Joshua, Josiah, Ezra, and the rest, when the^ would renew the Lords
covenant with the people, read nothing but the law, to show that it was the
only rule and square of al their duty: Esaias. 8. 20.
and therefore Esaias recalleth us to the law and to the testimony, etc. and
Christ sends us to search the Scriptures, John. 5. 39*
because by them we have eternal life: and therefore the Popish church (which
nor content with the milk of the Gospel) has broached many heathen
traditions, and unwritten trash; does not feed but choke and poison her
children with them, and deprive the Lords people of this food of life, and
like cursed Philistines stop up the wells of water which other have dug:
what do they else but starve and famish so many Nations? For well may their
hedge priests like dry Nurses delight and disport the children for a season;
but when hunger bites; when the distressed conscience would be fed and
comforted, then they are not able to affoorde them the very crummes from
Christ's table, and therefore we must needs account the estate of those
congregations to be full of dread and horror which have not this milk of the
word to feed their souls, which want a good steward to give them their meat
in due season; which like the Egyptians lie crawling in the dark, when other
churches enjoy most comfortable light. Iaacob forsook the blessed land of
Canaan when it had no bread, and can we be enamored of those assemblies where
there is no souls food? If ye did consider (my beloved) that ye cannot be
nourished unto eternal life, but by the milk of the word; ye would rather
desire your bodies might be without souls than your churches without preachers.
I tremble to think how often you have heard this, and yet how little you have
performed it. For the second point, that the doctrine of the Gospel is plain,
appears, when the wise man says, All the words of his mouth are plain and
easy to him that will understand. Pro. 8. 9.
The testimony of the Lord is sure and gives light to the simple. Psalm. 19. 7
If our Gospel be hid (says the Apostle) it is hid unto them that perish: 2
Cor 4. 3.
for as the Sun which was made to lighten all things, is most light; so the
word which was made to clear all things, is most clear: so that if there be
no communion between light and darkness, Psalm. 119. 5
and the word of God be a lantern unto our feet, and a light unto our paths;
then it is evident that the Word has no darkness in it. If we see not all
things, the fault is not in the light, but in the eye; as Agar could not see
the water which yet was before her, and therefore our adversaries falsely charge
the Scriptures of exceeding hardness and intricatenes* When the spies were
returned from Canaan^ they could not say, Number. 13.
but that it was a good land; but they said it was hard to come by: So the
Papists must needs confess, that the Scripture is a good Word, and yet to
dissuade the Lords people from a serious and diligent search of it; they bring
up a slander and say; it has many obscurities and bypathes. But as Elisha saw
the horses and fiery chariots which his enemies could not see: So (beloved) if
ye come with a faithful and a holy heart to the Word and to the Scripture,
ye shall see that plainness and easiness in the doctrine which our
adversaries cannot see. For the third point, that the Gospel is the only
comfort and consolation of a faithful soul; The Prophet Jeremy says, Thy
words were found by me, and I did eat them, Ier. 15. 16.
and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of my heart. Thy testimonies
have I taken for an heritage for ever: Psalm. 119. 111
for they are the joy of my heart. As a man will be glad to be hired to a
noble man: so David when he had gotten the milk of the Word, rejoiced as
much as if he had been hired unto God: and therefore, in all the story of the
Acts, we see joy and comfort to have followed the word, as Elisha followed
Elias, and would not leave him. So the wise men rejoiced exceedingly when they
saw the star which should lead them to Christ: so ye have matter of great
joy and comfort, when ye hear the word preached which shall carry you to
heaven, like the chariots which conveyed Iaacob into Egypt. There be many
Micols in this land which have mocked King David for dancing before the Arc.
There are many which term us heady and foolish men, because we come and
throng, and prease thus to a sermon: but as Christ said, Father forgive them,
they know not what they do; So God forgive them, they know not what they say:
for if they did feel the calm of conscience, the joy of heart, the
consolation of spirit, and the exceeding and everlasting comforts in God,
which the faithful possess and enjoy by hearing the word, they would account
us not only fools, but stark mad, if all the pleasures, or profits, or
dangers of the world should withdraw or with-holde us from it. So much for
our food; now we come to the quality of our food.

It must be sincere. Sincere both in his savor, and also in effect and
operation: for, as in nourishing our body naturally, our blood cannot be good
if our diet be unwholesome: so in feeding our souls spiritually, neither our
hearts nor affections, nor our words, nor our works can be good, unless the
milk be wholesome whereupon we feed, and therefore, as our Savior b^ds us
take heed what we hear: so the Apostle to the like effect, Math. 4. 24.
gives a caveat to take heed upon what we feed; for there is a pure and fresh
doctrine, in. Ier. 1. 7. and there is a sower and leauened doctrine, in Matthew.
16. 6. There is a new wine of the Gospel in Matthew. 9. 17. and there is mixed
wine in the cup of Fornicators in Reu. 17. 4. There are wholesome words in 2.
Tim. 1. 13. and there are corrupt and unwholesome words, Ephesians 4. 29. There is a
doctrine of God, Ioh. 7. 16. and there is a doctrine of Devils. 1. Tim. 4. 1.
There is an edifying and a building word, and there is a fretting and a
cankred word, 2. Tim. 2. 17. As the Prophets children cried out death in the
pot; so some places may say, death in our food: and hereof it is, that we are
so often for warned in Scripture to beware of the leaven of the Scribes and
Pharisees; to take heed of the Prophets which come to us in sheep clothing:
to beware that no man seduce us through Philosophy: to try the spirits
whether they be of God or no; as we must taste our food before we digest it:
to try our gold before we treasure it: Christ tasted the vinegar but would
not drink; so when we taste false doctrine we must reject it. There are many
greedy of milk, but it is Dragons milk: they take great pains to learn, but
it is to learn the language of Ashdod, and not the language of Canaan: they
run to hear, but to hear fables and untruths. Nimrod was as paineful in
building of Babel, as Solomon in rearing the holy temple. Micah entertained a
Leuit, and consecrated his silver but to an idolatrous worship. The Israelites
melted their eare-rings, but to erect a calfe. Iezabel fed a great rout of
trencher chaplains, but to honor Baal. Many desire to have milk, but they will
have it from dragons poisoned; and therefore we are here warned to desire the
sincere milk, etc. For the Lord will not have the wine of his word to be
mingled and mashed with the water of humane inventions. He that has my word,
Ier. 23. 28.
let him speak faithfully: what is the chafe to the Wheat? God would not have
one field sowed with two kinds of grain; to show us that he would not have
one heart filled with two kinds of doctrine. Dagon could not stand with the
Lord's Ark; no more can Christ's truth hold any fellowship with the word of
error: and therefore as the ministers must beware that they make not
merchandise of the word of God, so must the people also, that they drink not
any milk but that which is sincere. And here ye ought (my beloved) more
carefully to behave your selves, as ye see the devil more subtly to assault
you, and under the cloak of zeal and reformation, to bring into the Lords
sanctuary most wicked profanation.

As a man will be more wary to try every piece of gold, when he sees many
counterfeit and Flemish angels to fly abroad: so, when ye see many sorts of
doctrine, crawling daily like Locusts out of the bottomless pit, ye must be
more diligent to taste and try which is sound and sincere. It follows:

That ye may grow by it. Here is the end of our hearing, That we may grow in
grace and increase in the faith of righteousness: for the faithful are called
the trees of righteousness, Esaias. 61. 3.
because they must be always springing: 1. Pet. 2* 3.
living stones, because they must grow in the building: Mat. 25. 16
good servants, which must trade and traffic the Lords talents to increase:
fruitful branches, Ioh 15. 2.
which must be purged and pruned by the hand of the heavenly husbandman. Isaac
must not always hang on Saraes breast, but must be weaned: so we must not
always be children, but grow up and increase and profit more and more. As the
star never ceased till it came over Christ; so we must never rest walking till
we come to GOD. If we have faith, we must proceed from faith to faith: Ioh.
1. 17.
if we have love, 1. The. 3. 12
we must increase and abide in love: Ioh. 2. 17.
if we have zeal, we must endeavor to be consumed with zeal: if we be
liberal to the distressed saints of GOD, we must double our liberality, as
Elkana gave Annah a double portion.

If we read the Scriptures, 1. Tim. 4. 13
we must go on and continue in prayer: Ioh. 12. 12.
if we give alms, we must step on one foot further, 2. Cor. 9. 7.
and give them with cheerefulnes: and thus as the Eagle continually soareth
till she come to the highest: so must we still increase till we come to
perfection. Let us be led forward unto perfection: Heb. 6. 1.
as if a faithful man were like a ship under sail, never anchoring till he
arrive at heaven. The greater is our sin which hear, and hear, but are
never the more reformed for our hearing, like Pharaohs ill favored kine which
devoured the fat kine, but remained as il favored as they were before; so many
of us, when we have lugged the breast almost dry, after twenty or thirty
years feeding, are as skregged and lean as we were before. No man almost
among us is more zealous, no man more faithful, no man more constant for the
truth, no man more fervent in religion, no man more sanctified, no man more
diligent in practicing, nor less vicious now, then he was one hundred sermons
a go, as if we were night black-rauens, which cannot be washed with all the
soap of the Gospel. Though we have long heard and still desire to hear, yet we
do not grow by our hearing, we are very dwarfes in Christ scant able to go,
little in faith, little in love, little in patience, little in obedience,
little in zeal, like Zacheus, so little that we cannot see Christ. This is an
undoubted evidence that we have not fleshly but stony hearts, which though they
be washed, yet they cannot be watered with the sweet showers of the Gospel:
For, is there not in every tavern, and in every shop, and in every house, and
in every hall, as much covetousness, as much briberie, as much cosening, as much
wantonness, as much maliciousnes after this long shine of the word, as there was
before? Are we not now as slothful in Gods service, as dissolute in the
practice of Christian duties, as dishonest in our dealing between man and man,
as proud in our attire, as light in our behavior, as hypocritical abroad, as
sinful at home, as we were before? And what is the reason hereof, but that
we come to the fountayn rather, to draw, than to drink: rather to hear, than
to be bettered, and sanctified, and increased by our hearing? One sort hears
not at all, like Eutichus which was sleeping when Paul was preaching: Act. 20.
9.
another sort forgets all as Nabuchadnezzar did his dream, the most sort
remembers all, but will make no practice of it as a Carpenter which should
square all by rule, and sticks it at his back, and works all by aim. But
assuredly (my beloved) it were better you never heard, then thus in despite of
God to abuse your hearing. If I had not spoken unto them (says Christ) they
should have had no sin, Ioh. 15. 22.
but now have they no cloak for their sin. What cloak can ye have when God
offers grace, and ye wilfully refuse it? As meat, the more a man receives,
the more it distempereth, if it be not digested; so the more ye learn, and
the more ye hear, the greater is your sin if ye grow not by it: if the
servant which hid his talent in a napkin was so handled, what shall be done to
them which suffer their talent to perish? And therefore every man must beware
how he hears, every man must take heed that he receive not the grace of God
in vain, that he desire the milk of the word, to be bettered and increased
by it. Wherefore whosoener thou be that hears this, and will hear other;
search thy conscience, whether thou be grown in any virtue since thou heardest
the last sermon: consider what sin thou had the last Sabboath, which thou
have not this Sabboath? If thou find no change, then the Word has not had his
working in thee: thou art not inereased by the food which thou receiuedst. Will
not, a man be angry to set his child to school, and find him always at his
A, B, C. or the first principles of sanctification? So will God be displeased,
if we be negligent and slack and never take out his lessons, but stand at a
stay.

I know many of you will give me the hearing of this, as you have done many of
my brethren heretofore: but as the worm stroke Ionahs guord, and it died in
the morning: so by the next morning a greedy worm of covetousness, or the like
sin will have perished all. If it do so, know the Judge stands before the
door ready every hour to summon you by death, to make your appearaunce at the
bar of justice, and to give up your account for every talent, yea, for every
lesson that ye have learned and left unpracticed.

As for you, (if any of you) walk in dutiful obedience to the word, I beseech
you in the fear of God, and in the bowels and love of Jesus Christ, that ye
will abound and increase yet more and more, and contend by all means to put
in practice and exercise those things that ye hear, that so at length when
ye be ripe for the sickle, and the great day of harvest be come, ye may be
gathered as good corn into the Lords garner, and be invested in the holy
heavens with that blessed kingdom which God has provided for them that serve
and fear him. Amen.

FINIS.
THE BANQVET of Jobs Children.
JOB. 1. 4. 5. verses. 4 And his sons went and banquetted in their houses every
one his day: and sent and called their three sisters to eat and drink with
them.

5 And when the days of their banqueting were gone about, Job sent and
sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning and offered burnt offerings,
according to the number of them all. For Job thought, it may be that my sons
have sinned and blasphemed God in their hearts. Thus did Job every day.


THis book is a story of patient Job, to show how God can deal with all, and
how they should receive all things at his hand, seeing the most innocent man
in the world, when God should try him, was brought so low, that the Devil had
power to lay upon him what torment he would, death only excepted, and yet he
stood to it with such constancy, that he says, though the Lord kill me, yet
will I trust in him, the thirteenth Chapter of Job, and fifteenth verse. Such
power was given unto his faith, and love, and patience, that they overcame the
Devil, which said that if he might have leave to plague him, he would make
him blaspheme God to his face, verse, 11. Therefore God would have this victory
to be recorded for all such as are sick, or sore, or needy, or oppressed,
that whatsoever pain we suffer, we may remember that Jobs pain was sharper
than this, and yet it could not make him so impatient: but when like a man he
was offended with his torments; like an holy man he was more offended with
himself, and angry with his anger. Therefore at last God returned to him, and
removed his troubles and made his end more honorable than his beginning, as if
he should say, Thus it shall be done to the man which is not offended with my
chastisementes. Now to our purpose, in the first verse of this Chapter, the
holy Ghost shows what a good man Job was, saying; that he was an upright and
just man, one that feared God and eschewed evil. In the second verse, he
shows what store of children Job had: saying, he had seven sons and three
daughters. In the third verse he shows what store of riches Job had: saying,
his substance was seven thousand sheep, and three thousand Camels, and five
hundred yoke of Oxen, and five hundred Asses, etc. In the fourth verse he
returns again to his children, showing how they were occupied, before the
wind came and blewe the house upon their heads, saying, his sons went and
banquetted, in their houses every one his day, and called their three sisters
to eat and drink with them. In the fifth verse he comes again to Job, and
shows a proof of his virtues, which he commended him for before, saying, that
when his sons had banquetted, he sent for them, and sanctified them, and
rose up early, etc.

So if ye ask what his sons did, the holy Ghost says, that they banquetted.
If ye ask where, he says, in their own houses. If ye ask when, he says,
every one kept his day. If ye ask who were the guests, he says that one
invited another, and the other invited him again, and they called their
sisters to them. and so they made merry together. If ye ask what father Job
did, the story says, that after every feast, first he sent for his sons, and
then he sanctified them, and then he sacrificed for them: the reason is added,
because Job thought, It may be that may sons have sinned and blasphemed God
in their hearts, his zeal in this action is declared by three circumstances.

First, that he rose up early in the morning. Secondly, that he offered so many
sacrifices as he had sons. Thirdly, that he performed this offering every
day while their feast lasted. Of every circumstance a little, because some had
rather hear many things then learn one. First here is to be noted that
amongst the blessings of Job, his children are reckoned first, so soon as the
holy Ghost was past his spiritual blessings which he mentions in the first
verse of all, before all his other blessings, lands and houses, and goods, and
cattle, and friends, and servants, he speaks of his children, as the
chiefest treasure which Job had next unto his virtues; although he was counted
the greatest man for riches and cattels, and all things else in all the east
parts, 3. verse. Therefore the Devil when he had taken away all his other
riches, took away his children last of al, trying him as it were by degrees,
as if he should say, I have a greater plague for him yet, if the loosing of his
goods and stealing of his cattle, and burning of his houses, and slaying of
his servants will not move him, yet I know what will rowse him: when his
children are all feasting together I will raise a mighty wind, and blow down
the house upon their heads, and kill every son and daughter which he has at
a clap. Indeed this news frighted him forest, as appears in the 20. verse,
his patience was so great, that when they brought him word of his oxen, and
camels, and asses, and sheep, he never shrinked, we do not read that he made
any answer; as though he cared not for the^, but when he heard that his dear
children, seven sons, and three daughters, after he had brought the^ up to
ripe years, were slain all at once, then the story says, that he rose up
from his seat, and rent his garments, and shaued his head, and fell down to
the ground and cried; Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I
return again. So even the devil knows what a man loves, and what a
blessing it is to have children, therefore when God commanded the man and the
woman to increase and multiply, it is said before, that God blessed them. Genesis
1. 28. which was the first blessing that was given to man, which is called a
blessing, The blessing of children. Again, when God spoke the same words to
Noah and his sons, it is said before, that God blessed Noah and his sons Genesis
9. 4. so children came still under the name of blessing. Thus God himself
shows that children are his gifts to make you thankful for them, and
careful of them as Job was. And therefore some men have more riches, and some
less, and some none, because it is the blessing of God (as Solomon says)
which makes rich. Pro. 10. 22. so some men have many children, and some few,
and some none, because it is the blessing of God, as David says, which sends
children. Psalm. 128. But this is the difference between temporal blessings
and spiritual blessings: that spiritual blessings are simply good, and
therefore do all men good that enjoy them: as faith, and love, and patience
can never hurt a man, but better him: and temporal blessings are as he which
has them, to good man riches are good, honors are good, health is good,
liberty is good, because he does good with them: but to an evil man they are
evil, because they make him worse, and he does evil with them: as Jeroboam
had not done so much hurt, if he had not been in such honor. Therefore we pray
for health, and wealth, and honor, and rest, and liberty, and life, with a
caution, If it be Gods will: As Christ prayed for the removing of his cross;
because we know not whether they be good or evil, whether they will make us
better or worse, or whether we shall do good with them, or hurt. Thus when
Job had his cattle, and his houses, and his friends, and his servants, and his
children about him, he was like the man of whom David speaks, The righteous
man shall flourish like a palm tree, Psalm. 91. 13. Therefore the devil said,
that God had made an hedge about Job. verse. 10. As an hedge goes round about a
garden: so Gods blessings went round about Job, according to that Psalm. 33. 10.
Him which trusts in the Lord, mercy shall embrace on every side.

Thus Job was endowed with children, but how his children were affected we
cannot define so well as of their father, because the holy Ghost says nothing
of them, but that they banquetted, which does sound as though he noted a
disparagement between Job and his sons, as there was between Ely and his
sons: for oftentimes a godly father has untoward children, which make him
watch, and fast, and pray, and weep when they little think, while they
themselves ruffle, and swear, and banquet, and game, till poverty fall on
their purses, as the house fell upon their heads: so it seems that Jobs sons
were secure upon their fathers holiness, as many are upon their fathers
husbandry, which think the old man has enough for us, we need not care to
get or save: so they might think, Our father sacrifices for us, we may feast
and be merry, his devotion will serve for us: he is an old man, let him pray
and GOD will hear him. One Lot is enough in an house: but if Job had bred up
his sons so, God would not have commended him, but rebuked him, as he did
Ely. Therefore this is not spoken against Jobs sons, that they banquetted, as it
is spoken against the Israelites, that they sat them down to eat, and rose
up to play. For first it is not like that he which was so co^me^ded of God,
that he said, No man was like him upon the earth, verse. 8. would not teach his
children in their youth, as he prayed for them after. Again, if they had been
Epicures, and Libertines, and beazlers, GOD would not have heard his prayer for
them, no more then he would hear Samuels prayer for Saul. Again, if they had
despised that GOD which their father worshipped, he would never have said as
he says, It may be that my sons have blasphemed God, as though some fault
might escape them by ignorance, or rashness: but he would have said, My sons
are blasphemers, and therefore I must punish them. For that which the law said
against blasphemers after, that Job understood by the law of conscience
written in his heart, as Paul says, Romans 2. 15. Again, if they had used their
feasts for their lusts, like them which say, Let us eat and drink, for to
morrow we shall dye, it had been vain for Job to speak to them of
sanctification, for they would not have sanctified themselves at his bidding.
But it is said, that before Job offered sacrifice for them, they were
sanctified, that is, they considered the faults which they had committed, and
repented for them, and reconciled themselves, and then Job sacrificed for them.
Again, if their feasts had been surfetings, and disorders, like our Wakes and
Revels, Job should have forbidden their feasts, and not prayed God to pardon
their sins which they committed in feasting, and suffer them to sin still,
for that were to mock God, as though he desired not pardon for their sins
past, but rather leave for them to sin still. Lastly, we do not see by any
circumstance of the story, that they abused their feasts either in suspected
houses, or profane company, or corrupt speeches, or impure gestures, or wanton
dauncings, or unlawful daliances, or vain superfluities, but that our feasts
might be allowed, if they were like unto theirs. For first they did feast in
their own houses, they did not run to Ordinaries, or Alehouses, or Tauernes,
as they which seek for the strongest wine, or hunt after news, or worse
purposes, but like good neighbors they invited one another home, and kept
their hospitality in their own houses, as our Gentlemen should do that lie
about London, which are a kind of Non-residents, from their poor neighbors.
Secondly, they did not feast every day, like the rich Glutton in Luke 16. every
one kept his day in the year when their feastings came: so it is not meant, that
the sons did nothing but feast, and the father nothing but pray: but as the
feasts of the Jews came at certain times of the year, to celebrate some
blessings of God, so they observed their feasting times, to celebrate their
good wills one to another. Lastly, they did not join themselves with ruffins,
and swearers, and tiplers, as all are wont to meet together at a feast:
neither did they inuit the rich to their tables, as James says, which are
feasts of flattery: but they were all of one kin, and one heart, brethren
and sisters, like the Disciples which sat down together.

All this does show that their meetings tended to nourish amity, and that they
had respect to the continuance of their peace, and increase of their love one
toward another, which was the first cause that feasts were instituted in the
Primitive Church, and therefore called the feast of charity, only that friends
and kinsmen and neighbors might meet one with another to receive the blessings
of God, and rejoice together like Joseph and his brethren, lest Christian
familiarity should wear out of use, and be forgotten. For ye may see in
Eccles. 2. 24. and 3. 12. and 5. 17. where Solomon speaks of the joy, and
pleasure, and delight which we may take in Gods creatures. And again, in
Psalm. 104. 15. where David says, that as bread was made to strengthen, so wine
was made to comfort the heart, that God would not only have us fed, but of his
exceeding goodness he would have us cheered and comforted beside, as he shows
by this abundance of his creatures, in that he has ordained so many things
more the^ we need. Why did God create mo things then we need? but to show that
he allows us needful and comfortable things, for all good things which were
not created for need, were created for delight. Therefore even the Scriptures
have commended solemn feasts in Le. 10. Number. 29. Exo. 23. where ye may read
of sundry feasts commanded by God himself, as the feasts of gathering fruits,
the feasts of tru^pets, the feasts of Tabrnacles, the feasts of new Moons, the
feasts of reconciliation, the feasts of dedication of the temples, etc. Beside
it is said, that Abraham made a great feast the same day that Isaac was weaned,
Genesis 21. 8. So it is said of Sampson, that he made a feast when he was married.
Iud. 14. 10. and at a feast in Canaan, Christ showed the first miracle that
ever he wrought, turning water into wine. Ioh. 2. If feasts had been unlawful,
Christ would not have been there: therefore the wiseman says, there is a time
to laugh, as well as he says, there is a time to weep, Eccl. 3. 4. when he
says, there is both a time to laugh and weep, he implies, that the time to
laugh is not every day: as it is said of Dives, that he fared deliciously
every day, Luke. 16. for then there were a time to laugh, but no time to weep.
Therefore if ye will know the time when to laugh, and when to weep, God has set
Vriah for an example, when the Church was quiet, and his country safe, Vriah
could rejoice as well as other: but when the Church was troubled, and his
country in danger, though the king bad him go home, and eat and drink, and
solace with his wife: he would not do so, but said, the Arc of Israel and
Judah, dwells in tents, and my Lord Ioab and the servants of my king abide in
the open field, and shall I go to my house, and eat and drink and be merry
with my wife? by thy life, and by the life of my soul, I will not do this
thing. See what a sin he counted it to feast then, which at another time he
counted no sin. Therefore if ye ask when it is time to feast, and when to fast,
learn of Vriah: he forbad not to feast, but if he should see your feasting now,
he would say, as Elisha said to Gehezi, Is this a time to take a reward? Is
this a time to make feasts? nay the father and the sons both had need to rise
early now and sacrifice together: for if ever the house were falling upon our
heads, as it did upon theirs, now the Devil has sent forth his winds, now
the Pope has laid his Ordinance, nay our own hands which should proppe it,
are digging as busily as the enemies, with reproaches, and slanders, and
suggestions, to undermine the Church, which is falling already, that we might
die like the Philistines, with the temple upon our heads. Is this a time to
feast Vria? when the house of God is beset like the house of Lot: when the
armies of Antichrist are preparing against Gods people? As the voice asked
Zachary, and Amos, and Jeremy what they did see: So if ye ask your Prophets
what they do see, they may say they do see the woolfe devouring the lambs.
We see a dark ignorance running over the land, like the blackness of Egypt:
we see the Romans coming in again as they came to Jerusalem and sacking the
temple: we see the Papists caruing of Images, and the people kneeling before
them: we see the professors of the Gospel shrink away, as the Disciples fled
from their Master when he was taken. Is this a time to feast Vria? Is this a
time to flatter? Is this a time to dissemble? Is this a time to loyter? Is this
a time to keep silence? Is this a time to gather riches? Is this a time to
revenge wro^gs? Is this a time to set forth pageants? No says Ezekiah. 2. King
19. 3. This is a time of tribulation, in which the Prince, and Nobles, and
people should humble themselves, as the Citizens of Niniuie, left the Arc be
taken from England, as the Arc was taken from Israel, which God grant that our
eyes never see.

Thus much of Jobs children, how every one had his several house, which
shows how God blessed the^ with riches, as he did their father, and what care
Job had, like a father to provide for them: then how they feasted together,
which shows how sweet and pleasant a thing it is for brethren to dwell
together in unity.

Now you shall see what the old man does which was so commended in the 1.
verse. the story says, that he sent for his sons and sanctified them, and
sacrificed for the^. In which words the holy Ghost shows the pattern of an
holy man, and good father, which kept the rule that God gave unto Abraham, to
bring up his children in the fear of the Lord. Job does not as some, which
when they have passed their bounds, set all at random, and say with Cain, in
Genesis 4. My sin is greater then can be forgiven: but he goes to the remedy,
as the Jews when they were stinged, went to the brazen serpent: Albeit my
children have not done their duties in all points, but offended in their
feastings, yet I am sure that God will have mercy upon them, and upon me, if
ye ask him forgiveness. Therefore he sent for his sons like a father, and
then he taught them like a preacher to sanctify them selves, and then he
offered sacrifice for them. First, we will speak of the cause which moved Job
to sacrifice for his sons, set down in these words: Job thought, It may be
that my sons have blasphemed God in their hearts. He was glad good man to see
his children agree so well together, but he would have them merry and sin not,
and therefore he puts them in mind every day while they feasted, to sanctify
themselves; he condemns not honest mirth and sober feasts, to maintain amity
and peace, but being thoroughly acquainted with man's infirmity: this shows,
that he had observed never any feasts so duly celebrated, but some disorder or
other has crept in, whereby God has been dishonored at his own table,
either for superfluity of meat, or excess of drink, or unchaste songs, or
corrupt speeches, or wanton dancings, or unseemly daliances; the devil has
been still at one end, and is lightly the master of the feast. Therefore Job
thought with himself; It may be that my sons have committed some escape like
other men: I cannot tell, they are but men: it is easy to slip when occasion
is ready, though they think not to offend; he had no apparent cause to
suspect them, and therefore he speaks in the doubting phrase, It may be that
they have sinned. It is better to be fearful, than too secure: that which
happens often in the like case, he might well doubt of it, though he had
warned them before: therefore his heart was not quiet, but still this ran in
his mind, all the while they feasted: It may be that my sons sin. How
wary was Job over himself which was so ielous over his sons, least one sin
should slip from them: nay if ye mark, he speaks not of any open or gross
sins which he feared, but he speaks of a sin in the thought, It may be
that my sons have blasphemed God in their hearts.

Blasphemy is properly in the mouth, when a man speaks against God, as
Rabshakeh did; but Job had a further respect to a blasphemy of the heart,
counting every sinister affection of the heart, as it were a kind of
blasphemy, or petie treason. Thus the penitent man does aggrauate his sins,
and retch them as it were upon the rack, to make his small sins seem great
sins, that he might beware as well of small as great. contrariwise, the
profane and carnal minded man does min^e, and flatter, and extenuate his
sins, as though they were no sins, because they should not trouble him: for
this sin which Job calls Blasphemy, which is the highest name of sin,
the Papists call but A venial sin; that is, but a slight sin, because it
is in the thought: So Job and they differ in judgment.

Now out of this speech of Job; It may be that my sons have sinned, or it
may be that my self have sinned, which I may properly and rightly term the
jealousy of a holy man; wherein Job shows in what fear he stood of his
sons so long as their feasts lasted, even as a merchaunt does till his ship
come home. First, we may see this, that the best things may soon be
corrupted, by the wickedness of men, such is our nature ever since Adam chose
evil before good, good has bin turned into evil, Genesis 3. Notwithstanding,
that our intent and meaning be good. As for example, when an husband loves his
wife, or a father loves his children, these are good and holy, and commendable
things, yet there is no man can be found that does love his wife, or his
children with that evenness (as I may call it) or just proportion, but that
there is some odds in the balance when his affection is weighed, which may
crave pardon like the feasts of Jobs children. If this odds be in all our
measures, then it is no strange case, that Job thought with himself, that his
children might offend God in the thing that of it self of fendeth not.
Therefore it is good for a man so long as he lives in this world, to remember
still that he is among temptations, and sits at a feast like Jobs children,
where he may soon take too much. If the fish did know the hook, and the bird
had seen the net, though they have but the understanding of fishes and birds,
yet they would let the hook alone, and fly over the net, and let the fouler
whistle to himself: so we must look upon our riches, as we look upon snares,
and behold our meats, as we behold baits, and handle our pleasure as we handle
Bees, that is, pick out the sting, before we take the honey, for in Gods gifts
Satan has hid his snares, and made Gods benefits his baits, that as Adam
said, The woman which thou have given me, tempted me to sin, so they may say,
the riches or the honors, or the liberty, or the wife, or the servants, or the
children, or the meats, or the wit, or the beauty which thou have given me,
tempted me to sin, so many sins lie in wait for us, about our meats and
drinks, and beds, and ways, that unless we watch, pray, and look about us at
every time, it may be, as Job says, that we may sin in our doings, or in our
sayings, or at least in our hearts, as he thought of his sons. Therefore no
doubt but as Job thought that his sons might offend in their feastings, so
he taught them, even when they were feasting, and when they sat at the table,
and when they drank one to another, to think oftentimes we may sin as our
father told us, which brideled their mirth, and stopped many words at the
door, even when sin was at the tongues end: you are not Jobs sons, but you
are come to be Jobs scholars, therefore learn, that which his children
learned. If a man did but carry this watchword with him, whenever he eats
or speaks, or bargaineth, it would cut off a thousand idle words, and wicked
acts in one year for which he shall give account. The second lesson which Job
seems to point us unto, is to prepare our selves before we eat the communion,
that is, to sanctify our selves, and our meats, as Christ did when they had
nothing but a few fishes and bare bread, yet there was prayer before they did
eat. For as Paul says, All the creatures of God are sanctified unto us by
prayer and thanksgiving. He which does not pray to God for his daily bread, nor
thank him for it, does not receive the creatures of God, but steal them from
him, as a man which takes a thing without asking or thanking. There is a kind
of men which I speak of, which hold it too sad a matter, to say a short grace
before they fall to meat, least it should forspeake their mirth, and keep the^
in a sober mind til they rise again. I have heard many say, that they cannot
be merry, unless they swear and whoop, and carouse, and dally, and gibe:
therefore if they can choose they will never be a guest where any godly man is
present, lest his countenance or words should dash their sport; and if any
matter of God happen to come in while they are in the vain, it is like a damp
which puts out their lights, and turns their mirth into heaviness, as the
hideous hand which wrote upon the wall cast Baltasar into a dumpe. These men
had need to leave their feasting, and go to praying, for they deserve to die,
like the Jews with the quails in their mouths. It may be (thought Job) that
my sons have a spice of this vanity. If it be so with the godly sort, as
Jobs children were, that they may forget themselves at such a time, and step
too far, and slip a sin, what shall we say of them that drive God out of
their company when they banquet, and say that scripture does not become the
table, as though we should forget God while we receive his benefits, we need
not say as Job said, It may be that they blaspheme GOD in their hearts, for
they blaspheme him with their mouths; we need not say, it may be that they do
sin, for they do nothing but sin? And their feast is a feast of sins,
as if the Diuelles should banquet together. But they which feast as Job would
have his children sanctify themselves before, and eat as in the presence of
God, and are merry as it were with the Angels; when they take their bread, they
think with themselves what a goodness this is, that God gives such virtue to
bread, to sustain life, which has no life in it self; and when they see so
many things before them prepared for the flesh, they consider with themselves
what care God has of my soul, which cares so much for my body, which shall
go^ to dust. There is another lesson which will stand you in great stead if ye
mark it, when Job says, It may be that my sons have sinned. Hereby he
teaches us to suspect the worst of the flesh, and to live in a kind of
jealousy of our selves, as he says that his manner was, cap. 9. I feared al my
works; that is, he did mistrust himself, and washed his hands, and his feet,
and his eyes and his ears, and his tongue, lest they should sin, as a mercer
mistrusts his prentice lest he should filtch: so he thought not only, whether
his sons sinned but he thought of his own sins too: when thou see some
selling in their shops, some tippling in the Tauernes, some playing in Theaters,
then think of this with thy self: It is very like that these men swallow many
sins, for God is never so forgotten, as in feasting, and sporting, and
bargaining, then turn to thy compassions, and pray for them that God would
keep them from sin when temptation is at hand, and that he would not impute
their sins to their charge; so we should do for our brethren as Job did for
his children. Again, so we ought to think when we our selves come from places
of temptation, which infect like a corrupt air; It may be that I have sinned:
have I seen and heard all this, and not slipped my foot with them? Come I home
sound and whole? have I drawn none of the infected air? Does none of the dust
stick upon my garments? Look about my soul, and if thou remembrest any sin
which slipped from thee, then pray for thy self as Job did for his children. If
thou will not pray for thy self, who shall pray for thee? If thou will not
repent thy self, who shall repent for thee. Look not for Job to sacrifice for
thee. Job cannot sacrifice for thee, but thou may sacrifice thy self, and
none but thee. This should be the thought of every Christian, not whether we
have pleased, nor whether we have revenged, but whether we have sinned: for
if Job was so zealous of his children, how zealous should we be of our selves.

FINIS.
Satan's Compassing the Earth.
JOB. 1. 7. 8. 7 Then the Lord said unto Satan, Whence come thou? And Satan
answered the Lord saying, From compassing the earth too and fro, and from
walking in it.

8 And the Lord said unto Satan, Have thou not considered my servant Job, how
none is like him in earth? an upright man, one that fears God ande schueth
evil.


I Have spoken of the question already, now of the answer: Compassing here does
signify te^pting, and the earth does signify all the people of the earth: as
if he should say, I come from tempting all men. It is some vantage unto us to
hear that the Spaniards are coming ^^fore they com, and what number they
have, and how they are appointed, that we may levy our forces accordingly. But
beloved, there is a greater adversary the^ the Spaniard, which brings in the
Spaniards, your adversary the Devil. It is good for us to hear when he
comes, that we may be in a readiness against him, as we prepare against them.
Therefore this Scripture, and this time accord well. In Revelation. 12. 10.
the devil is called an accuser, and now I am an accuser of the accuser: he
accuses us to God, and God accuses him to us, that when he comes like an
Angel, yet we may say to him like Christ, Avoid Satan. First give me leave to
say unto you as Christ said unto his disciples, Take heed how you hear, for
that which I am to speak unto you of the devil, the devil would not have you
hear: and therefore as he is here called a Compasser, so he will compass your
eyes with shows, and your ears with sounds, and your senses with sleep, and
your thoughts with fancies, and all to hinder you from hearing while the
articles are against him, and after I have spoken, he will compass you again
with business, and cares, and pleasures, and quarrels, to make you forget that
which you have heard, as he has made you forget that which ye have heard
before, or else to conte^ne, as though you might do well without it: as he has
compassed them which do walk in the streets while the voice of God sounds
in the Churches as they pass by: therefore before every Sermon, ye had need
to remember Christ's lesson, Take heed how you hear.

Now to the matter. Satan from whence come thou? I come from compassing the
earth. Here the Devil is called in like a Iaylor, which keeps some in
perpetual prison, and some are bayled, and some return to prison again, and
some are executed. They which sin fearfully, stay as it were about the
prison, but are not bound: they which sin wittingly, are under lock, they
which sin greedily, are under lock and bolts, they which dye in their sin,
are like them which are condemned: this is the bondage which we have brought
our selves unto for a fair apple. When the tempter overcame us, we were
removed out of Paradise, where we were seated: when we have overcome the
tempter, we shall be translated into heaven, where he was seated: heaven door
was wide, and the way was broad before the rebellion: but when we knocked at the
cannell door, then the good door was shut: heaven is large, but the way to
heaven must be narrow, therefore God has set our enemies in the gate to fight
with us before we enter, that this faying might be verified, The kingdom of
heaven is caught by violence: so soon as we rise in the morning we go forth
to fight with two mighty giants, the World and the Devil, and whom do we
take with us but a traitor? this brittle flesh which is ready to yield us up
to the enemy at every assault, only he which suffers Satan to compass us,
does stay him from destroying us. When God asked Cain, where is thy brother?
Cain lied and said, I cannot tell. When God asked Sarah why she laughed? Sarah
lied and said, I laughed not: but when God asked the devil from whence he
came, he answered truly, I come from compassing the earth, and yet he which
speaks truth himself, taught them to lie, as he is called the father of
liers, because he teaches all others to lie. How then? Was Caine worse then
the devil, because he lied and the other told truth? By this you may see that
carnal men do not know so much of God as the very devil knows, for he
knew that GOD could tell where he had been, but Caine doubted whether God
could tell what he had done, and therefore he made a lie. Thus, thus the
Devil teaches his scholars to do worse sometimes then he will do
himself, even as he would bring them (if it were possible) into a worse plight
the^ he is himself. The devils faith cannot save us, no more then it can save
him, the devils knowledge cannot convert us, no more then it does convert him,
and yet he would not have men believe, that which he bleeueth himself, nor
have us understand so much as he understands himself: for if Caine had
vndderstood so much as he, that God knew whether he lied or no, he would have
answered God truly, as Satan did: but the devil knew that there was no
dissembling with God, who knows what he asks before he asks, therefore he told
troth to God, though he lie to man: for to lie unto him which knows, is as if
one should lie to himself, but Cain was not so well learned, he thought
peradventure yet God might understand his murder, as a thief suspecteth in
his heart that the Judge may know his theft: but he doubted whether God did
know it, and therefore he denied it like one which is guilty, but thinks
that if he confess, he shall be hanged, and therefore though evidence and
witness accuse them, yet you see many will not accuse themselves.

From compassing the earth, He which was called Satan before, which signifies
an adversary, is here said to compass the earth: which is to say, being put
together, an adversary compasses the earth: and therefore let the earth
beware like a City which is besieged with the adversary.

The devil has mo names then any Prince has titles, some God has given to
him, and some he has given to himself: but this is to be noted in the devils
names, that he never called himself a lier, nor a te^pter, nor an accuser, nor
a sla^derer, nor a deceiuer, nor a deuourer, nor a murderer, nor a master, nor
an adversary, nor a viper, nor a lion, nor a dragon, nor a woolfe, nor a
cockatrice, nor a serpent. But when Christ asked him his name, he calls
himself Legion, which imports a multitude, as if he should brag of his number,
and here he calls himself in effect the compasser of the earth, as if he
should brag of his power. And in the 4. Chapter of Luke and 6. verse, he calls
himself the possesser of the earth, as if he should brag of his possessions, and
in the same he calls himself the quier of the earth, as if he should brag of
his liberality. Thus he which is evil it self, does shun the name, because
he would not be hated: and therefore no marvel if men call evil good, and would
be counted honest, though they be never so lewd, for so will the devil: but as
God never called the devil but by those names which the devil hated, so he
never calls sinners by those names which they call themselves. For if you
observe the Scripture, there is no name of the devil, but in some place of
Scripture or other the wicked are called by the same name: he is called a lier,
and they are called liers: he is called a tempter, and they are called
te^pters: he is called a murderer, and they are called murderers: he is called
a slanderer, and they are called slanderers: he is called a viper, and they are
called vipers: he is called a lion, and they are called lions: he is called a
woolfe, and they are called wolves: he is called a serpent, and they are called
serpents. Thus God would they that shall be damned should have the name of him
which is damned, to put them in mind. Now none of the devils names are in the
book of life: and therefore liers, and tempters, and slanderers, and murderers,
and defamers are not: therefore these are the devils names. This I note to
show you how deadly God does hate sin, that neither the devil nor his
followers could ever get a good name of him: for all his compassing, he could
never compass this, to shuffle any praise of himself into this book of life:
for he does not compass heaven, but earth, though he would compass both: the
devil himself does tell us here, that he co^passeth, and he tells us not why
he co^passeth; but his name Satan that went before, which he spoke not of, does
tell us why he compasses. Because it signifies an adversary, it gives us to
understand that he compasses the earth like an adversary. God does compass
the earth like a wall to defend it: the devil compasses the earth like an
enemy to besiege it. For enemy is his name, he is envy even to the name.

Three things I note: wherefore the devil may be said to compass the earth.
First, because he tempts all men. Secondly, because he tempts to all
sins. Thirdly, because he tempts by all means: So whosoever sins,
wherein soever he offends, whereby soever he is allured, the sin, and the
sinner, and the bait, are compassed, and contrived by this Archpolitique,
which calls himself a Co^passer. Many have their names for naught, because
they do nothing for the^, like Labans images which were called Gods, though
they were but blocks: but the devil deserves his names, he is not called a
tempter, and a liar, and a slaunderer, and an accuser, and a deceiuer, and a
murderer, and a compasser in vain, like S. George, which is always on
horseback, and never rides: but he would do more the^ by his office he is
bound to. Other are called officers, because they have an office: but he is
called an enemy, because he shows his envy. Other are called Iusticers,
because they should do justice: but he is called a tempter, because he
practices temptations. Other are called Pastors, because they should feed:
but he is called a deuourer, because he does devour: and we call him a
Compasser, because that he does compass. Ever since he fell from heaven he has
lived like Caine, which cannot rest in a place, but is a ru^nagate over the
earth, from door to door, from man to man, begging for sins as the starued
soul begs for bread. He should have dwelt in heaven, and not bin compassing
the earth, he should have sung with the Angels and not been quarelling with
men, but he has changed his calling, and is become a compasser, that is, to
lay fetters upon men, as GOD has fettered him, least they should ascend to the
place from whence he is fallen. Therefore in this the Liar spoke truth, when he
said, I come from compassing the earth: as if he should say to God, I come
from the slaughter of thy servants, not to ask forgiveness for all the souls
which he has slain already, but to get a commission that GOD would make him
Knight Marshall over the world, to slay and kill as many as he hated: like the
bramble, which set it self on fire first, and then fiered all the wood.

Peter describing the devils walk, says, that he goes about: The devil
says, that he goes a compassing. Peter puts in, seeking whom he may devour:
the devil leaves out devour, and says no more, but that he compasses. This
circular walk is peculiar to the devil, and therefore may be called the devils
circuit. All other creatures go forward but the devil goes about, which may
well be applied to the crafty devil, because to go about, is commonly taken
to undermine: when he means he will destroy you, then we say, he will
compass you: so when the devil compasses, then beware lest he devour. For
the devil goes about men, as the Fowler goes about the lark to snare her; as
the thief goes about the house, to rob it; as the yuie goes about the
oak, to kill it. The devils walk is a siege, which goes about but to find an
issue to go in: for he goes about but until he can get in to be a possessor.
He is content to be a compasser. The first name the devil has in Scripture,
is a Serpent, he is a Serpent, and so are his ways like a Serpent, which
windeth himself like a circle.

As GOD is said to make an hedge about men, so here the devil is said to make
an hedge about men: but this is an hedge of temptations, and that is an hedge
against temptations. As David says, the Angels compass us, so might he say,
the devils compass us, Satan compasses, and man is compassed. Satan is like
the circumference, and man is, as it were, the Center: that is, temptations go
round about him, and he dwells in the midst of them. Thus much of
Compassing: now what he does compass.

I come from Compassing the earth. This is the devils pilgrimage, from one end
of the earth to the other, and then to the other again, and then back again,
like a wandering Merchant, which seeks his traffic where he can speed
cheapest. I have heard of some travelers which have gone about the earth, but
I never heard of any that had seen all parts of the earth but this old
Pilgrim Satan, which has been in heaven, and in paradise, and in the earth,
and in the sea, and in hell, and yet has not done his walk, but like the
Sun which courseth about the earth every day: so there is no day but Satan
sees every man upon earth: as a compass has no end, so he makes no end of
compassing. Because he is such a compasser of the world, therefore Paul calls
him The God of this word, not a piece of the world, as England, or Ireland, or
France, or Germany, or Spain, but of the world, that is, of all the
countries, and cities, and towns, and villages, and houses. The Pope talks of
his kingdom, how many Provinces are under his dominion, but the devils circuit
is greater then the Popes: one would think that he could never tend half his
flock, because he is Vicar of so great a Monarchy, and yet he is never
non-resident. You may see his steps every where so brim and fresh, as though
they were printed in ashes. If God make you see your country naked, your
Temples desolate, your Cities ruined, your houses spoiled, you will say the
Spaniards have been here: so when you see your minds corrupted, your hearts
hardened, your wills perverted, your charity cooled, your Judges bribers,
your Rulers persecutors, your Lawyers brablers, your Merchants usurers, your
Landlords extortioners, your Patrones symonists, your Pastors loyterers, you
may say the devil has been here. Seeing then these weeds grow in every
ground, you may bear the devil witness, that he does compass all the earth.
If a man love his friend, he will say, I will go an hundred miles to do him
good: but if the devil hate a man, he will go a thousand miles to do him hurt*
The devil does not go his progress like a King, only for delight, but all the
way as he goes, Peter says, He seeks whom he may devour. The devil goes a
visiting, he will teach the sick how they shall recover their health, he will
whisper the poor how they shall come by riches, he will tell the captives how
they shall redeem their liberty: but to devour is the end of his
visitation. Therefore Peter called him a Lion, and said, that he went about:
and told us that he sought as he went: at last he says, to devour, and there
he ends, showing that devouring is his end. Now you shall hear whom he
compasses, and to what he compasses, and how he compasses. When it is said,
that the devil compasses the earth, it is meant, that he compasses the men
of the earth: out of which I gather, first of all creatures he compasses men:
secondly, that he compasses all men, and by consequence, that he compasses
good men. The devil is like an Archer, and man is his mark, and temptations
are his arrows. As Peter is called a fisher of me^, so the devil may be
called a hunter of men: for of all creatures his envy is only to men, because
man was made to serve GOD, and inherit the joys which he has lost:
therefore he is called no slear, but a manslear. When there are no men upon
earth, then the devil will compass the earth no more.

Secondly, he assaulteth all men, like Ismael, which was against al. It is said
of Saul and David, Saul has slain his thousand, and David his ten thousand:
but if you put in Satan, you may set up the number, and say, Satan has slain
his hundred thousand. As there is a legion of men, so there is a legion of
devils: that as they said Peter's angel, so they may say Peter's devil: for
Christ would not have called Peter Satan, if Satan had not backed him: as death
kills all, so the devil tempts all: when he has Eve, he hunteth for
Adam: when he has Adam, he hunteth for Caine: as the father was tempted, so
must the sons: as the mother was tempted, so must her daughters. Every man
but Christ may say, I have been overcome, but Christ himself cannot say, I
have not been tempted. In the Spanish Inquisition the Protestants are examined,
but the Papists slip by: but in the devils Inquisitio^ Papist, and Protestant,
and Atheist, and Puritan, and all are examined. He is not a captain of
forties, nor of fifties, nor of sixties, nor of hundreds, but he is General
over all which fight not under Christ's banner: he possessed the two Gergesites,
which were men, he possessed Mary, which was a woman: he possessed the ma^s
son, which was a child. Nimrod is called a mighty Hunter which killed beasts,
but this is a mighty hunter which killed Nimrod himself, God keep us out of his
chase. Thirdly, he warreth against the righteous, eue^ because they are
righteous: as God makes the barren fruitful, and the fruitful to bear more
fruit, so the devil would have them serve him, which serve him not, and they
which serve him to serve him more: and therefore as the Grant encou^tred with
David, so the devil encou^tred with David, and with David's Lord: he which gave
him leave here to tempt Job, was after tempted himself, although the net
brake, and the bird escaped: yet as he tempted Christ thrice together, and as
he desired to sift Peter more then other, so they that follow Christ, and are
like Peter, are sifted more then other. For this viper is like the viper which
seized upon Paul. Among many which stood by the fire, the viper chose out Paul,
and lighted upon him before all the rest: so if one be holier then another,
this viper will battle with him, and there is great reason why the godly are
tempted more then the wicked; because the wicked are his servants, and do
tempt others.

As he tempts all men, so he tempts to all sins: for hell and the devil,
are alike: therefore as hell is never filled with sinners, so the devil is
never filled with sins: and therefore when he had made Peter deny his master
once, he made him deny him twice, and when he had made him deny him twice, he
made him deny him thrice. For this cause our sins are counted amongst those
things which are infinite, because the devil and our flesh meet together every
day to engender new sins. All the devils riches is in baytes, he has a
pack full of oaths for every one which will swear, a pack full of lies for
every one which will deceive, a pack full of excuses for every one which will
dissemble. As he does go through the streets, into every shop he casts a
short measure, or a false balance: as he passes by the Tauernes he sets
dissension betwixt friends: as he passes by every Inn, he casts a pair of
Cards, and a pair of Dice, and a pair of Tables: as he passes by the
Courts, and finds the Lawyers at the bar, he casts among them false
evidences, forged writings, and counterfeite seals.

Thus in every place where he comes (like a foggie mist) he leaves an evil
savor behind him. The murmuring of Moses, the dissimulation of Abraham, the
idolatry of Aaron, the incest of Lot, the dronkennes of Noah, the adultery of
David, the flight of Jonah, the denial of Peter, name Satan, and thou have
named the very spawne of all sins, which with his tail plucked down the
stars from heaven. How many hate their enemies, and friends too, and yet
embrace this enemy, because he kisseth when he betrayeth, as though he would
not betray. Avarice says, I will make thee amiable: tyranny says, I will
make thee dreadful: sloth says, I will make thee beautiful: vanity says, I
will make thee merry: prodigality says, I will make thee beloved: So the
poor sinner stands distract how he may follow all sins at once, seeking grapes
of thistles, and roses of thorns.

As he tempts to all sins, so he tempts by all means: for the name of a
compasser does import a cunning tempter. There is craft in compassing: the
Hunter makes a rail about the Dear, as though he would guard the^, when he
means to take some of them: the Fowler goes about the bird as if he did not
see her, when he comes to snare her. If men have so many sleights to compass
their matters, how can the compasser himself hold his fingers? if the Serpents
seed be so subtle, what do you think of the old serpent, who has been
learning his trade ever since the creation? If men's trades may be called
crafts, the devils trade may be called craft? Herod is called a fox, but this
fox taught him his subtlety: this is he that prepared flatterers for Rehoboam,
which prepared liars for Ahab, which prepared concubines for Salomo^, which
prepared Sorcerers for Pharao, which prepared witches for Saul, which prepared
wine for Benhadab, which prepared gold for Achan, which prepared a ship for
Jonas, which prepared a rope for Haman, he goes not about for nothing. But
this is the first trick of his compassing, he marks how every man is inclined,
what he loves, what he hates, what he fears, and what he wants: and when he
has the measure of his foot, then he fits him. Ask what you will, here is he
which offered the whole world. What? shall Jonah stay for want of a ship? nay
here is a ship, go and fly from the Lord: shall Esau stay for want of broth?
nay here is a mess of broth, go and sell thy birthright: shall Judas stay for
want of thirty pence? nay here are thirty pence, go and betray thy master:
shall Pilate stay for want of an halter? nay here is an halter, go and hang
thy self.

The Tyrant shall not want a flatterer, the (...) and Apostles, as they
followed Christ, lest following that which they repented, we sustain or
suffer that which they escaped. This is a lesson for all but Christ, Let him
which thinks he stand, take heed lest he fall. When Paul had distilled the
capital sins of the Israelites, this is the quintescence, that is, all the
profit which he could wring out of them, Let them that think they stand, take
heed lest they fall. Who would have said that Jerusalem would have become an
harlot? that the chosen people should become the cursedst upon the earth? yet
so it is, says Paul, thus and thus they have done, and thus has God forsaken
them, that all the world may take heed how they stir up the lion of Judah,
which deuoueth the wicked like bread. Who would have thought when Lot was
grieved with the sins of Sodom that he would have committed a worse sin
himself, first to drink til he was drunken, then to lie with his own
daughters? yet he did so. Who would have thought that Noah when he builded the
Arc, because he believed in God, and gave example to all the world how they
should save themselves, when the flood was past, would have given the first
example of sin to his own sons? When would have thought that when he was
persecuted for his godliness in the desert, he would have slain the husband for
the lust of the wife, when the blessings of God did call him to thankfulness?
Who would have thought that Solomon when he prayed in the temple, and was
termed by God the wisest man in the world, would have taken mo concubines unto
him than any heathen in the world? How are the mighty overthrown says David?
2. Sam. 1. Like Peter which said he would never forsake Christ: and forsook him
first. The strong men are fallen. Even Solomon himself, and David, and Noah,
and Lot, and Sampson, and Peter, the light of the world, fell like the stars
of heaven: these tall soldiers, strong oaks, fair pillars lie in the dust,
whose tops glittered in the air, that they which think they stand may take
heed lest they fall. Can I look upon these ruins without compassion, or
remember them without fear, unless Ibe a reprobate, and my heart of flint? Who
am I that I should stand like a shrubbe, when these Caedars are blown down to
the ground, and showed themselves but men? the best man is but a man, the worst
are worse then beasts, no man is untainted but Christ, they which had greater
gifts the^ we, they which had deeper roots then we, they which had stronger
hearts then we, they which had more props then we, are fallen like a bird
which is weary of her flight, and turned back like the wind in the twinkling
of an eye. 2. Kin. 8. 13. Who would have mocked him, that should have said
sometime as Elisha said to Hazael, what wickedness he should do in time to
come, that he should slay and trample men, women and children, Hazael blushed to
hear thus of him, and said, Am I a dog that I should do this? as if he would
never do it while he were a man, but count him a dog when he comes to that:
so they which are changed like Hazael, blush to hear thus of him, and would
have scorned sometime at him which should once have said, when they were
zealous and studious preachers, and persecuted for their preaching, that the
time would come when they should be loyterers, time-seruers, lovers of the
world, and greedy woolues, deuourers of their flocks, and persecutors, they
would have said, Am I a dog? Am I a beast? Am I a reprobate, that I should do
this? they would never believe this till it came to pass, and being fallen,
they say they sinned like Hazael, which blushed before he sinned, and was
impudent after. Therefore let no man say what he will be, before he have
examined what he is, but run his course with a trembling fear, always
looking down to the rubs which lie before him, and the worthies which are
slain already, and remember when any spectacle of frailty is in thine eye,
this is my warning, for no man has more privilege the^ another. This is the
profit we should make of other men's faults, like a pearl which is taken out
of the serpent: when we see our brothers nakedness, it should move us to
compassion of him, and a fear of our selves, for when we rejoice at others
fall, like Cham, as the leprosy went from Naama^ to Gehezie, so God turns
his wrath from them, and it lights upon us, Prou. 24. 18. and such as have
despised others without remorse, have fallen in the like, or more shamefully
themselves, and never rose again. What shall we do then when we hear of
other men's faults? not talk as we do, but beware by them, and think, Am I
better then he? Am I stronger then Sampson? Am I wiser then Solomon? Am I
chaster then David? Am I soberer then Noah? Am I firmer then Peter, if God
should leave me to my self? if he should withdraw his hand which holds me?
Into how many gulfes have I been falling, when God has preserved me of
occasion, or delayed the temptation, or wonderfully kept me from it, I know not
how, for he delivers me from evil as he delivered David from the blood of
Nabal, by Abigail, which came unlooked for: So he has prevented many
wonderfully, when they were assaulted so hardly, that they had thought to have
yielded to the enemy. Sometime I may say there wanted a tempter, sometime I
may say there wanted time, sometime I may say there wanted place, sometime the
temper was present, and there wanted neither time nor place, but God held me
back that I should not consent: so near we have glided by sin, like a
ship which rides upon a rock, and slips away, or a bird which scapes from
the Fowler when the net is upon her. There is no salt but may lose his saltnes,
no wine but may lose his strenght, no flower but may lose his sent, no light
but may be eclipsed, no beauty but may be stained, no fruit but may be
blasted, nor soul but may be corrupted* we stand all in a slipperie place,
where it is easy to slide, and hard to get up, like little children which
overthrow themselves with their clothes, now up, now down at a straw, so
soon we fall from God, and slide from his word, and forget our resolutions, as
though we had never resolved. Man goes forth in the morning, weak, naked,
and unarmed, to fight with powers, and principalities, the devil, the world,
and all their adherents, and whom does he take with him but this flesh, a
traitor, ready to yield him up at every assault unto the enemy. Thus man is
set upon the side of a hill, always declining, and slipping: the flesh
muffleth him to make him stumble, the world catches at him to make him fall,
the devil undermines him to make him sink, and cries still, Cast thy self
down, and when he falls, he goes apace, as Peter, who denied thrice
together; and when he is fallen is like a stumbling stone in the way for
other, that they may fall too. Therefore, Let him that thinks he stands,
take heed lest he fall.

So earnestly must we call upon our souls, that we be not weary of well
doing: for happier are the children that never began, then Judas, whose end
was worse then his beginning. Wisdom and Righteousness are angry with him
that leaves his goodness to become worse: if thy spouse had committed
fornication thou might have divorced her, but he which leaves his
righteousness to live in wickedness, forsakes his spouse to commit fornication,
and is divorced from Christ himself. If thou were like the Vine, or the Olive,
or the Fig tree, they would not leave their grapes, or their fatness, or
their sweetness, to get a kingdom; but the Bramble did: If thou be like the
Bramble, what will thou do when the fire comes? As this is a memorandum to
all, so especially let him that rules, and him that teaches, take heed lest
he fall: for if the Pillars shrink the Temple shakes, as when a great Tree is
hewn down, which is a shadow to the beasts, and a nest to the birds, many
leaves, and bows, and twiggs fall with it: so many stand, and fall with them,
whose lamps give light to others: Even as Ieroboams sin made Israel to
sin: therefore Paul has given you a watchword, which every one should write
upon his table, upon his bed and upon his nails, lest he forget in one hour:
for he which stands now, may fall before night. Sin is not long in coming,
nor quickly gone, unless God stop us, as he met Balaam in his way, and stay
us; as he stayed the woman's son, when he was a bearing to his grave: we run
over Reason, and tread upon Conscience, and fling by Counsel, and go by the
Word, and poast to Death, as though we ran for a kingdom, like a Lark, that
falls to the ground sooner then she mounted up: at first she retires, as it
were by steps, but when she comes nearer the ground, she falls down with a
iumpe: so we decline at first and waver lower and lower, till we be almost at
the worst, and then we run headlong, as though we were sent poast to hell,
from hot to lukewarm, from lukewarm to key cold, from key cold to stark
dead: so the languishing soul bleedes to death, and sees not his life go
till he be at the very last gasp. Woe be unto him that is guilty of this
murder: if the blood of Abel cried for vengeance against his brother Caine
which slew his body, shall not GOD be revenged for the death of the Soul?
where is thy brother (says God?) Nay where is thy soul? have thou slain it,
which was my spouse, my temple, mine own Image? If the servant which hid his
Talent was cast into darkness, what shall be done unto thee which have lost
thy Talent? For he which falls from his righteousness, does not hide his
Talent, but more, he does lose it.

Thus if you never knew what good to make of evil, this you may learn in the
sinners School: let them which think they stand, take heed lest they fall,
and let them which are down, care to rise, and the Lord so direct our steps,
that we may rise again.

FINIS.
THREE PRAYERS: ONE FOR THE MORNING, ANother for the Evening, the third for a
sick man.
Whereunto is annexed a godly Letter to a sick friend: and a comfortable
speech of a Preacher upon his death bed. Anno. 1591.
A Morning Prayer.
O Lord prepare our hearts to pray.
Eternal God, giver to them which want, Comforter to them which suffer, and
forgiuer to them which repent: we have nothing to render thee but thine own.
If we could give thee our bodies and souls, they should be saved by it: but
thou were never the richer for them. Al is our duty, and al of us cannot
perform it: therefore thy son died, and thy spirit descended, and thy Angels
guide, and thy Ministers teach, to help the weakness of men. All things call
upon us, to call upon thee, and we are prostrate before thee, before we know
how to worship thee: eue^ since we rose, we have tasted many of thy blessings,
and thou have begun to serve us, before we begin to serve thee. Why should
thou bestow thy health and wealth, and rest, and liberty upon us more then
other? we can give no reason for it, but that thou art merciful. And if thou
should draw all back again, we have nothing to say, but that thou art
just. Our sins are so grievous and infinite, that we are feign to say with
Judas, I have sinned and there stop, because we cannot reckon them. All things
serve thee, as they did at first, only men are the sinners in this world.

Our heart is a root of corruption, our eyes are the eyes of vanity, our
ears are the ears of folly, our mouths are the mouths of deceit, our
hands are the hands of iniquity, and every part does dishonor thee, which
would be glorified of thee. The understanding which was given us to learn
virtue, is apt now to apprehend nothing but sin: the will which was given us
to affect righteousness, is apt now to love nothing but wickedness.

The memory which was given us to remember good things, is apt now to keep
nothing but evil things. There is no difference between us and the wicked, we
have done more against thee this week, then we have done for thee since we
were borne, and yet we have not resolved to amend: but this is the course of
our whole life, first we sin, and then we pray thee to forgive it, and then
to our sins again, as though we came to thee for leave to offend thee.

And that which should get pardon at thy hands for all the rest, that is, (our
prayer) is so full of toys and fancies, for want of faith and reverence, that
when we have prayed, we had need to pray again that thou would forgive our
prayers, because we think least of thee when we pray unto thee: what Father
but thou, could suffer this contempt, and be contemned still? Yet when we
think upon thy son, all our fear is turned into joy, because his
righteousness for us, is more then our wickedness against our selves. Settle
our faith in thy beloved, and it suffices for all our iniquities, necessities,
and infirmities.

Now Lord we go forth to fight against the world, the flesh, and the devil,
and the weakest of our enemies, is stronger than we: therefore we come unto
thee, for thy holy spirit to take our part; that is, to change our minds and
wills, and affections, which we have corrupted, to remove all the hindrances
which lets us to serve thee; and to direct all our thaughts, speeches, and
actions, to thy glory, as thou have directed thy glory unto our salvation.
Although we be sinners (O Lord) yet we are thine, and therefore we beseech thee
to separate our sins from us, which would separate us from thee, that we may be
ready to every good, as we are to evil. Teach us to remember our sins, that
thou may forget them, and let our sorrow here, prevent the sorrow to come.
We were made like thee, let not flesh and blood turn the image of God to the
image of Satan: our foes are thy foes, let not thine enemies prevail against
thee to take us from thee; but make thy word unto us, like the star which led
unto Christ: make thy benefits like the pillar which brought to the land of
promise: make thy cross, like the messenger which compelled guests unto the
banquet; that we may walk before men like examples, and always look upon thy
son, how he would speak and do, before we speak or do any thing.

Keep us in that fear of thy Majesty that we may make conscience of all that
we do, and that we may count no sin small, but leave our lying, and
swearing, and surfeiting, and coveting, and boasting, and flanting, and
inordinate gaming, and wanton sporting, because they draw us to other sins,
and are forbidden as straightly as other. Let not our hearts at any time be so
dazzled, but that in all temptations, we may discern between good and evil,
between right and wrong, between truth and error: and that we may judge of
all things as they are, and not as they seem to be: let our minds be
always so occupied, that we may learn some thing of every thing, and use
all those creatures as means and helps prepared for us to serve thee. Let our
affections grow so toward one another, that we may love thee as much for the
prosperity of other, as if it were our own: let our faith, and love, and
prayer be always so ready to go unto thee for our help, that in sickness we
may find patience, in prison we may find joy, in poverty we may find
contentment, and in all troubles we may find hope. Turn all our joys to the
joy of the holy Ghost, and all our peace to the peace of conscience, and all
our fears to the fear of sin, that we may love righteousness, with as great
good will as ever we loved wickedness: and go before other in thankfulness
toward thee, as far as thou go in mercy toward us before them, taking
all that thou sendest as a gift, and leaving our pleasures before they leave
us, that our time to come, may be a repentance of the time past, thinking always
of the joys of heaven, the pains of hell, our own death, and the death of
thy son for us. Yet Lord let us speak once again like Abraham, one thing
more we will beg at thy hands, our resolutions are variable, and we can not
perform our promises to thee: therefore settle us in a constant form of
obedience, that we may serve thee from this hour, with those duties which the
world, the devil, and the flesh, would have us defer until the point of
death.

Lord we are unworthy to ask any thing for our selves, yet thy favor has
preferred us to be petitioners for other. Therefore we beseech thee to hear
us for them, and them for us, and thy son for all. Bless the universal
Church, with truth, with peace, and thy holy Discipline. Strengthen all them
which suffer for thy cause, and let them see the spirit of comfort coming
toward them, as thy Angels came to thy son, when he was hungry.

Be merciful unto all those which lie in anguish of conscience, for remorse of
their sins: as thou have made them examples, so teach us to take example by
them, that we may look upon thy Gospel to keep us from despair, and upon
thy law, to keep us from presumption. Prosper the armies which fight thy
battles, and show a difference between thy servants and thy enemies, as
thou did between the Israelits and the Egyptians, that they which serve
thee not, may come to thy service, seeing that no God does bless besides
thee. Make us thankful for our peace, whom thou have set at liberty, while
thou have laid our dangers upon others which might have laid their dangers
upon us: And teach us to build thy Church in our rest, as Solomon builte thy
temple in his peace. Have mercy upon this sinful Land, which is sick of
long prosperity: Let not thy blessings rise up against us, but indue us with
grace as thou have with riches, that we may go before other nations in
religion, as we go before them in plenty: give us such hearts as thy servants
should have: that thy will may be our will; that thy Law may be our Law; and
that we may seek our kingdom in thy kingdom. Give unto our Prince a Princely
heart, unto our counselors, the spirit of counsel, unto our Judges, the
spirit of Judgment, unto our Ministers the spirit of doctrine, unto our
people, the spirit of obedience: that we may all retain that communion here,
that we may enjoy the communion of Saints hereafter.

Bless this family with thy grace and peace, that the Rulers thereof may
govern according to thy word, that the servants obey like the servants of God,
and that we may all be loved of thee. Now Lord we have commenced our suite,
our understanding is weak, and our memory short, and we unworthy to pray
unto thee, more unworthy to receive the things which we pray for. Therefore
we commend our prayers and our selves unto thy mercy in the name of thy
beloved son our loving Savior, whose righteousness pleads for our
unrighteousness.

Our father which art in heaven, etc.

ruption, as though we were made to sin: indeed, or in word, or in
thought, we have broken all thy Commandments, that we might see what good is
in evil, which has left nothing but guilt, and shame, and expectation of
judgment, while we might have had peace of conscience, joy of heart, and all
the graces which come with the holy spirit. Some have been won by the word,
but we would not suffer it to change us: some have been reformed by thy cross,
but we would not suffer it to purge us: some have been moved by thy
benefits, but we would not suffer them to persuade us: nay, we have given
consent to the Devil, that we will abuse all thy gifts, so fast as they come:
and therefore thy blessings make us proud, thy riches covetous, thy peace
wanton, thy meats intemperate, thy mercy secure, and all thy benefits are
weapons to rebel against thee, that if thou look into our hearts, thou may
say our Religion is hypocrisy, our zeal envy, our wisdom policy, our
peace security, our life rebellion: our devotion ends with our prayers, and
we live, as though we had no souls to save.

What shall we answer for that which our conscience condemns? We are one
day nearer to death since we rose, when we shall give account how every day
has been spent, and how we have got those things which other will consume when
we are gone. And if thou should ask us now, what lust assuaged, what
affection qualified, what passion expelled, what sin repented, what good
performed, since we began to receive thy benefits this day, we must confess
against our selves, that all our works, words, and thoughts, have been the
service of the world, the flesh and the devil: we have offended thee, and
contemned thee all the day, and at night we pray unto thee: Father, forgive us
all our sins, which have dishonored thee, while thou did serve us: run from
thee while thou did call us: and forgotten thee whilst thou did feed us,
so thou sparest us, so we sleep, and to morrow we sin again: this is the
course of al our pilgrimage, to leave that which thou command, and do that
which thou forbiddest. Therefore thou might justly forsake us, as we forsake
thee, and condemn us, whose conscience condemns our selves: but who can
measure thy goodness which give all, and forgiuest all? Though we are
sinful, yet thou love us: though we knock not, yet thou openest: though we
ask not, yet thou give: what should we have if we did serve thee, which
have done all these things for thine enemies? Therefore thou which have given
us al things for thy service, O Lord give us a heart to serve thee, and let
this be the hour of our conversion, let not evil overcome good, let not thine
enemy have his will, but give us strength to resist, patience to endure, and
constancy to persevere unto the end.

Instruct us by thy word, guide us by thy spirit, mollify us by thy grace,
humble us by thy corrections, win us by thy benefits, reconcile our nature
to thy will, and teach us to make profit of every thing, that we may see thee
in all things, and all things in thee: and because (O most merciful father) we
walk between thy mercy and justice, through many temptations, govern our
steps with such discretion, that the hope of mercy may prevent despair, and
the fear of justice may keep us from presumption: that in mirth we be not
vain, in knowledge we be not proud, in zeal we be not bitter, but as the
tree brings forth first leaves, then blossoms, and then fruit, so first we
may bring forth good thoughts, then good speeches, and after a good life, to
the honor of thy name, the good of thy children, and the salvation of our
souls, remembering the time when we shall sleep in the grave, and the day when
we shall awake to judgment. Now the time is come (O Lord) which thou have
appointed for rest, and without thee we can neither wake nor sleep, which
have made the day and night, and rulest both: therefore into thy hands we
commend our souls and bodies that thou have bought, that they may serve thee:
restore them O Lord to their first Image, and keep them to thy service, and
resign us not to our selves again, but finish thy work, that we may every day
come nearer and nearer to thy kingdom, till we hate the way to hell, as much
as hell it self, and every cogitation, and speech, and action, be so many
steps to heaven. For thy names sake, for thy promise sake, for thy sons sake
O Lord, we lift up our hearts, hands and voice unto thee in his name, which
suffered for sin, and sinned not. Our Father etc.

A Prayer for a sick man.
Almighty God and all merciful Father, which art the Physician of our bodies
and souls, in thy hands are life and death, thou bring to the grave, and
pullest back again: we came into this world upon condition, to forsake it
whenever thou would call us, and now the Somners are come, thy ^etters
hold me, and none can loose me but he which bound me. I am sick in body and
soul, but he has stricken me which in judgment shows mercy. I deserved to
dye so soon as I came to life: but thou have preserved me till now, and shall
this mercy be in vain as though we were preserved for nothing? Who can
praise thee in the grave? I have done thee no service since I was borne, but my
goodness is to come, and shall I dye before I begin to live? but Lord thou
know what is best of all, and if thou convert me, I shall be converted in an
hour: and as thou acceptedst the will of David as well as the act of Solomon:
so thou will accept my desire to serve thee, as well as if I did live to
glorify thee. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is frail, and as I did
live sinfullie, whenever thy spirit was from me, so I shall dye unwillingly
unless thy spirit prepare me: therefore dear father, give me that mind
which a sick man should have, and increase my patience with my pain, and call
unto my remembrance, all which I have heard or read, or felt, or meditated to
strengthen me in this hour of my trial, that I which never taught any good
while I lived, may now teach other how to dye, and to bear their sickness
patiently: apply unto me all the mercies and merits of thy beloved son, as
if he had dyed for me alone. Be not from me when the enemy comes; but when the
tempter is busiest, let thy spirit be busiest too: and if it please thee to
loose me out of this prison, when I shall leave my earth to earth, let thine
Angel carry up my soul to heaven, as they did Lazarus, and place me in one of
those mansions which thy son is gone to prepare for me. This is my mediator
which has reconciled me and thee, when thou did abhor me for my sins,
and thou did send him from heaven to us, to show that thou art bound to hear
him for us. Therefore in him I come unto thee, in him I call upon thee. O my
redeemer, my preserver, and my savior, to thee be all praise with thy father
and the holy spirit for ever. Amen.

What shall stay me from my Father, my brother, and my Comforter.
A comfortable speech, taken from a godly Preacher, lying upon his deathbed:
written for the sick.
I Owe to God a death, as his Son died for me. Ever since I was borne I have
been sailing to this haven, and gathering patience to comfort this hour,
therefore shall I be one of those guestes now, that would not come to the
banquet when they were invited? what hurt is in going to Paradise? I shall loose
nothing but the sense of evil: and anon I shall have greater joys then I feel
pains? For my head is in heaven already, to assure me that my soul and body
shall follow after. O death where is thy sting? why should I fear that which I
would not escape, because my chiefest happiness is behind, and I cannot have
it unless I go unto it? I would go through hell to heaven, and therefore, If I
martch but through death, I suffer less then I would suffer for God. My pains
do not dismay me, because I travail to bring forth eternal life, my sins
do not fright me, because I have Christ my redeemer, the judge does not
astonish me, because the Judges son is my advocate, the devil does not amaze
me, because the Angels pitch about me. The grave does not grieve me, because it
was my Lords bed. Oh that Gods mercy to me, might move other to love him! for
the less I can express it, the more it is. The Prophets and Apostles are my
forerunners, every man is gone before me, or else he will follow after me, if
it please God to receive me into heaven before them which have served him
better, I owe more thankefulnes unto him. And because I have deferred my
repentance till this hour, whereby my salvation is cut off, if I should die
suddenly: Lo, how my God in his merciful providence, to prevent my destruction,
calls me by a lingering sickness, which staieth till I be ready and prepares
me to my end, like a preacher, and makes me by wholesome pains, weary of this
beloved world, least I should depart unwilling, like them whose death is their
damnation. So he loves me while he beats me, that his stripes are plasters
to salve me, therefore who shall love him if I despise him? This is my whole
office now, to strengthen my body with my heart, and be contented as God has
appointed, until I can glorify him, or until he glorify me. If I live, I
live to sacrifice; and if I die, I die a ^acrifice, for his mercy is above mine
iniquity. Therefore if I should fear death, it were a sign that I had not
faith nor hope, as I professed, but that I doubted of Gods truth in his
promise, whether he will forgive his penitent sinner or no. It is my father,
let him do what seems good in his sight: Come Lord Jesus, for thy servant
comes, I am willing, help my unwillingness.

Thus the faithful depart in another sort, with such peace and joy round about
them, that all which see, wish that their souls may follow theirs.
A Letter written to ones friend in his sickness.
Beloved, I marvel not that you have pain, for you are sick: but I marvel
that you cover it not for offense, because the wisdom of a man is to bite in
his grief, and always to show more comfort in God, than pain in suffering.
Now God calls to repetitions, to see whether you have learned more constancy
than others: if sickness be sharp, make it not sharper with frowardnes, but
know this is a great favor to us when we die by sickness, which makes us ready
for him that calls us: ^ow you have nothing to think upon but God, and you
cannot think upon him without joy: your grief passes, but your joy will never
pass. Tell me (patient) how many stripes is heaven worth? Is my friend only
sick it the world, or his faith weaker than others* You have always prayed
Thy will be done, and now are you offended that Gods will is done? How has the
faithful man forgotten that all things (even death) turn to the best, to them
that love God? Teach the happy (O Lord) to see his happiness through troubles.
Every pain is a prevention of the pains of hell, and every ease in pain, is a
fore-taste of the ease, and peace, and joys in heaven.

Therefore remember your own comforts to others before, and be not impatient,
when there is most need of patience, but as you have ever taught us to live,
so now give us an example to die, and deceive Satan as Job did.

FINIS.

