THE DOCTRINE OF Prayer in general for All men, that is, universally for All
mankind:

Proved
1. By the true sense of the words of the Apostle. 1. Tim. 2. 2. By the
reasons, why All men in that sense should be praid for. 3. By the Doctrine
establishing such Prayer. 4. By the practice of Churches, concerning that kind
of Prayer. 5. By the Objections, Answered.
Against the Position of those that say and preach, that All men are not to be
praid for.

By I. Smith, Minister of Gods word at Reading*

Augusti. de Catech. rudib. Homines ergo bon^s imi^are, malos ^olera, omnes
ama, quoniam nescis, quid eras futuru^ sit, qui body malu^ est. Imitate thou
(therefore) good men, the evil bear with and tollerat, and love all men: For
thou know not what he may be to morrow, which to day is evil and wicked.

LONDON, Printed by Adam Islip. 1595.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, and most reverend Father in God, my L. Archbishop of
Canturburie: One of the Lords of her Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel:
and Primate of all England.
WE have held the course (most reverend Father) by the good sufferance of our
most merciful and loving Creator, in this Church of England; among other most
needful and careful suits to the Lord our God, in holy prayer and calling
upon his name; as, for the establishing and co^firming of his children in holy
life: so also for the conversion of unrighteous and sinners, that is, for just
and unjust, for all mankind: that in such our dutiful prayers, so far forth
as we might obtain the same of our merciful Father, his glory might shine
forth, and all nations might know the salvation of our God. But I know not how
it comes to pass, having thus long continued our public prayers to this
end, we begin in these later days to doubt, and to reason, for whom we ought
to pray; as though we had never read in the scriptures, That all mankind ought
to be dear unto us: Or as though the Apostle had never said unto us, 1.
Timoth. 2.
That prayers, supplications, intercessions, and giving of thanks, should be
made for All men. Of which rule, and of the fourth verse thereof, S. Augustine
speaking, Aug. tom. 7. ad Artic. sibi falls. impos. Artic. 2.
says, Siquidem Apostolus cuius ista est sententia, solicit praecipit, quod
in omnibus ecclesijs pijssime custoditur, vt Deo pro omnibus hominibus
supplicetur, For sure the Apostle, whose sentence this is, does most carefully
command, and which thing is most godly observed in all churches, That
supplications be made to God for All men. And Chrysostom doubts not to say,
Chriso. in Mat. Hom. 26.56.
Idcirco altari assistens Sacerdos, pro vniuerso orbeterrarum, pro absentibus,
atque Praesentibus, Deo nos gratias iubet offerre, To this purpose, the Priest
standing at the altar commands us to offer up thanks to God for the whole
universal world, for the persons absent and Present, etc And it seems by S.
Ciprian, that it was a Christian man's profession, and an outward badge of a
Christian, even to confess, That he has compassion on Infidels, and such as
are without, and excepted none, but prayed for all: and therefore being
required, to convert to idolatry, by the Proconsul; he answered, Christianus
ego sum, In pas. bea. Ciprian. per Pont. Diaco.
and nullos alios deus noui nisi vnum, and verum deum, etc. Hunc nocte, dieque
deprecamur pro omnibus, etiam pro imperatoribus, etc. I am a Christian (says
he) and know not any other gods but one, and the true God. Him we entreat and
pray unto day and night, yea for All men, and even for the emperors: which were
then Galienus and Valerianus, who were at that time the persecutors, and had by
their letters commanded that All men should worship the Roman gods. In reading
of these things (therefore) with a great deal more, as follows in the
process hereof (most reverend Father) I wondered that men should be so
deceived, as to speak against that which they knew not, or to mislike that
which was Apostolical, just and good. That (therefore) I might relieve the error
of the ignorant herein: not doubting of the learned and their persuasion, (of
whom I am ready to learn) I have taken upon me to write this Treatise,
nothing fearing, but if they will in all humility learn, they shall easily be
drawn forth of the snares, wherein they have been entangled, and discern and
confess the truth. So committing the same unto your honorable and fatherly
tuition: as being a point and question in Divinity, and now too much contended
of, amongst the simple. Leaving you to your more weightier affairs, I cease any
further at this time to entreat hereof.

From S. Laurence in Reading, in the County of Berkshire. Anno 1595. Your
Honors most humble and daily Orator, John Smith.

To the Christian Reader, Grace and Peace.
THou have of late (right Christian reader) given forth unto thy view, a
little Treatise concerning Prayer for Almen, for thy confirmation that way, if
thou be established: for thy instruction, if thou doubt: as is meant by the
writer and the author of the same. Which for my part should have gone on, and
passed without any my speeches, or writings, if it had passed in innocence and
simplicity of it self. But because it so deeply reprooueth the contrary
minded, argues their ignorance, confuteth their opinions, impaireth the
understanding of S. Augustine alleged, the Author knows by whom: I thought
good, being one of the simplest of those that preach that doctrine, yet most
touched in the said Treatise, to deal toward thee after this sort. First I
have sent thee here, the Doctrine hereof, namely, of Prayer for All men;
secondly I mean to send thee (as God shall give time) the full answer unto that
former Treatise, that thou may discern where the truth and where the error
is. I must confess, if the disquieted minds about this doctrine had not moved
me; and the often soliciting of such whose I am in the Lord, also provoked me;
and the learned my friends, often told me how I was dealt withal in the said
Treatise, I had not taken this service in hand. For I bear this mind always,
in most ready sort being advertised, to reclaim that I speak amiss, even in
the congregation, much less would I hear of it in Print. For what is the
estimation of a minister in the Lord, if he be bereaved of the truth? None
surely in my judgment, any way. First therefore judge thou of my doctrine:
secondly thou shall, if God give grace, understand our faults and imperfections
laid to our charge. And the Lord Jesus in the mean season give thee
understanding in all things, to thy everlasting comfort in him. Amen.

Thine in the Lord, John Smith.

GENERAL PRAYER for all Men.
IT were greatly to be desired (right Christian reader) that in the course and
preaching of the Gospel, there were such an harmony and agreement, that (the
smaller things less esteemed) the direct and maine course of godly exercise
of holy life, of brothe^ly love, of fruits of righteousness, might be more
thought upon, embraced and followed. But howsoever it comes to pass, it
goes with us far otherwise. And as a bird may be snared by a little twig, that
he cannot fly, so we in these days, by some inferior matter or question, of
less importance, are drawn away from the greater points; as Judgment,
Mercy, Fidelity, and Innocent life: That the clear light of the Gospel in
the fruits and actions of righteousness and true holiness (wherein we should
walk all the days of our life) cannot gloriously make show, or shine forth
amongst us. When soldiers have their charge, what exploit to take in hand: and
now to that purpose march in the face of the enemy, from this fierce and
resolute mind, to be calmed with a toy, or withdrawn with a false alarm, or
stopped by some conceit suddenly happening; is an infallible presumption and
information, that the princes cause is not regarded, they themselves are not
trained and expert as they ought to be: and that each man regards, neither
his own, neither yet his brothers life. So is it in the military profession of
a christian knight and soldier. The cause we have in hand is Christ's, to
profess his name, to walk in his ways. From this if we be carried, either by
entisement, or by ^alse persuasion, or by impertinent questions, we show our
selves not to regard ^i^her the cause, or our brethren, or the Lord that bought
us. And sure his example, who is that worthy captain, and Lion of the tribe
of Judah, is worthy the marking and the following, who for the joy that was set
before him, indur^d the Cross, and despised the shame, Heb. 12.2.
and is set on the right hand of the throne of God: So should we (little
esteeming the things of less importance) with constancy fight the good fight
of faith, and run with patience, the race that is set before us, looking unto
Jesus the author and finisher of our faith, that we might take hold of
everlasting life, in him that lives and reigns for ever.

Amongst other things and points of this sort, that trouble many, is this one;
Namely, concerning prayer for All men. And some say we ought to pray for all
men, and some say we ought not. From thence they grow to reason, concerning
Predestination, and Election: so of Calling and Reprobation: then to discern
this man's wo^kes, and that man's life, to salute this man, and let the other
pass: Lastly, to conclusions of their own, without fear, or without regard
to discern, either how, or of whom, or to what end, the word of God be
pronounced, spoken, or divided.

That I might somewhat (therefore) relieve such men's ignorance (of which sort
some it may be, have moved me to write) and also show what I have preached
therein, for the benefit of the congregation wherein I am, from time to time, I
have taken in hand to commit this discourse to the open view: bearing always
this mind, that what I have well spoken to the glory of God, to persist
therein, and to confirm the same: if contra^ily, I have spoken amiss, to be
the first also, in my congregation to retract the same. For God forbid any
Minister should live in a flock, to corrupt, to abuse, or to destroy the
flock, Act. 20, ^^.
whereof the holy Ghost has made them oue^seers: to feed the Church of God,
which he has purchased with that his own blood.

Now in handling of this question, I see many difficulties to ensue. On the one
side, if I say, Pray for all men: then they will say, What shall become of the
Reprobates? Behold one that prays for reprobates. All men shall not be
saved. And all men are not to be prayed for.

On the other side, if I say, All are not to be prayed for, I fear I shall
speak against the truth, against the Church of God, against scripture it
self. In this dilemma (therefore) I will follow the mind of the Prophet, Aba.
2.
I will stand upon my watch, and hearken what the Lord will say: 1 Reg. 22.14
and whatsoever the Lord in his word says unto me, even that will I speak.
Aug. t^m. 7. de v^^^. ^ccl^. ca. 7.
Saint Augustines counsel is good, Sileant humanarum contentionum animosa and
perniciosa certamina inclinemus aurem verbo dei. Let the lusty and dangerous
quarrels of humane contentions keep silence, let us incline our ear to the
word of God.

Some have said, That it is a superfluous thing, to pray for all men, That such
men are more charitable in prayer then God would have them to be, That they
do more work than ever the Lord required, That it is a superfluous and
foolish charity. And (therefore) one in acertain book, sets down this state
on the question.

But now for the better satisfying of those, which have been troubled about
this matter, and desired resolution at my hand^, for the removing of their
doubts, we will a little further consider of the matter, and see what we are to
judge of it by the word of God, which is the perfectest rule that we can go by.
Your question (beloved in the Lord) is, whether it be lawful to pray for all
men, or no. Yea even for the verse reprobate, whom God ha^h rejected in his
eternal counsel, that they may be saved in the day of the Lord. For that is
the state of the qu^stion indeed. To which my answer is. That al men being
taken in that sense, we are not, Nay, we ought not, to pray for all: because
all shall not be saved. In these words (first) there is a satisfying promised,
and that according to the best rule, (which is the Word) and it is w^ll if it
be performed.

Secondly, the question is set down: which I mislike for sundry causes. First
it comprehends in it too many things to be comprehended in one queston. As,
Prayer, All men, R^probates, Reiection, Eternal counsel of God, Salvation in
the day of the Lord; And every one of these will move many a question.

Also it contains a division of the question, and so in part to import a
resolution. As, when mankind is divided in the question, into Elect and
Reprobate, which shows not plain dealing: and the question not indifferently
propounded, which thing should be observed.

Thirdly, it is far from the nature of a question in art. Aristo^ de demonst.
lib. 2. ca. ^.
For, Questiones sunt aut simplices aut coniunctae, Simplices fiunt, de re
sumpta cum verbo est* secundo adiacente, vtan homo sit. Coniunctae
complectuntur, subiectum and praedicatu^, distinctum a verbo est. vt An homo
sit risibilis. We are allowed but small allowance, for ^he putting forth of a
question: and not to farce in as much as we list. For a simple question is
short, and contains no more than man express the thing that is spoken of,
As, An sit fides, w^ether there be faith or no. And the compound question has
but the nature of the proposition. As, An fides sit iustificans, that is,
whether faith be justifying, or no. And therefore a question must be proposed
indifferently and plainly: Let objections or exceptions be answered as they may.

Lastly, the very Pharisees propounded the question more truly (in respect of
the nature of the question) unto Christ, than this is, when they said: Is it
lawful to give tribute unto Caesar, or no? And therefore, Ramus.
as Ramus notes out of Aristotle. Amputanda quae supersunt, The things that
abound must be abridged. And this is the question, and the only question,
Wheher it be lawful to pray for All men or no. For other things contained in
the question, they shall be answered in their place.

Now then we come unto the answer. The answer is, That in that sense, they are
not to be prayed for. And there is a reason added: because all shall not be
saved. But these things are matters disputable. And the question not rightly
propounded, the answer can not be much auailable. And as for the reason, it
shall stand forth in his place, and come to the sifting. In the mean season we
will see, if the foresaid treatise, will yet afford us, either another, or a
better state than this is. In the same treatise thus it follows.

God calls some at one time, and some at another: therefore it is lawful to
pray for them thus. That in Spain, Portugal, Rom^, Turkey, Iewrie, and in all
other pla^es of the world: yea, and of those which do now pe^secute Gods
Church, as sometime Paul did: So many of them as do belong to Gods etern^ll
election, it would p^ease his ^a^estie to conue^t, etc. And a^ for the rest
which do not belong to his ete^nall election and covenant of grace: we are to
pray that his will may be done upon them, and he may be glorified in h^s
judgments upon them, as he was ^lorified in the ouerth^o^ of Pharao and his
host. Neither yet does this state like me: For herein is the people of the
world divided into Elect and Reprobate, into believers and infidels; and herein
is no charitable prayer for the infidel, if he be rejected: and where
infidels are shut out of our prayers, we cannot well be said, to pray for all
men. And therefore we will seek further.

gain^ in the same treatise: entreating upon the^e words of Paul. God will that
all m^n shall be ^aued: that is, of all sorts and degrees of men, to s^ue some,
of Jews some, of Gentiles ^o^e, of Ki^gs some, etc. It follows: And the
cause of the Apostl^s ^^iting thus to Timothy, was for that the church of God
lived then v^der N^r^, A wicked prince and c^u^^l Ty^ant, and an enemi^ to ^he
gospel of Christ: Ins^much as some doubted, whether he were to be prayed for
or n^. Therefore the Apostle pu^s them out of doubt for tha^ ma^t^r, and
shows that praie^s n^^ be made for kings and princes, and All men: And
therefore for their prince, though ^ee were a wicked enemy. For that of all
m^n, and of all sorts of m^n. God has his n^mber. And what could they tell,
whether he were one of that number or ^o* Therefore they were to pray for him.
Now at the last here is somewhat: the church living under Nero, and Nero
himself a cruel enemy, the church prays for Nero. And the reason, for they
knew not whether he were of the number of the elect or no. Yea and prayers must
be made for all men, For that of all men, and of all states of men, God has
his number. So that the state here aduouched is: that prayer must be made for
all men, for kings and princes, yea though he were Nero. The reasons are, For
that of all men, and of all sorts of men, God has his number: And we know not
whether Nero be elect or reprobate. And therefore to pray for Nero himself,
let him be what he will. Now at the last we are come to the Apostles, All men:
and the words be these.

1. Tim. 2. I exhort therefore, that first of all Prayers, Supplications,
Intercessions, and Giving of thanks be made for all men, For kings, and for all
that are in authority, etc.

The question is, Whether al men be to be prayed for or no. S. Paul answers,
Let prayers, supplications, intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for
all men.

But that I may proceed herein, for the edifying of the simple, I will first
show the occasion of this rule, and the circumstance of this place: secondly, I
will grow on to the interpretation of the same.

S. Paul the Apostle of the Lord, that Timothy might the better be furnished
for the ordering of the Church of Ephesius, first bids him take heed, 1.
Tim. 1.3. Act. 2.42.
that he warn ^ome that they teach no other doctrine: for he would have the
doctrine, as we read in the Acts Apostolical, not men's devises. That done, he
sets up public prayer, in the church of Ephesus: and that questioning
should not be made, Whether this man or that man, this king, or that ruler
were to be prayed for, he t^lleth them, for whom prayer should be made. For all
men, For kings, and for all that are in authority. And this is the occasion of
this rule, and the schoolmen thus set it out. Supra docuit Timothaeum quomodo
r^ducat populum ad forma^ verae fidei; Aquina^.
Hicagit de pertinentibus ad cultum fidei scilicet orati^nibus and obsequijs,
and primo ponit doctrinam orationis in co^muni. In the chapter before the
Apostle taught Timothy, here to bring the people to the form of true and
sound faith: here he entreats of things belonging to the service of faith,
That is, of praie^s and supplications: And first he sets down the doctrine
of prayer in common. And this is the occasion of this rule.

The circumstances are sundry: and the first is, concerning the Apostles
person, the author and giver of this rule of prayer. I (says S. Paul) that
have been set apart to preach the Gospel, whom God has counted faithful, and
put in his se^uice, yea I the Apostle of the Gentiles, a chief masterbuilder,
having received autho^itie, from the Lord: Exhort that first of all, and before
all things, when the church is gathered to hear the word teach them and exhort
them. That straight in the beginning, in this sort, and for this purpose they
pray unto and call upon the Lord. And he ioineth hereunto the four kinds of
prayer (Deprecationes) deprecations or prayers, entreating the Lord to deliver
us from all evil, from the danger of sin, from punishments and plagues
^anging over our heads. (Obsecrationes) Obsecrations, supplications, when we
desire at the hand of God, happier success in the estate of the church: the
plentiful increase of blessings, both spiritual and temporal, to be poured
upon us: the sum of which good things are comprehended in the Lords prayer.
Postulationes interpellationes, Intreatings or prayers, when we pour forth
our injuries before the Lord, pray for the conversion of them that afflict us:
and when we entreat the Lord one for another, for saving health, and
deliverance. Gratiarum actiones, Giving of thanks: when we praise the Lord, for
his benefits, renounce our own strength, confess all from him and his
goodness. Thus then the Apostle says: I exhort above all things, that public
prayer be made in the church and congregation: that is, prayers entreating the
Lord for deliverance, supplications for the increase of Gods gifts, both
spiritual and temporal: postulations, intercessions, for conversion saving
health and deliverance: giving of thanks, for the Lords great kindness
showed. Let these be made in the congr^gation for all men. Thus far then we see
plainly, who commands, the Apostle of the Lord, a sure master builder,
from and by the spirit of God: What he commands, public prayer to be made:
For whom, For all men.

Now yet for all this, we are not thought to have gotten any great furtherance
or advantage, toward that state in this question which we look for, if we
remember our selves. For although the Apostle say, Pray for all men: yet it may
be in some certain phrase of speech. And though it be pronounced All men:
yet in some special sense, it may be particular enough. And so to pray for all
men, may be no more to say, Then to pray for some men, or for some men of all
sorts, etc. For this phrase All men, is taken sundry ways: and it may be S.
Paul means some one of those particular ways. And therefore we will speak
of them first, and show which all men we mean. In the treatise before spoken
of, there is sundry distinctions of (all men) as in this phrase of speech:
Such a man teaches all the town grammar; Al men go in at this gate: when as
yet he teaches no more, then such as come of the town; and no more pass at
the gate then such as go in. Again this word (All) is not put always in the
scripture for every particular man woman, and child: but sometime for the
greater part: as, all the Aegiptians came to Joseph: that is, Genesis 47.1^.
the greater part. And sometime for the elect: as, As by Adam all die: so by
Christ shall all be made alive: that is, all the elect, etc. Sometime it is
taken also for the wicked, as thus: Ye shall be hated of all men for my names
sake: that is, of all the wicked. For the avoiding (therefore) of these and
such like manner of speeches, I set down in plain words after this sort, That
S. Paul when in this rule above specified, commanded to pray for (All men) that
he meant that we ought to pray for all men, that is, all people, universal
mankind. And for the avoiding of cauilles, in this sense do I take his words
through all this whole discourse: and therefore I will proceed after this sort.

1. First I will show the interpretation of the words (Al men) to that effect,
out of holy writers. 2. Secondly the reasons, why all men in that sense should
be prayed for. 3. Thirdly the doctrine establishing such prayer. 4. Fourthlie,
the practice of Churches, concerning that kind of prayer. 5. Fifthly the
Objections against it.


Forasmuch (as a holy father says) our prayer is a speech and talk with God,
Of the first.
and that he has taught in his word what manner of persons we should be, and
how instructed, unto whom we come, and what to ask: therefore the counsel of
Chrysostom is good to be followed, Chrisost. ^e eo quod scriptum est in Psalm.
19 domine deus meus.
who thus teaches, Oration ergo continua and instans predicatio, necesse est vt
habeat mentis vigilantiam: vt agnoscat quis oret, quid oret, ad quem orat.
Continual prayer and instant talking unto God, it is needful that it have a
watchfulnes of the mind, to discern who prays, what he prays, and to whom
he prays. Of the three circumstances, this is to be considered here, namely
what a man prays: and whether it may be according to the mind of God or no.
For a man to pray for himself, necessity compels, (says another) but to
pray for others, brotherly love exhorts, but more sweet is that prayer unto
God, not which necessity sends forth: but which brotherly love commends.
Heb. 13.
Let (therefore) as the Apostle counsels, brotherly love continue. And let
us see what we are to pray for, concerning men and mankind, and our brethren in
brotherly love.

Pelli^an.
One says, Hac de causa veteribus crant litae vel litania, quibus pro populo,
pro regibus, pro episcopis, pro Repub. alijsque periculis orientibus, deo
supplicabant. Deus enim praedicationem and functionem ministrorum secundat. For
this cause in the old churches, they had their lites and litanies, wherwithall
they made supplication unto God for the people, for their kings, for the
Bishops, for the commonweal, for other dangers like to arise and spring. For
God does prosper and give a blessing unto the preaching and function of
ministers. S. Aug. lib. 4. ad Bonif. cont. duas epist. Pelag. ca. ^.
Augustine speaking of the manners of praying in his time says, Oramus etiam
non solum pro nolentibus, verumetiam pro repugnantibus, and oppugnantibus. Quid
ergo petimus, nisi vt fiant ex nolentibus volentes, ex repugnantibus
consentientes, ex oppugnantibus amantes: a quo, nisi ab illo de quo scriptum
est, praeparatur volu^tas a deo. We pray (says S. August.) not only for the
unwilling, but also for such as resist, and for such as fight and set
themselves against the truth: then what require we? But that of unwilling they
may be made willing, of resisters, receivers, and embraces of the truth: and
for such as fight against that, they may be made lovers of the same: Of whom?
but of him, concerning whom it is written, The will is prepared of the Lord.
Chrisost. Chris. ad pop. Antioche. him. 69.
likewise, Nam quare pro pace, mundique tranquillitate nos iussit orare? Quare
pro omnibus hominibus, cum hic vbique sint latrones, and fures ac sacrilegi,
and infinitis pleni facinoribus: and tame^ pro omnibus precamur: forsitan
aliqua fiat eorum mutatio. For wherefore has God commanded us to pray for
peace and tranquillity of the world? Wherefore for all men? When as of all
sides, there are thieves, and robbers, and sacrilegious persons: and full of
infinite wickedness; And yes we pray for all, happily there may be made some
change of them. And again. Si vero non pro fidelibus tantum, sed etiam pro
infidelibus orare iubemur, cogita quantum mali sit, contra fratres imprecari.
If we be commanded to pray not only for the believers, but also for the
infidels, think with thy self, how great an evil it is to give forth
cursings against the brethren.

Now then that which we here have said, teaches us this much: That we ought
to know what to pray herein, That in brotherly love and duty, we ought to
commend others unto God, That ancient churches have had their letanies, for the
people, for kings, for bishops, for the commonweal, That God blesses the
work of the ministry, in such a case. That in S. August. time, they prayed for
the unwilling, for the repugners, for the persecutors: That in Chrisostomes
time, they prayed for the tranquillity of the world, yea for All men: though
the world were full of thieves, murderers, sacrilegious persons, and all kind
of wickedness: That we are commanded to pray both for believer and infidel: And
I believe we shall hardly find a state of men in the world, but they are
comprehended, either in brotherly love, or amongst the believers, or amongst
the infidels, or amongst the resisters, or amongst the persecutors, or amongst
the thieves, or amongst the murderers, or amongst the sacrilegious persons, or
amongst infinite wickedness, or in the world, or amongst All men. And therefore
I do verily think, that according to the Apostolical rule of the Apostle, the
church of God made their public prayer for all estates, and for All men.

But that it may yet more evidently appear, we will see what the learned have
thought of these words of the Apostle, and whether they may carry any sense
that way, as these Fathers above have spoken, concerning prayer, or no.

Amb. in 1. T^m. ca. 2.
First (therefore) Saint Ambrose, writing upon these words of the Apostle, I
exhort therefore, etc. says after this sort, Haec regula ecclesiastica est
tradita a magistro gentium, qua vtuntur sacerdotes nostri, vt pro omnibus
supplicent, deprecantes pro regibus huius seculi, etc. This ecclesiastical
rule (says the holy father) is given of the master of the Gentiles, which our
priests and ministers do use, to the intent they may make prayer for all men,
entreating also for the kings of the world, etc. Here S. Paul's rule is a rule
in the Church: And the Ministers take it up and use it, praying for All men,
according to the sense of the Apostle, and for the kings of the world.

Chrysostom likewise, Chrisost. in 1. Tim. ca. 2.
Quid autem sibi vult (primum omnium) In obsequio scilicet quotidiano,
perpetuoque diuinae religionis ritu; Atque id neuerunt fideles, quomodo diebus
singulis, mane and vespere, orationes fundantur ad dominum, quomodo pro omni
mundo, and regibus and omnibus, qui in sublimitate sunt positi, obsecrationes
ab ecclesia fiant. But what means that he says (first of all) That is as
much to say, in daily service and continual rite of Gods religion. And
further, let the faithful know that thing how every day, morning and
evening, prayers are poured out to the Lord: how even for the whole world, for
kings, and all that are in authority, obsecrations and prayers are made of the
Church, etc. This father teaches, That it was a rule and rite in the Church,
every day, morning and evening, to pour out their prayers for the whole world,
and for kings: where we are to note, That he doubts not to call (All men)
here specified of the Apostle, the whole world.

Saint Augustine has thus, Pro omnibus hominibus, Ang. paulin^. ad quest. 9.
epist. 59.
pro regibus and ijs qui in sublimitate sunt, vt quietam and tranquillam vitam
agamus, in omni pietate and charitate. Ne quisquam (sicut se habe^ humanae
cogitationis infirmitas) existimauit ista, non esse facienda pro his a quibus
persecutionem patiebatur ecclesia, cum membra Christi ex omni esset hominum
genere colligenda, etc. For all men, for kings and all that are in authority,
that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness, etc. That no
man (as is the state of the weakness of humane cogitation) should think that
those things are not to be done, for them, of whom the Church suffers
persecution: when as the members of Christ, were to be collected and gathered,
from, and forth of all sorts of men. As if he should say, Prayer for all men,
as kings, etc. that we should not think, the very persecutor of the Church of
God to be shut out, which yet is the worst state of people, Therefore to pray
for all.

Hier. in 1. Tim. 2
Saint Hierom gives this reason, Pro omnibus hominibus, pro regibus, etc. vt
cognoscant deu^, sieve vt subiectas habeant gentes. Illorum enim pace,
tranquillitas nostra consistit. For all men, and for kings, etc. that they may
know God, or that the nations may be in subjection under them: for in their
peace our peace consists. Saint Hierom teaches that we must pray that all
men may know God, for the obedience of nations, that the Gospel may have free
passage.

Aquinas.
Another says, Pro omnibus hominibus, cuins ratio est, quia oration est
interpres desiderij nostri: orando enim petimus quod desideramus. Charitas
autem requirit, quod desideremus bonum omnibus, ad quos se extendit, Iac. vlt.
16. Orate pro inuicem vt saluemini. For all men, The reason whereof is, because
pra^er is the interpreter of our wants and desires. For in praying, we ask
what we need and desire. And love requires that we desire good to all men, to
whom she does extend herself. Ia. 5.16. Pray one for another that ye may be
saved. Lira.
Lastly, Lira expounds them thus, Orandum pro omnibus hominibus generaliter.
We are to pray for all men in general. All these above alleged show us, that
it was no new thing, to pray for all mankind: to make the rule of the apostle a
rule in the Church, to pray for all men, to pray for all rulers, to pray for
mankind ingenerall, that they may be converted, that they may know God.

But let us hear later writers: whether they infer any new interpretation,
or agree unto these.

First (then) Vitus Theodorus thus writes, Primum S. Vitu^ Theod.
Paulus adhortatur, ad orationem and precationem pro omnibus hominibus,
praecipue autem pro magistratu, vt per administrationem eius, pacem habeamus,
euangelium latius propagandi. Saint Paul (says he) first exhorts unto prayer
and supplications for all men, but especially for all magistrates, that by
their government we may have peace, to the further setting forth of the
knowledge of the Gospel: Thus he expounds it, Prayer for all men, without any
restraint, this way or that way.

But instead of many, let us hear master Calvin, Cal^in.
who writing upon this place, thus says: Ac initio quidem de publicis
orationibus, disserit: quas iubet, non pro fidelibus modo concipi, sed pro
vniuerso genere humano, etc. And sure in the beginning the Apostle disputes of
public prayers, which he commands to be done, not only for the faithful,
but for universal mankind. For thus might some recount with themselves: Why
should we be so careful for the salvation of infidels, with whom we have no
familiarity? is it no enough, if we brethren do mutually pray one for another,
and so do commend unto God his whole church? They that are without, are nothing
unto us. With this sinister opinion, Paul meets, and commands the Ephesians
in their prayers, to comprehend All mortal men: and not to restrain their
prayers to the body of the church only. And again Paul, by my judgment
simply commands, Call. in his s^rmons upon. 1. Tim. ca. 2. ser. 11.
as often as public prayers are made, to make supplications, and to entreat for
all men, yea even for them, which for the present time, have no conjunction or
fellowship with us. And again, when Saint Paul commands us to pray for all
men, he gives us to understand, that we must exercise our charity one toward
another, desiring God to be merciful to all, and to gather us together into
his heavenly inheritance: seeing he has made and fashioned us, to his own
Image. Also, following. Yet notwithstanding his mind was to show, that we must
not only pray for the faithful, which are our brethren already, but for them
that are very far off: as the poor unbelievers: although there seem to be a
great distance, and a thick wall betwixt both: yet must we notwithstanding,
have pity on their destruction, to the end that we might pray to God, that he
would draw them unto him. And in the next sermon. We have showed already what
Saint Paul's meaning is in this place, Germ. 12.
that is to say, That the faithful pray not only for the body of the church,
but generally for all men, as our Lord Jesus Christ exhorts us, also: to do
good to them that persecute us, and pray for them that curse us. For what know
we whether it will please God, to have mercy upon them, or no: and bring them
to the way of salvation. For we ought to hope well of them, seeing they are
created to the image of God. And seeing our salvation comes only, for the
mere and free goodness of God; why will he not do the like to them, which now
are in the way of damnation, as we were. Therefore the faithful ought to have
care of them, which are not yet joined to them, but are rather their deadly
enemies. Thus far master Calvin, comprehending all mankind and infidels
whatsoever: to pray for them in hope, for we know not whether the Lord will do
as much for them as he has done for us: seeing he created them to his own
image and similitude,

B^za.
The note that Beza gives, is thus: Vbi absoluit quae ad doctrinam spectant,
etc. Having absolved and dispatched those things which appartaine to doctrine:
he speaks now in the second place, of the other part of the ministry of the
word, that is, of public prayers, and first of al declaring this question, For
whom we ought to pray: He teaches that we must pray for All men. Yea, and
especially for all manner of magistrates. Lastly, Tremel. extralat. Sira. in 1.
Tim. 2.
Tremelius thus translateth the words, Pro quibusuis hominibus, pro omnibus
hominibus; He translateth them, Pro omnibus filijs hominis. That is, That
prayers, supplications, etc. be made, for All the sons of man. And these few
shall suffice for the late Interpretours, and for the sense of the words, All
men.

In consideration whereof, we see the Apostles rule expounded, That prayers are
to be made, for All men: for universal mankind, for all the world, for all
manner of men, for all men in general, for all the sons of man.

Since that (therefore) it is a rule, taught unto the Church of God by the
Apostle, That prayers and supplications should be made for all mankind: I see
no cause why I may not say, Aug. vitali de orando pro incred. epist. 107.
and conclude with Saint Augustine, Nunquid cum audieris sacerdotem dei ad eius
altar populum hortantem, ad Deum orandum, vel ipsum clara voce orantem, vt
incredulas gentes, ad fidem suam, venire compellat: non respondebis, Amen? An
etiam huius fidei sanitati, contraria disputabis? Nunquid beatissimum
Cyprianum, in hoc errasse clamabis, vel susurrabis, vbi pr^ inimicis fidei
Christiana, vt etiam ipsi ^d eam con^ertantur orare nos docet, etc. Wilt not
thou, when thou shall hear the Priest of God at the Altar of GOD, exhorting
the people to pray unto the Lord: or when thou shall hear him himself, with a
loud voice praying, That it please him to compel in, and drive unto the faith,
and make to come, the unbelieving people and nations, Wilt not thou answer,
Amen? And will thou dispute contrary things, against the soundnes of this
faith? will thou cry out or privily whisper, that blessed Cyprian erred
herein? whereas he teaches us to pray for the enemies to Christian faith, that
they may be converted and brought home thereunto. Lastly, will thou blame Paul
the Apostle, having such kind of prayer, for the Jews infidels, concerning
whom, Romans 10.
he says: Brethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that
they might be saved. Thus far saint Augustine. To conclude then the first
part, we have found a rule out of the sacred scriptures, That we may pray for
All men. And what manner of All men, we have sufficiently heard. I see
(therefore) no cause but I may thus end. For whom soever the Lord commands us
to pray for in our public prayers, for them we may safely pray: But the Lord
by the Apostle saint Paul, commands us in our public prayers, to pray for
All men, for universal mankind, for All men in general, for the sons of
man: Therefore we may pray for All men, for all men in general, for universal
mankind, for the sons of man.

Of the second part, concerning the Reasons.
NOw we come to the second part: that is, to the Reasons, why all men should be
prayed for: and we will first set down the rule, and so grow on to our
purpose.

1. I exhort (therefore) that first of all Prayers, supplications,
intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for All men: for kings, and for
all that are in authority. 2. That we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life,
in all godliness and honesty. 3. For this is good and acceptable in the sight
of God our Savior, who will that all men shall be saved, and come unto the
knowledge of the truth.
These words contain especially three things: First the exhortation or
commandment, concerning prayer in the Church, and for whom, in the first
verse, according as I have set down.

Secondly, the end and effect, that may come thereof, in the second verse, To
lead a quiet life, etc.

Thirdly, A reason of such kind of prayer, For it is acceptable in the sight of
God, etc. in the third verse.

Concerning the exhortation, or commandment, which is the first verse, has
been sufficiently spoken: that is, That it is a commandment, that prayer be
made for all mankind in general: publicly, and universally in the Church and
congregation: yea for kings, and for all that are in authority, unto whom any
dignity or civil function is committed. For Christians might thus think,
That they ought not to pray for them which confer and bestow all their riches
and power to withstand the Gospel, and the kingdom of Christ Jesus: which
thing before all things is to be sought. For Rulers how many so ever they
were, at those times, were even as it were so many tyrants, oppressors, and
even sworn enemies of Christ, and of the professors of his holy name. The
Apostle (therefore) even meets with this scruple, bidding them also to pray
for them: For surely the wickedness of men, can not cause or work any thing,
but that nevertheless the ordinance of the Lord, is to be loved and prayed
for. And kings and magistrates, are ordained of God. For every power is of
God: yea, even the wicked Rulers and governors, are given for the sins of the
people, and his judgments hanging over their heads. Now in that he says, For
kings, and for all that are in authority; might be good matter found, and
arguments drawn, for the defense of the cause, and Prayer, as we have set
down. For I do not think, that verier Reprobates have lived, since the
ascension of the Lord, then have been some, contained in this clause, where it
is said (Kings, and all that are in authority) whom the Church, from time to
time has prayed for. And yet as most wicked rebels and apostataes, have fallen
away, or have quite renounced, or never received, or more cruelly persecuted,
or more feare^ully been blinded, from the ways of the truth, and the light of
the Lord, which lives and lasts for ever.

But because the matter hereof, is comprehended in this, That prayer is to be
made for All mankind universally: and that such like arguments are comprehended
therein. Therefore I surcease upon such occasions, and go forward to my
prefixed article, and point: which is to show the Reasons, why prayer should
be made for all men in general, beginning with the Apostle Saint Paul, in
the third verse above: who gives this reason:

For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God, our Savior, who will
that All men shall be saved, and come to the acknowledging of the truth. This
reason contains two things: The one, that this kind of prayer for mankind
and for all men, is pleasing to God, the other thing is a consequent thereof,
showing, that it is his will, that all men should be saved, and come to the
knowledge of the truth. And therefore such a prayer is pleasing unto God, and
agreeable unto his will.

The first part.

For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior. A good God is
not pleased but with good things, he is pleased with this prayer, this prayer
(therefore) is a good work a good thing: Early in the morning will I direct my
prayer unto thee, and will look up: Psalm. 5.4.
for thou art the God, that have no pleasure in wickedness, neither shall any
evil dwell with thee: 73.
truly he is kind and loving unto Israel, even unto such as are of a clean
heart. Psalm. 100.3.
Be thankful unto him (therefore) and speak good of his name: for the Lord
is gracious, his mercy is everlasting; and his truth indureth from generation
to generation.

It is also (acceptable) that is, well pleasing: yea it pleases him better then
a bullock, that has horns and hoofes: Think thou that I will eat bulls
flesh, Psalm. 50.13.
and drink the blood of goats: Offer unto God thanksgiving: Who so offers
me thanks and praise, he honoreth me. Thou delightest not in burnt offerings:
51.17.
the sacrifice to God is a troubled spirit. The Lord said unto Solomon, 1. Reg
3.
ask what thou will, that I may give it thee: Solomon said, give thy servant an
understanding heart. etc. And this pleased the Lord well, That he had desired
this thing. For it was to discern righteously between brother and brother, for
the setting up of justice and judgment, and for the preservation of his
people. So entreat God for his people, yea and for all mankind, count it not a
charity in prayer more then God requires: say not it is a superfluous and
foolish charity to do it. For it is the Lords commandment, and such kind of
prayer, is good, pleasing, and acceptable in his sight: and he shall hear it,
and it shall return into my own bosom. And this much for the first clause or
part.

The consequent of the reason, is a describing of the will of God, to be
applied unto thy prayer, whereby thou shall know, that thou seruest him. For he
that calls upon him, according to his will, serves him. And the words be
these:

Who will that All men shall be saved, and come to the acknowledging of his
truth. Some take these words and make them absolute of themselves, and apply
unto them sundry significations: according as they may be taken in divinity,
or according as in some sense, and in some respect, this way or that way, they
may be interpreted: but that is not much pertinent to this matter. For the
words are respective, and are the chief clause and weight, of the reason given
by the holy ghost, establishing that prayer. For the exhortation concerning
this rule of prayer, consists of three parts. A proposition, the end and
effect, and a reason.

The proposition. Let prayer be made for all men.

The end and effect. That we may lead a quiet life, in all godliness, etc.

The reason. Thou will say, Why so? and wherefore? the holy ghost informs
thee: For that is good and acceptable, in the sight of God our Savior. And he
confirms that by his will: who will have all men to be saved, and to come to
the knowledge of the truth: as if he should say, Therefore is it good and
acceptable in his sight, because he would have no man cast away, but be saved:
because he would have no man ignorant of him, but all to come to the knowledge
of his truth: he will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should
convert and live. We need not be afraid to understand the Apostles words, I
doubt not but the Apostle knew what he wrote, for he had a good teacher. Let us
therefore take them according to the mind of the teacher. And since his mercy
stretches unto All men, let us hope and pray that we may be of that number,
that may receive and enjoy such his mercies, laid up in store for them that
love him.

But least I may seem to speak some unnecessary thing, let me show by other
places of scripture, my further meaning, and whether the reason of any doctrine
or scripture, be so necessary or no: or whether I have spoken clean from the
purpose. First (then) we read in S. Matthew. Mat. 1.21.
While thoughts did arise in the heart of Joseph, it was said unto him of the
Angel: Fear not to take to thee Mary thy wife: (the reason wherewithal he is
confirmed, is) for that which is conceived in her, is of the holy ghost.
Again, thou shall call his name Jesus: The reason, For he shall save his people
from their sins: again, He that abides in me, and I in him, Io. 15.5.
the same brings forth much fruit: The reason, For without me, Io. 4.23.
can ye do nothing. Again, the true worshippers, shall worship the father in
spirit and truth: The reason, For the father requires even such to worship
him. Again, Ye know not of what spirit ye are: The reason, For the son of man
is not come to destroy men's lives, Luke 9.55.
but to save them, etc. Again, But there are some of you that believe not: The
reason, For Jesus knew from the beginning, which they were that believed not,
Ioh. 6.64.
and who should betray him. We see in these few as in many, how notably the
spirit of the Lord, does suggest a reason proper to the thing that is handled,
for the further instruction, comfort, and edifying of his children. As if he
should say in plain words: search the scriptures, Io. 539.
For in them, ye think to have eternal life, and they are they that testify
of me. A reason most notably encouraging the servants of the Lord, to seek for
eternal life, and to seek to know Christ in the scriptures. So here in hand
at this time, Pray for all men: For it is acceptable to God, who will have all
men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth. A reason setting
forth the pleasure of God, that before him such a prayer is accepted, that he
will the same too: that they pray, that is, All men to be saved, and to know
the truth. Then we see, even from the instruction of the spirit of the Lord,
That these words yield a reason p^oper unto the proposition which they
confirm. And therefore have therein their own proper sense, which what it is,
I will by the grace of God search forth, after the mind of the best writers.
Neither will I go to the right hand or to the left, but will declare the truth
herein. And howsoever men have judged of me herein, I esteem not: the cause is
Gods.

Who will have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth.
In speaking concerning the will of God* S. Augustine has a good saying for us
to consider, Aug. in Ench. ad laurent. cap. 102.
Ne^ inique aliquid facit, nec nisi volens quicquam facit, and omnia quaecunque
vult facit. That is, neither does God any thing unjustly, neither does he any
thing, but of his good will, and all things whatsoever he will, that he does.
And again, Omnipotentis voluntas dei, semper inuicta est, quae mala esse
nunquam potest. The will of the almighty God is always invincible, Call in 1.
Tim. cap. 2. verse. 4.
which never can be amiss or evil. To which purpose Calvin notes upon this
place, After that (says he) the Apostle had taught that that thing was
profitable which he commanded: now he sets down a more forcible argument,
that is, that it is pleasing unto God, Nam vbi constat de eius voluntate,
instar omnium rationum nobis esse debet. That is, For where the matter is
known to be the certain will of God, that ought to be unto us in stead of all
other reasons whatsoever. Quia autem dei voluntas regula est, ad quam exigenda
sunt, officianostra omnia, Because indeed, The will of God is a rule by which
all our duties and doings, are to be squared and tried. God therefore, does
nothing unjustly, he does what he will: That his will, is always just, and
true, It is the rule of our actions. It is in stead of all other reasons unto
us, that may be given. Thus much being spoken of the constant will of God, we
will go forward, and come more near unto the matter.

First (therefore) Chrysostom upon these words of Timothy, Chrisost. in 1.
Tim.
thus writes, Hoc enim bonum and acceptum est, (inquit) coram saluatore nostro
Deo, Quid illud est? orare pro omnibus, hoc suscepit deus, hoc iubet. Qui omnes
homines, vult saluos fieri, and ad agnitionem veritatis venire: Imitare Deum
tuum, Si omnes ille vult saluos fieri, merito pro omnibus oportet orare; Si
omnes ipse saluos fieri cupit, illius and tu concorda voluntati, etc. For this
is good and acceptable (says he) before our Savior God. What is that? To
pray for all men. This God warranteth: This God commands: who will have all
men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth: Imitate thou thy
God, If he will All men to be saved, of right we must pray for all men: If
he desire all men to be saved, unto his will also be thou conformable. Thus he
says, Imitate thy God, desire as he desieth: If he will have all men to be
saved, pray thou for it. This holy father seeks not out any strange sense,
any other way; He bids thee do, as God wills.

Saint Ambrose thus writes, S. Ambrose.
Si Deus vtique qui omnipotens dicitur, omnes homines saluos vult fieri, cur
non impletur eius voluntas: Sed in omni loq^utione sensus est. Conditio latet,
vnde dicit Petrus Apostolus, omnis scriptura indiget interpretatione: vult enim
Deus, omnes saluos fieri, sed si accedant ad eum Non enim sic vult, vt nolentes
saluentur, sed vult illos saluari, si and ipsi velint. Nam vtique, qui legem
omnibus dedit nullum excepit a salute. Nunquid non Medicus, idcirco proponit in
publico, vt omnes se ostendat velle saluare, si tamen ab aegris requiratur,
etc. If (surely) God, who is called omnipotent, will have all men to be saved,
why is not his will fulfilled? But in every speech, there is his own proper
sense. The condition lies hid. Whereupon says the Apostle Saint Peter, Every
Scripture has need of his interpretation. For God will have all men to be
saved, but so that they draw near unto him. For he so will not, That
ill-willing and refusers be saved: but will them to be saved, if they
themselves be willing. For sure he that gave a law for all, has excepted no
man from health and salvation. Does not the Physician therefore make show in
public place; as that he shows he will heal all comers: yet so, as if
he be sought for of the diseased, etc. This holy father respects the outward
ministry, and the voice of the Gospel: he derogateth nothing from the will
of God. God has given health for all, if they will come: he is a Physician for
all, if they will seek him.

Saint Augustine hereof thus writes. Aug. Encher. ad Laurent.
Praeceperat enim Apostolus, vt oraretur pro singulis hominibus and specialiter
addiderat pro regibus and ijs, qui in sublimitate sunt, qui putari poterant,
fastu and superbia seculari, a fidei Christianae humilitate abhorrere. Proinde
dicens: Hoc enim bonum est, coram saluatore nostro deo, id est, vt etiam pro
talibus oretur: statim vt desperationem tolleret addidit: Qui omnes homines
vuls saluos fieri, and in agnitionem veritatis venire. Hoc quippe Deus bonum
iudicauit, vt orationibus humilium, dignaretur salutem praestare sublimium. For
the Apostle had commanded that prayer should be made for every man, and
especially he added for Kings, and such as were in authority: who might be
thought through pride and worldly pomp, to abhor from the humility of
Christian faith. Therefore saying: For this thing is good before God our
Savior, That is, that even for such, prayers be made: Forthwith, That he might
take away desperation, he adds: who will have All men to be saved, and to
come to the knowledge of the truth. For this thing the Lord judged to be good,
That at the prayers of the humble, he might vouchsafe to give health and
salvation, to such as were in authority.

And again the same Father, Remota tamen ergo hac discretione, Aug. con^.
artic. sibi falls. impos. artic. 2.
quam diuina scientia, intra secretum iusticiae suae co^tinet sincerissime
credendum est, atque profitendum, Deum velle vt omnes homines salui fiant. Yet
therefore this discerning set apart, which the wisdom of God contains within
the secret of his own justice, we are most sincerely to believe, and to
profess, that God would, that All men should be saved.

Says Saint Augustine, After the Apostle had said and charged, to pray for
every man, and all that are in authority; That he might take away
desperation, he added, Who will have All men to be saved. This, says he, he
speaks, that none should despair. And again leaving Gods secret discerning
and justice to himself: we must sincerely believe, That God would that all men
should be saved. So then these fathers diminish nothing of the Lords
commission. Pray (says one) as God commands: If he will save all, pray
thou for all. He will save all (says an other) but thou must keep the
condition, and draw near unto him. Lastly, These words (who is the Savior of
all men, etc.) are added to take away desperation. So these fathers nothing
diminish the nature of the words: but make consideration how they be applied
concerning prayer, for all mankind in general.

Calvin.
But let us hear later writers, and what they have thought. First (therefore)
master Calvin, speaks thus hereof, Sequitur deinde huius secundi membri
confirmatio. Quia velit Deus omnes homines saluos facere. Quid aute^ magis
aquum, quam vt huic decreto vota nostra subseruiant. Postremo autem deo cordi
esse omnium salutem demonstrat quia omnes ad veritatis suae agnitionem vocat.
Argumentum est a posteriori, nam si dei potentia est Euangelium in salutem omni
credenti. Romans 1.16. certum est inuitari omnes, ad spem vitae aeternae, quibus
Euangelium offertur. Afterward follows the confirmation of this second
member, because God will save All men. Then what is more right, then that our
prayers should readily serve, at that our Lords decree. Lastly, he shows,
that the salvation of all men is well pleasing unto God, because he calls all
men to the acknowledging of his truth. It is an argument (Aposteriori.) For if
the gospel be the power of God unto salvation, to all that believe. Romans 1.16.
it is most certain that all are invited, to the hope of eternal life, unto
whom the Gospel is offered, etc. Master Calvin here inioyneth us, to pray as
the Lord commands, That the salvation of all is pleasing unto God, That all
are invited, to whom the Gospel is offered.

Call. upon the first to Tim. ca. 1. verse. 3. ser. 13.
Also in his sermons thus he writes. This is the reason why S. Paul uses this
argument, that God would have all the world to be saved, to the end, that as
much as lies in us, we should also seek their salvation which seem to be as
it were banished men out of the kingdom of God, especially at such time, as
they are unbelievers. And again a little following:

And indeed we see, how holy writ does greatly set forth this adoption, that
God had made of this people of the Jews. But S. Paul commands us to pray for
all the world: and so, not without cause adds the reason which is here set
down, to wit, Because God will have all men to be saved. Also afterward; For
why are we in this world, but only to set forward the good will of God, as
much as we can: Thus master Calvin? We must pray as the Lord decrees, The
health of al is well pleasing to God, All are invited to whom the gospel is
offered, We must seek the salvation of all: We must set forth Gods will, We
must pray for all the world.

And out of the Siriac, the words are thus translated: Qui vult vt omnes filij
hominis, seruentur, Tremelius.
and sese conuertant ad cognitionem veritatis, etc. Who will that all the sons
of man be saved, etc. So translating all the sons of man, for that which we
say, All men. And master Bullinger has thus: Christianorum enim est, Bullinger.
imitari exemplum dei patris, and Jesus Christi filij sui. Ille autem sinit
solemn suum, oriri super bonos and malos, and pluit super iustos and iniustos.
Mat. 4.53. Hic vero etiam pro persequutoribus orauit. Luke 23.34. Gentiles in
sacris suis deuouent Christo addictos: at Christiani pro vniuersis hominibus
etia^ inimicis and peccatoribus, orare debent. It is the part of Christians to
imitate the example of God the father: and of Jesus Christ his son. For the one
suffers his sun to shine forth upon the good and the evil, and sends his
rain upon the just and unjust: and Christ also prayed for his persecutors. The
Gentiles in their rites, curse such as profess Christ: but Christians must
pray for All men universally, even for their enemies and sinners. And Erasmus
thus interprets: Erasmus. in 1. Tim. 2.
Last of all let thanks be rendered unto him, etc. And let these be done, not
only for the Christians, but for all manner of men also: lest Christian love
should appear to be but a streit-laced love: as though it favored none, but
of his own sort: but let it be extended abroad in most large manner, after the
example of God, both to the good and to the bad: like as he being perfectly
good and beneficial to al, as much as in him is, bestows his sun to shine,
unto the just and also to the unjust. And in as much as God gives public
quietness, by means of Ethnic rulers: it is reason that thanks be rendered also
for them. And it is uncertain to us, whether that ruler being a wicked image
worshipper, shall in short space receive the gospel: for that cause, Christian
love wishes the salvation of all. The Jew loves the Jew, the brother loves
the brother, etc. This is not a gospell-like love; but that is a gospell-like
love, that loves the godly for Christ: and loves the wicked that they may
once repent and turn unto Christ. And prayer is to be made, not only for the
whole general sort of men, but also especially for kings, etc. Again, Christ
is the Savior of all, he excludes none from salvation, he brings the light
of the gospel unto all, etc. Also, If the common father of al, sent him to
save all: and if he gave himself, for the redemption of all: it is meet for us
to endeavor by all means, that his death may indifferently be available unto
all.

Beza. in. 1. Tim. 2. Psalm. 4.
And Beza gives this note upon that verse, saying, Another argument, why
churches or congregations ought to pray for all men, without any difference of
nation, kind, age, or order; to wit, because the Lord by calling of all sorts,
yea sometimes those that are greatest enemies to the gospel, will have his
church gathered together after this sort: and therefore prayers to be made for
All.

To this point comes that, that we have hitherto set down^ in both these
chapters. First the proposition is made plain and proved: that prayers,
supplications, intercessions, and giving of thanks, is to be made for all
mankind.

Secondly, the reason of the Apostle is expounded to maintain the proposition,
in such ample sort as is required: and that God will have al men to be saved,
and to come to the knowledge of the truth.

Thirdly, the reasons of the learned gathered hereupon are added also: As,
that such prayer is to be made for all: that there may be made a change of
them: that of persecutors, they may be made cherishers: seeing he has made us
to his image, we should exercise our charity one toward another: we must have
compassion on the destruction of infidels: we must follow the example of God
that gives his sun and his rain to the unrighteous: and we must follow the
example of Christ his son, that prayed for his persecutors: we must hope well,
because they are created to Gods image. We were in the way of damnation, God
may do as much for the^ as he did for us: we may not despair of them: the
salvation of all is well pleasing to God: we are in this world to set forward
the good will of God: our love must not be a straitlaced love, but a
gospell-like love, to love even the wicked. If God gave his son for all: If
Christ offered himself for a redemption for all, we must endeavor by all
means, that his death may be auileable to all. And therefore I conclude, that
such a prayer is neither superstitious nor superfluous, nor more charitable
then God requires; but most holy, accepted, religious, and agreeable to the
mind, purpose, and will of God. And thus much concerning the two first points.

The third part. Of the doctrine establishing such prayer.
THese things being thus delivered, concerning the Apostles rule of public
prayer, for mankind, I come to the doctrine thereof, and to show how by
doctrine it stands: and that Gods children ought so to pray.

I find concerning prayer for others, two grounds or foundations from whence
they flow, and whereunto they have respect and relation, that is:

Election. Vocation.

The first sets down knowledge, assurance, manifest evidence, concerning
the persons spoken of, and prayed for.

The second an hearty desire, an expectation, an attendant hope: 1. Cor. 9.10.
that he which aireth, should air in hope, and that he that thresheth in hope,
should be partaker of his hope. For if we hope for that we see not, we do with
patience abide for it. Romans ^.
But of these two points, I will speak more at large: and first of prayer
grounded in election.

When the great shepherd of the sheep, the Lord Jesus walked on earth, and
chose unto himself his twelve disciples: these he taught, these he instructed,
he showed unto them his works, his secrets, his glory. They heard the voice of
God aucthorising his Christ. If they were weak, he strengthened them. If they
were worldly, he reproved them. If they were ignorant he opened their wits: he
reproved their enemies, excused his disciples, showed them the readiness of
the tempter, armed them against temptations, teaches them to watch and to
pray, confirms them with his spirit and grace: So of all sides prepares them
to the service and work, whereunto it was his good pleasure to send them
(according as it is written) You have not chosen me, Io. 15.16.
but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye go and bring forth fruit,
and that your fruit remain, etc. This his flock so instructed, and taught, so
conformed to his heavenly purpose, was notwithstanding of two sorts of people.
For it consisted of Elect and Reprobate, Have I not chosen you twelve, and one
of you is a diuill? John 6.^.
He spoke it of Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon: for it was he that should
betray him, though he was one of the twelve. And as the Lord instructed and
taught them, so also this bondslaue of Satan, even Judas, the Lord ceased not
to speak unto, to reprove, and to check: As to say unto them, That one of
them is a devil, That one of them should betray him, Mat. 26.21.
That he dippeth his hand with him in the dish: to say, Friend wherefore art
thou come, Judas betraiest thou the son of man with a kiss? It had been
better for that man he had never been borne: He that eats with me, has
lift up his heel against me. All which reproouing spoken from him, as having
authority: and not as the Scribes and Pharisees, had been sufficient to have
pierced the flintie and adamant heart, had not Satan so thoroughly bewitched and
possessed him, to that his vile and traitorous purpose.

When Jesus knew (therefore) that his hour was come, that he should depart out
of the world, unto the Father. Forasmuch as he loved his own, which were in
the world, unto the end, he loved them: John. 13.
And therefore (as we read) commends them being taught and instructed of
him, unto the father, saying: I have declared thy name unto the me^ which thou
gave me, out of the world. Thine they were, and thou gave them me, John.
17.^.
and they have kept thy word. Again, while I was with them in the world, I
kept them in thy name. Those that thou gave me, have I kept, and none of them
is lost, but the child of perdition, that the scriptures might be fulfilled.
For these he prays unto the Father, saying: I pray for them, I pray not for
the world, John 17.9.
but for them which thou have given me, for they are thine.

Consider in this most heavenly and divine prayer, these points and
circumstances.

1. Who prays. 2. For whom he prays not. 3. For whom he prays. 4. And
the reason.
He that prays, is that true shepherd, that labored painfully, that wrought
righteousness, that was without sin, that came to be the light of the
Gentiles, and the glory of his people Israel, That gives up, as it were in
this prayer, his account to his Father, that cares for mankind, that prepares
his Disciples to send into all the world, that has gotten redemption for his
people, that works the overthrow of the kingdom of sin, and Satan; even
Christ Jesus, God and man, entering into the secrets of the Godhead: even he as
now departing out of the world, unto the Father, concerning his office, which
he received of the Father, thus humbled as man, makes intercession and prayer
unto him.

Secondly, because in the world are daily outrageous blasphemies: and that it
runs on headlong into all kind of wickedness; Death, hell, and damnation it
self, triumphs over it (for the only believers for whom Christ praid do
overcome:) And for the world he prayed not, and therefore it abounded in evil.
For which cause this wo^ld, by the just judgment of God, is turned over into a
reprobate mind, left to his own lusts and desires: and therefore, as it
lives in horrible sins and abominations, so unto most horrible, just, and
severe judgment, is it turned over, thrown down and condemned: for which
cause the son of God said: I pray not for the world.

He prays then for them which the father had given him. For the wicked world
he was not careful. He was careful for his own flock. These had forsaken
all, and followed him, to these he had declared the name of the Lord, these
had continued with him in his temptations, these he kept, to send into the
world, That the world might believe by them. John 17.
And as thou did send me into the world, so have I sent them into the world.
Such are they whom thou have given to me. And for these I pray, and lift up
mine eyes unto heaven.

The Reason follows: For they are thine. He calls them not only his
Disciples, because he trained and taught them to his divine and heavenly
purpose: but further entering into the secrets of God, beholds the wonderful
judgments of God, discerns and pronounces of them, That those that be his,
are indeed Gods also. We silly men pray, according to the bare sense, and
feeling, of faith and love: But Christ the son of God, God and man, enters
into the tabernacle of the highest, discerns between Election and
Reprobation, shows that these his disciples, whom he has taken out of the
world, That they are Gods own: sets forth also him, that is none of Gods
own, but a Reprobate, a lost child, as he says, Those that thou gave me
have I kept, John 17.12.
and none of them is lost, but the child of perdition, That the Scriptures
might be fulfilled.

Herein then, we behold the most wonderful work and ministry of the high
Shepherd. He is of God, and came from God he teaches, he reproves. In the
assurance of his divine knowledge he deuideth his sheep, commends the elect
to God, entreats his Father, to preserve them in the world: shuts out, and
points at the Reprobate, the child of perdition, that betrayed him. A work,
I hope, that will make all sheepherds and people to stand in awe and fear, and
not to suit themselves in this work, with Christ Jesus. And therefore a
learned man says, Precationis autem qua hic refertur, Calvin in Io. cap. 17.
alia suit quedam specialis ratio, quae in exemplum trahi non dedet: Neque enim
ex nudo tantum fidei and charitatis sensu, Christus orat, sed adita coelorum
ingressus, ante oculos habet arcana patris iudicia, quaenos latet, quamdiu per
fiden^ ambulamus. That is, Of the prayer which is here specified, there was
another special reason, which ought not to be drawn for an example. For
Christ prays not, upon the bare feeling of faith and love only: but entering
into the palaces of heaven, has the very secret judgments of his Father
before his eyes: which things lie hid unto us, so long as we have our
conversation, and walk by faith.

To conclude then, let our prayers proceed, according to the commandment of
the Lord, in ordinary vocation and calling: for, to teach so perfectly and to
discern so deeply, into Gods secrets, or to yield up so exact an account,
belongs not unto us: but that we must let that alone for ever. And thus much
for the first part of doctrine: now to the next, which concerns Calling.

Now follows the second point. Namely of prayer having his foundation in
calling. Many a one, when they talk of Calling, do think that they speak of
some imperfect, easy, o^dinarie thing, without strangenes, without deep
conceit, a thing of course, and that may be drawn too and fro, off or on,
present or absent, of some effect, or none effect, at their own pleasure; and
therefore as thinking themselves able to handle greater matters, they will
enter into Predestination, whether he be a reprobate, whether such a one be
elect, I am sure I am chosen and elect I look into such a man and I see that
he brings forth the fruits of reprobation. Thus man where he should not
judge, is very quick sighted; and where he is taught to discern and judge
indeed, there he will not understand, but is stark blind. For surely Vocation
is a most excellent ordinary mean, for man and for the church of God, to know
and discern the things of God which are prepared for them that love him: on
the contra^ie side, his judgments and punishments, against those that are
despisers and contemners of his truth and Gospel. And therefore in vocation,
to what thing soever he would turn himself, whether it be to behold the
goodness or mercy of God toward mankind, either to discern things concerning
himself or his brother, he shall find it most plentifully taught in the
scriptures, yea most admirablie set forth: if he will in the spirit of meekness
and wisdom, employ himself and seek for the same.

Such kind persons of such peremptory persuasions, are like unto those that
say: If I be predestinate to be saved, I shall be saved, and think it
sufficient thus to say. They never draw near unto Christ, they examine not
whether they be chosen in him, whether they be under his guard and protection:
they consider not that they should be holy and without blame before him in
love, Ephesians. 1.4.
That they are predestinat to be adopted, through Jesus Christ, That they
should be to the praise of his glory. These things they consider not, so in
most dangerous sort they entangle themselves, being in a maze, and cannot get
out: So likewise these men in predestination, in election, in reprobation, they
censure others, thinking most weakly of the state of Vocation (being indeed the
only place, where we should behold our selves and others) and forgetting, That
since God has given us his Christ, how shall not he with him give us all
things also: Romans ^.32. Mat. 27.18. Heb. 1.2.
seeing all power is given unto him, both in heaven and in earth: and that God
has made him heir of all things. Seeing therefore that this Lord is unto us
omnisufficient, and most rich: and no less bountiful then he is rich to all
that call upon him: let us draw near then unto Vocation, and see what things
he has prepared for them that love him: 1. Cor. 1.30.
who of God is made unto us, wisdom and righteousness, and sanctification
and redemption. That according as it is written, He that reioiceth, let him
rejoice in the Lord.

God even the most mighty God, for the gathering of the saints together, has
spoken, and invited the world, from the rising up of the sun, unto the going
down of the same. He being the fountain and fulness of all good things, has
prepared marriage for his son, and invited guests thereunto: whereby is
understood, That he tendreth unto mankind, the holy fellowship of his son
Christ Jesus, That he will in him gather together his people, his saints, his
church: and lastly bestow upon them the most comfortable and heavenly ioies
eternal in his glorious kingdom. Romans 10.4.
For Christ is the end of the law, for righteousness, to all that believe.
Neither tends the work of the righteous God in his covenant to any other
point, Hos. 2.20.
but this, That Christ should be their God, his church married unto him in
faithfulness, that they might know the Lord. And that he might be as is written:
I will be a father unto you, and you shall be my sons and daughters, says the
Lord God almighty. To this end, 6.18.
and for this holy calling, and that it might be truly said as a judgment
against the wicked world and worldlings one day, for contempt of the gospel:
What could I have done any more to my vineyard, that I have not done unto it.
Esa. 5.4.
Therefore is God like unto a certain man, that made a great supper, and bad
many: Luke 14 16.
and sent his servant at supper time to say to them that were bidden, Come, for
all things are now ready. But they all with one mind began to make excuse,
etc. Mat. ^2.3.
Or as it is in S. Matthew, they would not to come. God extended toward the
Jews a double grace, or favor. First he preferred them before other nations,
that if they will hear his voice indeed, and keep his covenant, then shall ye
be my chief treasure above all people: Exo. 19.6.
though all the world be mine. A kingdom, priesthood, a holy nation: thus
would the Lord build them up, and not luck them down. Secondly by his
prophets he opened to them his will, his favor, his adoption, Genesis 17.7.
That he would be their God, and the God of their seed; but they made excuse,
but they would not come, they would not know the day of their visitation, most
ingratefully rejecting the feast, contemning God, and contemning salvation.

Therefore now let us hear, what the Lord says, To. 11.11.1^
not only to the Jew, but to the Gentiles, yea to all the world. For through
their fall, salvation comes to the Gentiles to provoke them to follow them:
and the f^l of them is the riches of the world. This world unto these riches,
thus the Lord inuiteth, and calls, and shows forth his will unto them.

Luke 14.21. This is, that vniu^rsall calling, whereby by the outward preaching
of ^he word, God In^iteth All together unto him
Then was the good man of the house angry, and said to his servant, Go out
quickly into the streets, and lanes of the city, and bring in hither the poor
and the maimed, and the halt and the blind. And the servant said, It is done as
thou have commanded, and yet there is rome. Then the master said to the
servant, Go out into the high ways, and hedges, and compel them to come in:
that mine house may be filled. Esa. 25.9. The church shall be gathered under
Christ, of Jews, and Gentiles; described as asumptuous feast.
And in this mountain shall the Lord of hosts make unto all people a feast of
fat things, even a feast of fined wines, and of fat things full of marrow, of
wines fined and purified. Mat. 28.19. The gospel published every where, should
bring all nations i^to the obedience of the faith. And to confirm the same
with babtisme, a sign and ^e^le of the gospel.
Go therefore and teach all nations, babtising them in the name of the father,
and of the son, and of the holy ghost. Mar. 16.15. Go into all the world, and
preach the gospel to every creature. Esa. 53.6. The promise of gra^e is
v^iu^r^all.
All we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own
way, and the Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all. Io. 1.29. Christ,
by the ^ac^ifice of his death takes away the sins of the world, and
reconcileth man to God.
Behold that lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world. Io. 3.16.
The love of God the chief cause and we^spring^ of our salvation. Faith in
Christ is lively and a^aileable to all men. Therefore Ch^^st brought life
because our heavenly father would not that mankind, whom he loved should perish.
Grace by Christ is declared to be the only health and salvation of the world.
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish: but have everlasting life. For God sent not
his son into the world, that he should co^demn the world, but that the world
through him might be saved. 1. John 2. verse. 2. And he is the reconciliation
for our sins. And not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world.
To. 11.32. All guilty of infidelity, that salvation might be only of his
goodness.
For God has shut up al in unbelief, that he might have mercy on all. Mat.
11.28. Christ said without exception, All that labor, and are laden, least
any through doubtfulnes should not draw near and come. Therefore he calls
not one man or other, the Jews only, the learned or the noble, but he calls
all, Children, old men, rich men, poor men, of what profession, sex, nation,
or age, etc.
Come unto me al ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you. Ezech.
18.23. The wonderful love of God, toward mankind, That he would All to be
saved, and that without respect, he stretches out his hand to All.
As I live I will not the death of a sinner; but rather that he convert and
live. 2. Pet. 3.9. The duty of Gods church and of man to further this purpose
of the Lord, and to pray that it may so come to pass.
The Lord of that promise is not slack, as some men count slacken^s^e, but is
patient toward us, and would have no man to p^rish: but would All men to come
to repentance. 1. Tim. 2. God excludes no estate from salvation for God would
his gospel to be declared to All men, according to the commandment of Christ.
Preach the Gospel to every creature, Mark. 16.
I exhort (therefore) that first of all prayers, supplications, intercessions,
and giving of thanks be made for all men: For kings, and for all that are in
authority, etc. For this is good and acceptable, in the sight of God our
Savior, who will that All men shall be saved, and come to the acknowledging of
the truth. Universal vocation or calling, is a setting forth and manifest
declaration of the good pleasure and will of God, whereby he does draw and
bring us to the knowledge of faith and salvation in him. Or, as an other says,
When by the preaching of the Gospel we are called out of the world, That we
should be a new creature, or spiritual kings and priests unto God.

For the manifestation whereof, according to the scriptures set down, we
gather these circumstances to be considered. 1. Who calls, and what moves
him thereunto. 2. The means of calling. 3. Whom he calls. 4. The duty of
man, to preach and to pray, for the effecting thereof.

For the first, The Creator and lover of man, even God thy savior and
redeemer, which has said, Fear not, Esaias 43.
for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name, Thou art my own: If
thou go through the water, I will be with thee: The strong floods shall not
ouerwhelme thee: and if thou walk through the fire, it shall not burn thee,
and the flame shall not kindle upon thee, For I am thy Lord, thy God, Verse 5.
thy holy one of Israel, thy savior, etc. Fear not, for I am with thee, I
will bring thy seed from the East, and gather thee together, from the West; I
will say to the North, Let go, and to the South, Keep not back: but bring me
my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the world. Even all
these that be called after my name, For them have I created, fashioned, and
made for mine honor. This Lord is that good man of the house, that prepared
all things ready: that is, the Lord of hoasts, that inuiteth all nations, that
fetches his people from the ends of the world, Esa. 55.
that prepares the dainty feast, that says, Come to the waters All ye
thirsty, come buy wine and milk, without any money: that reioiceth if they
come, that is moved with zeal, if they come not. Which says, Incline your
ears and come unto me, take heed, I say, and your soul shall live. Verse. 3.
For I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of
David. Yea a better heritage and name, then if they had been called sons and
daughters: I will give them an everlasting name, 56.5.
that shall not perish. Thus says he, Behold I am here, 65.1.
I am here, That if we shall seek for him, he will be found of us. Let us with
ready and willing minds, follow this caller, let us hear when he speaks,
let us answer when he calls: let us be obedient when he commands, in all
humblenes submitting our selves, under his mighty hand, Psalm. 130, 7.
that he may exalt us unto glory, for with the Lord there is mercy, and with
him there is plenteous redemption: as in the Scriptures aforesaid set down is
most amply showed.

This merciful father, according to his accustomed goodness, not for any thing
that he saw in mankind, looked upon him, to make him his child: but even when
they were weak, ungodly, unclean, sinners, and the enemies of God, dead in
sins and offenses: even for his own sake: when he saw thee in thy blood, even
when no eye pitied thee, to do any of these things unto thee, for to have
compassion upon thee, I saw thee (says the Lord) polluted in thine own blood,
and I said unto thee, ^zech. 16.
when thou wast in thy blood, Thou shall live; even when thou wast in thy
blood, I said unto thee, thou shall live. And moved through love, wherewith he
most fatherly loved the world, he gave his only begotten son, that we might
live through him. Romans 5.^.
For herein God sets out his love toward us, seeing that while we were yet
sinners, christ died for us. Well (says S. John) Behold what love the Father
has given to us, John. 3. Romans 8.31.
that we should be called the sons of God. Now then if God be on our side, who
can be against us? who spared not his own son, but gave him for us all to
death. Let us (therefore) rejoice in this his love: not as the Lord reproved
the Jews, that for a space they would rejoice in the light which John the
Baptist brought, 2. Cor. 3.1^.
but so let us rejoice in the same, that we way enjoy the benefit of the same,
1. John 3.18.
in the saving health thereof. And that we may be changed, into the same image,
from glory to glory, as by the spirit of the Lord. So shall we also love not
in word, neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth.

The means whereby he calls, is (first) the preaching of the Gospel, the
certainty whereof is such, That (as the Apostle says) though that we, Gal.
1.8.
or an Angel from heaven, preach unto you any otherwise then that which we
have preached unto you, let him be accursed. Yea doubtless, I think (says
he) all things but loss for the excellent knowledge sake, Phil. 3.8.
of Christ Jesus my Lord. For whom I have counted all things loss, and do
judge them to be dungue, that I might win Christ. This is that which the
Angel said, Luke 2.10.
Be not afraid: for behold I bring you glad tidings of great joy, that shall
be unto all people. This is a doctrine and knowledge that passes all
knowledge, not given us by nature, but revealed from above, containing that
most wonderful message, concerning our Savior Christ Jesus, and the benefit
where withal we are blessed, and enriched by him, who of God, is made unto us,
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, 1. Cor. 1.30.
and redemption, being unto them which are called, both of the Jews and
Gentiles, 1. Cor. 1.24.
Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God: In whom God has blessed us,
with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ: and according to
his abundant mercy, Ephe. 1.3.
has begotten us again, unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ from the dead, 1. Pet. 1.3.
to an inheritance immortal and undefiled, etc. The sum whereof is to
believe, That Jesus Christ is the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of
the world. For he that believes in him, and shall be baptized, shall be saved.

Unto this divine and heavenly message of the preaching of the gospel,
concerning health and deliverance in Christ Jesus, to be received and believed
of us: for the further strengthening and increase of our faith, comes also the
Lords institution, in the ministration of the sacraments; which were ordained
for the gathering together of the saints, and for the work of the ministry.
And these sacraments have such affinity and agreement with the word, as that
whatsoever is given and promised unto us in the word, concerning our liberty,
freedom, health and salvation in Christ to be obtained, enioied, and received,
Even that do the sacraments, as signs and seals applied to the word, to
relieve and strengthen our infirmity, confirm and make sure unto us: and to
this end, they are called holy signs and seals, in the sight and eyes of men,
instituted of God: that by them he may more declare and seal unto us the good
things and merciful promises revealed in the gospel. Also they are a
^estimonie of Gods favor toward us, confirmed by an outward sign, with a
mutual testifiing of our godliness toward him. For sacraments are nothing else
then the promises of the gospel set forth and adorned with outwatd action and
ceremony.

And therefore in baptism we are washed with water, in the name of the Father,
the Son and the Holy ghost, to signify that we are received into grace and
favor, for the blood of Christ Jesus, shead for us, and are regenerate by his
spirit. And we on our parts, do hereby testify, and are bound that we will
hereafter in our lives and conversation, witness and show forth all newnes of
life, and the good increase of the fruits of the spirit of the Lord. And
therefore, being the church of Christ, we are gathered together by baptism and
the word: that first by that mark we may be discerned from other sects and
people: secondly, that thereby our faith may be confirmed: when as thereby
Christ witnesses that he washes us with his blood, conferreth and bestows
upon us remission of sins, justification, and regeneration: Thirdly, as it
teaches the unity of the church whereby we say, I believe the holy catholic
church: so also it shows that baptism is a knot or band, whereby the members
of Christ are bound or knit in mutual love one toward another, that as we
have many members in one body, and al members have not one office: so we being
many, are one body in Christ, Romans 12.^.
and every one one another members. And concerning this our washing and
regeneration, most aptly says one, Nostrae tum purgationis, tum
regenerationis, in patre causam, Call. instit^. lib. 4. ca. 15.6.
in filie materiam in spiritu effectum consequimur, and quodammodo distinct
cernimus. We get and obtain, and as it were after a sort, do see very
distinctly, In the Father the cause, in the Son the matter, and in the
Spirit, the effect, of our clensing and regeneration. For the father gives,
the son lays down his life for the sins of the world, and the holy spirit of
God sanctifies our hearts. For he performs that washing inwardly in the
soul, which the water is said to do outwardly to the body.

Now after that our good and gracious God, has thus into his peculiar, and
family received us, as his children and sons, as a loving father, most
careful of his people and chosen ones, he forsakes us not, but cherishes and
feeds us in the whole and continual course of our life. And therefore unto his
church he has given by the hand of his only begotten son, a spiritual and
heavenly banquet, where our Savior Christ is unto us that bread of life,
wherewithal our souls should be fed, to the true and blessed immortallitie,
and to have the end everlasting life. And therefore at this holy supper, being
so called, of the first institution thereof, the Lord Christ promises and
seals unto the faithful, That his body was broken and offered on the cross,
and his blood so surely and truly shead, as with my eyes I beheld the bread of
the Lord to be broken, and the cup to be distributed: and therefore so surely
is the child of God fed to life everlasting, by his body crucified, and his
precious blood shead: as my body, is outwardly fed by the hand of the
minister, by the bread and cup which are given unto me, as sure pledges of the
same.

1. Cor. 10.16.
To this end says the Apostle, The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not
the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the
communion of the body of Christ? 1. Cor. 11.26.
For we that are many, are one bread and one body, because we all are
partakers of one bread. For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this
cup; ye show the Lords death, till he come. In this holy institution of the
Lord therefore we seek the confirmation of our faith, our uniting unto Christ,
the testification of our obedience to the church of God, our desire and love
that we have to dwell together in unity, our gladness when they come together
to eat: that we may confirm the peace, unity and love of brethren. For that
holy supper shows forth unto us, that under one head, we are all made the
members of Christ Jesus, because we are all made partakers of one bread.

But herein I may say, woe to the world, because of offenses, yea the offenses
(I say) against this holy institution of the Lord; who are desirous hereof to
be partakers? who applies and uses it? as the remembrance of the death of
Christ Jesus for his sins? who does often resort thereunto, to confirm the
band of love amongst brethren? Or rather is it not in most places set down for
an ordinary work at Easter only? and never thought upon all the year
following. So that holy band of Christian unity of setting forth of the Lords
death, is rejected and contemned: we desire the world, and look upon the
earth: the things of God, and the things that are above where Christ sits on
the right hand of God we seek not for, nor hearken after them. If we would
judge our selves, we should not be judged of the Lord, but he judges us and
calls for a plague, and it deuoureth: he judges us and calls for a
famine; and that famine together with the adamant, brassie and flintie hard
hearts, rangeth and rag^th over the poor of the land: to eat up my people as
they would eat bread. And lastly he will call for a sword to make an end of
us, if we repent not; O consider this, Psalm. 50.22.
ye that forget God, least I pluck you away, and there be none to deliver you;
O let not the earth be your reioicing. Christ calls us up into heaven, unto
the table of the great king: Ascendamus cum domino, Hier.
in caenaculum magnum stratum atque mundatum, and accipiamus ab eo sursum
calicem noui testamenti. Let us ascend up with our Lord, into that great dining
chamber, adorned and made clean, and there above let us receive the cup of the
new testament. Chr. in 1. Cor. homil. 24.
Again, Vt terra nobis coelum sit, facit hoc misterium, Ascend igitur ad
coeli portas and diligenter attend: Imo non coeli, sed coeli coelorum, and
tunc quod dicimus, iutueberis. This mystery causes, that unto us the earth is
heaven: Ascend up therefore unto the gates of heaven, and mark diligently, Nay
I say not unto the gates of heaven: but unto the gates of the heaven of
heavens, and so shall thou see the things that I tell thee.

To conclude (therefore) this part, which contains the means whereby we are
called: that is, the preaching of repentance, and forgiveness of sins, in
the sweet promises of the Gospel, and the ministration of the holy Sacraments:
it is set down before in this effect, That we feel our burden, that we
taste of his feast, that we sit at his Supper, that we be partakers of the
Sacraments, that he stretches forth his mercy unto all, that we might
believe in him, that we might live through him, and enjoy everlasting life.

Now then it follows by order, that we show, whom he calls under the name
of Jew and Gentile, is comprehended, All mankind. Matt. 22.9.
Now when it is said, Go into the High ways, and as many as ye find, call
them to the marriage: Herein is described the calling of the Gentiles, which
might have stirred up the Jews unto zeal, as we read. Deuteronomy. 32.16.
They have provoked me, in them, which are no gods: I therefore will provoke
them to iealosie, in them which are no people; 21.
yea, in a foolish nation will I provoke them to anger. The Jews because they
were chosen by God, in the former place flattred themselves, as though the
grace of God should be addicted, and only shut up in them: even as though God
himself could not want, or be without them, by any means. Nay (says God) Seek
in the high ways, in the lanes and streets of the city. For the place, for
the degree, for the person make no regard, be they halt, lame, blind, maimed,
poor, rich. All which generality of places and persons, shows the franck and
free, bountiful and liberal, loving and universal, inuiting and calling of
the Lord our God. For the word witnesses accordingly. The servants went forth
into the ways, gathered all, as many as they found, both good and bad
together: so the wedding was furnished with guests (both good and bad together)
these they gathered without making choice, no man being shut out, for the
kingdom of heaven, is like unto a draw net, cast into the sea, Matt. 13.47.
that gathers of all sorts.

Also to his feast in mount Sion, he inuiteth all people, he sends his word,
the Gospel, to be preached; the Sacraments to be ministered to all nations, to
all the world, to every creature: Amongst them he will not the death of a
sinner; upon his son he has laid the iniquity of us all, he has taken away
the sins of the world. God loved the world: Go into all the world; he will
all men to be saved, and come to repentance, he has shut up all in unbelief,
that he might have mercy upon all. God is wonderful in his work, whom he
calls, and whom he changes. Therefore I thank him (says Saint Paul) which
has made me strong, that is, Christ Jesus our Lord: For he counted me
faithful, 1. Tim. 1.12.
and put me in his service, when before I was a blasphemer, and a persecuter,
and an oppressor: but I was received to mercy, etc. Again, Be not deceived,
neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor wantons, nor buggerers, 1. Cor. 6.9.
nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor railers, nor extorcioners, shall
inherit the kingdom of God: And such were some of you, but ye are washed, but
ye are sanctified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God.
Also the Ephesians, dead in sins and trespasses, Ephe. ^.
walking according to the course of this world, after the prince that rules in
the air, even the spirit that works in the children of disobedience, etc.
You has he quickened (says the Apostle. V^^s. 3.
) Among whom we also had our conversation in times past, in the lusts of our
flesh, in fulfilling the will of the flesh, and of the mind, and were by
nature the children of wrath, as well as others, etc. but God, which is rich in
mercy, etc. has quickened us, etc.

Now then, they that will profit in the school of Christ. Behold he freely
sends to all people, to all nations, to all creatures, to the good, to the
bad, to as many as ye can find, to the high ways, to the lanes, to the laden,
to the oppressed, to all the world, to blasphemers, fornicatours, adulterers,
and idolaters, to men dead in sins, possessed of Satan, children of the
world, children of wrath and disobedience, That none should despair, that none
should be discouraged, that all should draw near unto him: That he might do
unto them as he did to the Corinthians, to the Ephesians, to wash them, and
sanctify them by his spirit, that they being once far off, Ephe. 2.13.
might be made near, by the blood of Christ, Verse. 19.
that they might be no more strangers and forreiners, but Citizens with the
Saints, and of the household of God. And for this cause, as a learned man
says, The nations are so often invited, to laud and to glorify God, both in
the Psalms and Prophets, as in the 117. Psalm, Plemingius in Psalm. 84. Psalm.
117.
Praise the Lord all ye nations, praise ye him all ye people. For his loving
kindness is great toward us, and the truth of the Lord endures forever. And
aagaine, Let the people praise thee, 64.67.
O God, let all the people praise thee.

And further, to the great comfort of all those that seek the Lord, while he
may be found, The Lord is no less bountiful toward halt, lame, blind, and
dead miserable man, in perfourming of his mercies, then he is in promising. But
according as it is said: The Lord is full of compassion, and mercy, long
suffering, and of great goodness. He will not always be chiding, neither
keeps he his anger for ever: Psalm. 103.^.
Even so walks he, and deals with his children. We know how like a loving
Father, he reasoned with Abraham, with dust and ashes, to have condiscended to
his request, Genesis 18.3^.
if there had been but ten good men. How inuiteth h^ his people Israel, to be
converted unto him. If a man put away his wife, and she go from him, and become
another man's: shall he return again unto her? Ierem. 3.
Shall not this land be polluted? But thou have played the harlot with many
lovers, yet turn again unto me, says the Lord. And again, Thou disobedient
Israel, return, Verse 12.
says the Lord, and I will not let my wrath fall upon you; For I am merciful,
says the Lord, and will not always keep mine anger. Let us look upon
examples. It was taught unto Peter, Matt. 10.33
Whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my father
which is in heaven; But Peter which was taught this doctrine, denied the Lord
with an oath, yea, with cursing and swearing, Matt. 26.72 74.
That he knew not the man: but the Lord forgave him. David sat in the throne
of justice and judgment, yet to make way unto his wicked lust, he took
Bersabe, killed Vrias with the sword of the Ammonites, made the enemies of God
to blaspheme his name, wrought great wickedness in the sight of the Lord, 2.
Sam. 11.12, 24.
in numbering the people, yet the Lord pardoned him. King Manasse^ led the
people in abominations fifty and five years: And when he was in tribulation,
he besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself exceedingly, before the God
of his Fathers, 2 P^^. 33.12, 13.
and made intercession to him, and God was entreated of him, and heard his
prayer. Out of the woman sinner, Mark 16.9.
the Lord cast out seven Devils. Yea, despairing is not cast upon Simon Magus,
that great bewitcher of the people, but that the Apostle says unto him, Acts
^.22.
Repent (therefore) of thy wickedness, and pray God, that if it be possible,
the thoughts of thine heart may be forgiven thee, etc.

But I surcease upon the multitude of examples, and conclude with David, that
thus burst forth in his wonderful strait. ^Sam. 24.14,
Let us fall now into the hands of the Lord, for his mercies are great, etc.
Let us in all the imperfections of this life draw near unto him, who so
lovingly inuiteth us, I^r^m. 3.
saying: O ye disobedient children, return, and I will heal your rebellions.
Let us most gladly and readily answer: Behold, we come unto thee, for thou
art the Lord our God. And for these his mercies, his name be blessed and
praised for evermore.

But now we come to the last part, concerning prayer; the will of the Lord
being so manifestly set down as before, I doubt not but according to the same
will, it is very plain and evident to discern, for whom we ought to pray:
and on the other side, the vanity of those that have coined forms of prayer
herein, contrary to the good will of God, does appear also. When Moses was
about the work of the tabernacle of the Lord, and to finish the same he was
warned by God: ^eb. ^.5. Exodus 25.40 Heb. 8.6.
See, said he, that thou make all things according to the pattern showed thee
in the mount: so I doubt not but the Apostle being a minister of a better
testament, which is established upon bett^r promises, would ordeine public
prayer for the church of God according to the mind of Christ, and the wisdom
from above revealed unto him. As if he should reason; Is it thy mind O Christ,
to call in halt, lame, blind, maimed? Will thou in mercy bring in the fulness
of the Gentiles? shall thieves, adulterers, and Idolaters, be changed and
sanctified unto thee? shall thy holy commission of the word and sacraments, for
the subduing of the kingdom of sin, for the working of faith in thy children,
go forth to all the world, to every creature? shall the word be thy power to
salvation, to all that believe, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile?
Shall the Apostles then go into all the world, and shall I be an Apostle of
the Gentiles, to set forth these glad tidings amongst them? surely then shall I
teach the unrighteous thy ways: and sinners shall be converted unto thee.
Psalm. 51.13.
And then let the Gentiles praise God for his mercy; as it is written: For this
cause I will confess thee among the Gentiles, and sing unto thy name. And
again he says, To. 15.9, 10.
Rejoice ye Gentiles with his people. And again, Praise the Lord, All ye
Gentiles, and laud ye him all ye people together. And again Esaias says,
There shall be the root of Iesse, and he that shall rise to reign over the
Gentiles, in him shall the Gentiles trust. Then O Lord show thy servants thy
work, Psalm. 9^.1^.
and their children thy glory. And the glorious majesty of the Lord our God
be upon us, prosper thou the work of our hands upon us, O prosper thou our
handy work; 2. Cor. 11.2^. Phil. 4.11. 1. Cor. 9.22.
Let me care for all congregations, let me learn, in what estate so ever I
am, to be content: let me be made all things to all men, that I might by all
means save some.

And first then I give in precept unto thy church, concerning the truth of thy
word and doctrine: and I say unto Timothy: So do, that thou warn some, 1.
Tim. 1.3.4.5
that they teach none other doctrine, neither that they give heed unto fables,
and genealogies, which are endless, which breed questions, rather then godly
edifieng, which is by faith. For the end of the commandment is love, out of a
pure heart and a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned, etc. Then after ye
have had a special care for the soundnes of the truth and wholesome doctrine: I
exhort that first of all, 1. Tim. 2.
supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all
men, For kings and for all that are in authority, etc. For this is good and
acceptable in the sight of God our savior, who will that all men shall be
saved and come unto the acknowledging of the truth. Thus the Apostle, according
to the instruction given unto him, establishes not only in the church of
Ephesus, but in the same, in the whole church of Christ, that there be not only
sound doctrine established: but also public prayer for all estates, and all
mankind universally. For God inuiteth them, and calls them to be partakers
of his saving health. And great reason it should be according to the pattern
set down, and will of the Lord: the maine ground and foundation whereof is
this.

To whomsoever the word and sacraments do belong, for them we ought to pray.
But the word and sacraments do belong to all the world, to all nations, to all
creatures. Therefore we ought to pray for all the world, for all nations, for
all creatures. The Apostle in this calling, counts it not a time to desseuer
them whom God in the participation of his promises of his word and sacraments,
and in the preaching of the acceptable year of the Lord, has joined and knit
together: and therefore would that all might be prayed for, unto whom this
mercy of the Lord is offered. He doubts not but the foundation of God
remains sure, 2. Tim. 2.19.
and has this seal, The Lord knows who are his; but in this charge that is
laid upon him; who is offended and S. Paul burn not: and therefore according
to the will of the Lord, he would have all know him and come unto the truth.

Again the Apostle by the spirit of the Lord, saw the wonderful effects that
should grow and spring from the preaching of the gospel. For thereby, and by
the preaching of the same, the fierce lions shall be tamed, Esa. 11.^.
and made meek and humble, the wolf and the lamb shall feed together: Esa. 9.
the people that dwell in darkness shall behold the true light: all nations
shall see the salvation of our God.

For this wonderful work and building of the Lord, having the foundation in
the great love of God toward us, is dispensed first, by Preaching and Hearing,
Preaching and hearing
whereby in the effectual working of the spirit from above, H^b. 11.6.
faith is fashioned in us (For without faith it is impossible to please God.)

Then are we buried with Christ by Baptism into his death, that like as Christ
was raised up from the dead, Babtism^. To. 6.4.
to the glory of the father: So we also should walk in newnes of life. For to
walk in newnes of life, is to be to the glory of the father also: according
as it is said, Let your light so shine before men, etc. Now then that the law
of the spirit of life, which is in Christ Jesus, has freed us from the law of
sin and death: Mat. ^.16. Education. To. 8.2. To. 1.17.
we must have our Education in the word and sacraments, that we may grow from
faith to faith: That we may join virtue with faith, and with virtue
knowledge, and with knowledge temperance, and with temperance patience, 2. Pet.
1.5.
and with pati^nce godliness, and with godliness brotherly kindness, and with
brotherly kindness love; that we benot unfruitful, that Christ Jesus may dwell
in us, that we may avoid the danger of sin, that we may be sober, and watch;
1. Pet. 5.^.
for the adversary as a roaring lion goes about, Confirmation.
seeking whom he may devour, him we must resist, steadfast in the faith. And
(therefore) often hereunto, we must join the exercise of the faithful: the
participation of the holy supper of the Lord, to set forth the death of the
Lord till his coming. And especially herein the ministers of the Lord must
not be strange, but to be often with the people of God partakers and receivers:
That the flock by their example, may be more stirred and moved, highly to
esteem of the sacraments and the ordinance of God in his church. And therefore
as one says, Pastor Hemingij.
Qui autem pastores raro communicant, exemplo suo faciunt, vt sacramenta
veniant paulatium in comtemptum. And those shepherds which seldom
communicate, by their example bring to pass, that by little and little the
sacraments grow into contempt.

Rising again.
Herein is also daily rising again, and coming to the Lord to say unto him:
Forgive us our trespasses. And, O Lord though our sins testify against us,
deal with us according to thy name; for our rebellions are many, Ier. 14.7.
we have sinned against thee, O the hope of Israel, the Savior in the time of
trouble, why art thou as a stranger in the land, as one that passes by to
tarry for a night? Why art thou as a man astonished, and as a strong man, that
cannot help. Yet thou Lord, art in the midst of us, and thy name is called
upon, forsake us not, etc.

Salvation.
And the most effectual power of the word, preached unto us, To. 8.24. 1. Io.
5.4. 1. Tim. 4.16.
appears herein also. For in it hope is confirmed; and by hope we are saved:
by the same word, faith is established; and the victory that overcomes the
world, is even our faith: by this preaching, salvation comes: for in doing
this, thou shall both save thy self, and them that hear thee: And again,
Receive with meekness the word, which is graffed in you, Iam. 1.21.
which is able to save your souls. Such is the effect and power of the
Gospel: and so pleases it God, to crown and bless the labors of men, both
in preaching and hearing of the word and Gospel.

So then herein is most comfortable things laid up for the children of men;
C^ndemnation. Heb. 3 14.
For we are made partakers of Christ, if we keep sure unto the end, that
beginning wherewith we are vpholden. Otherwise let us know, that herein is
judgment, and Condemnation also, (as it is said:) And this is the
Condemn^tion, John 3.19
That the light came into the world, and m^n loved da^kenesse, rather than
light, because their deeds were ^uill. So, as there is no condemnation, to
them that are in Christ Jesus; so on the other side, to them that love
dark^n^sse, that delight in sin, that walk after the flesh: this is their
condemnation, That the light is come, and they have not received, nor b^l^eued
in the same.

Lastly, Eternal life. Heb. 11.
because faith is the ground of things hoped for, and the evidence of things
that are not seen: we shall in this calling and prea^hing of the Gospel,
behold the end of our faith, the salvation of our souls. For that a crown of
righteousness is laid up for bel^euers. For herein is also for them, that have
run well, Life eternal. And this is Life eternal, John 17.3^
That they know thee to be the only very God, and whom thou have sent Jesus
Christ; This is then an understanding, and a knowledge, that pass^th all
knowledge; and therefore we must endeavor, that our conversation may be, Phil.
1.27.
as becomes the Gospel of our Savior Christ, That in all things we may be
made rich in him, in all kind of speech, 1. Cor. 1.5.
and in all knowledge: till we all meet together, in the unity of faith, and
the acknowl^dging of the son of God, Ephe. 4.13
unto a perfect man; and unto the measure of the age, of the fullness of
Christ: which God work in us, for his great mercies sake.

To conclude then this point, we behold here a brief collection, concerning
that wonderful husbandry, of the Lord our God, toward his children, in
calling of them to repentance. He inuiteth and calls in love, The message is
a message of peace and love, The ministers with the flock do walk and have
their conversation, not by sight, but by faith, and by love; Yea, if any be
cast out, 1. Cor. 5.5
it is done in love: that his soul may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus:
and not for destruction or confusion. In love, we do good to all men, we pray
for all men: 1. Cor. 13.7 1. Pet. 4.8
for love hops all things, indureth all things, and love covers the
multitude of sins: and therefore the rule of the Apostle must be followed, Let
all your things be done in love. 1. Cor. 16.14


Then (beloved) if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. 1. John
4.11.
Concerning this love, the son of God gives this precept, Matt. 5.44.
Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you,
pray for them which hurt you, and persecute you; that ye may be the children
of your Father which is in heaven, etc. Look hereupon. The commander is
Christ, the commandment is to his Church: and the end is, That they may be
like God, and his children: which merciful God makes his Sun to rise, on the
evil, and on the good. The work commanded is, Love, doing good, blessing, and
prayer. Toward whom? toward the rifraffe, the scum, the offscouring of the
world, enemies, haters, cursers, persecuters of God and good men, of his
Church, and his children.

This, Gods Church and his children, scattered upon the face of the earth, here
and there, at the good pleasure of God, must do toward this sort of people,
throughout all ages, to the end of the world, having herein no exception, of
Jew or Gentile, of Christian or Infidel, called or not called, elect or
reprobate, and herein to follow the example, of the heavenly father. Who^ shall
we think amongst these, in so many ages, in so many nations, amongst so many
infidels on the one side, and false brethren on the other side, without
respect, without naming, without condition, amongst enemies, haters, cursers,
persecters: whom (I say) shall we think, The Lord Jesus commands us, to
love, to bless, to pray for, to do good unto, amongst all these: but unto the
righteous, and unrighteous, that is (no doubt) amongst all these, to pray for
no small number, which still were without, and never belonged to the election
of the Lord. But howsoever that matter did stand in the sight of the Lord, the
Church of the Lord, is always bound, to show her love, and her duty. Whom shall
we think that Moses prai^d for, when he said: And now forgive them their
sin, or if thou will not, Exodus 3^.3^
wipe me, I pray thee, out of the book which thou have written: Surely,
amongst these were many perilous rebels, against Moses, and against God. How
wishes and prays the Apostle Saint Paul: For I have wished my self, Romans
9.3^
to be accursed from Christ, for my breethren, my kinsmen, as pertaining to the
flesh, which are the Israelites. Again. Brethren, my hearts desire, Romans 10.
and prayer to God for Israel, is, that they might be saved. Surely hereof S.
Augustine says thus: Numquid postremo Apostolum Paulum, Augustin^.
pro Iudaeis infidelibus, habentem talia vota, culpabis de quibus ^it: B^na
voluntas quidem cordis mei, and deprecatio ad Deum, pro illis in salutem, etc.
Lastly, will thou blame the Apostle S. Paul, having such prayers for the Jews
infidels, concerning whom he says, My good will sure from the very heart, and
prayer to God for them, is, for their health, and salvation. Thus these entreat
for the whole people, without any distinguishing of them, wishing themselves,
estranged from the Lord, and accursed: So that their people might know the
Lord, be restored unto his favor, and work his will. So unfeignedly have they
loved, and cared for the people of God: and so little have they esteemed
th^mselues, so they might further and promote, the glory and kingdom of the
Almighty.

Genesis 18.23.
Also we read that Abraham prayed for the Sodomits, not being warned so to do,
any way by the Lord. And Samuel against manifest prohibition, 1. Sam. 16.
prayed for Saul. The like also we read of Jeremy, Iere. 32.16.
that entreated for the city. They were repulsed by God, they were not heard;
What then? was their prayer ^r^uolous? was it superstitious? was it not of a
good mind? was it not of faith? If not of faith, then of sin. It seems hard
to condemn these wonderful pillars, and instruments of the Church of God, of
idle or impertinent prayer. And therefore I like master Caluins resolution
herein, In^^it. lib. 3. ^a. 20.15.
who thus speaks of it, Quamuts repulsam pas^i suerint, durum tamen videtur,
eos, fide priuare. Atqui solutio haec, modestis lectoribus (vt spero)
satisfaciet: generalibus principijs ^ulios, quibus iubet deus, indignos quoque
misericordia prosequi, non prorsus fide carnisse, quamuis in ipsa specie,
frustrata eos fuerint opinio. Prudenter alicubi Augus^inus: Aug de ciuit. dei.
li. 22. ca. 2
Quomodo (inquit) fide orant sancti, vt petant a Deo, contra quam decreuit,
nempe quia secundum voluntatem eius orant, non illam absconditam, and
incommutabilem sed quam illis inspirat, vt eos exaudiat ali^ modo, etc Although
these holy men suffered repulse, yet it seems a hard point to deprive them of
faith. And this solution (as we hope) shall content modest readers, That those
holy men, fetched the ground of their prayers, from those general principles,
wherein we know God commands, to pros^cute eu^n the most unworthy persons,
with mercy and favor: and not that they altogether, wanted faith, although in
^utward show their mind and opinion failed them. Most wisely has Saint
Augustine in a certain place: How (says he) do the Saints pray in faith, as
when they ask of God: even against that ve^ie thing, which he has decreed:
Sure for this cause: for they pray according to his will, not that hidden and
unchangeable will, but even that, which he inspireth them withal, that he may
hear them to effect, some other way.

And as before, we set down the prayer of our savior Christ, wherein he
beheld the secrets of God, in wonderful election toward his flock, and those
which his father had given him out of the world: so as he was the Lord and knew
all things, Io. ^1.17.
yet he sanctifies this holy calling, with his prayer, praieng for his
enemies, and persecutors, saying: F^ther forgive them, for they know not what
they do. As before he had given a doctrine, Luke 23.^4.
Do good to them that hate you and persecute you; Mat. 5.44.
Pray for them which hurt you, etc. Even this very doctrine he practices in
his own prayer. And he not only forgiueth the reuengement, but commends
their salvation unto his heavenly father, of whom, he so cruelly was pierced
and tormented. And S. Steven imitateth herein our savior Christ, who when he
was stoned, prayed unto the Lord, saying with a loud voice, Act. 7.60.
Lord lay not this sin to their charge. So mercy, pardon, and repentance, is
prayed for, even for those most cruel enemies of the Lord, and his saints: of
some of whom, yet no doubt it was said, By hearing ye shall hear, and shall
not understand: and seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceiu^. For this peoples
heart is waxed fat, and their ^ars are du^l of hearing, and with their eyes
they have wincked, Mat 13.14.
l^ast they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and should
understand with their hearts, and should retur^ a^ that I might heal them. 1.
Pet. 2.23.
So then hereunto are we called. For Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an
ensample, that we should follow his footesteppes, who did no sin, neither
was their guile found in his mouth: who when he was reviled, reviled not
again: when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed it to him that
judges righteously: to whose example, grant merciful father, that we may more
and more be confirmed.

To conclude then, concerning this point, namely of prayer in Calling, I have
somewhat at large set it down, that it may be the better thought on and
regarded. For we have heard of the Caller, the merciful God of the cause, his
great love, mercy and bounty: of the persons called, All the world, every
creature: of the means of calling, his Gospel, his truth, word and sacraments:
also the effects of calling, and the reasons whereupon, the prayer of the
Apostle in praying for all men, is grounded and established. Lastly, that we do
good to all men, that we work in love, that we walk in love, that we judge in
love, that we pray in love, according ^o the examples set down. I end
therefore this point, with this saying, of that excellent learned man M. Bucer,
who unto those that labor in the harvest of the Lord, gives this most
effectull exhortation.

Maert. Buc. d^ cura animat^^^.
Verum dominus nobis misteria electionis suae, patefacere non vult sed mandat
nobis, vt eamus in mundum vniuersum, suumque euangelium praedicemus, omni
creaturae. In mundam vniuersum dicit, and omni creaturae. Itaque nobis hoc in
omnibus hominibus satis causae esse debet, vt ipsos ad vitam aeternam, omni
fidelitate quaeramus, quod a deo conditi, deique creaturae sunt. Atque ideo
dominus etiam commune p^suit nomen, (Omni Cre^turae.) But the Lord our God will
not make known to us the mysteries of his election, but commands us, that we
go into the universal world: and that we should preach his gospel to every
creature: this thing (therefore) should be cause enough unto us, concerning
all men, That we with all faithfulness, seek them out to the way of eternal
life: For that they be the workmanship of God, and be his creatures: and for
this cause also the Lord gave forth this common name (Every creature.)

The fourth part. Of the practice of the Church.
NOw in the fourth part, we come to the practice of the church of God, from
time to time, concerning this kind of public prayer. Ierem. 6.16.
The counsel of the Lord by the P^ophet, is herein most profitable for us. For
thus says the Lord: Go into the streets, consider and make inquisition for
the old way, and if it be the good and right way, then go ther^in, that you
may find rest for your souls, etc. So let us go, into the way of the fathers,
of ancient churches: and let us see how they have prayed, and I doubt not, but
for this matter, we shall rest, whereon to stay our selves.

From the mouth of our savior Christ concerning this: For whom we ought to
pray, I find set down thus: Orandum porro esse, non tantum prose, Centur. 1.
lib. 1. cap. 4.
verumetiam pro alijs, ex oratione, quam vocamus dominicam, liquet, And
moreover a man must pray, not only for himself, but also for others, as
appears by that prayer, which we call the Lo^ds prayer.

It should seem that this question, For who^ we should pray, has not ben so
much doubted of: for S. Basil thus has, Basil. mag. ^^hic.
Orandum esse pro subditorum profectu, and illius nomine gratias agendas. That
we ought to pray for the amendment of the people or subjects, and to give
thanks to God in their name. And a learned man ^etteth it down after this
sort, Heerbra^d, Comp^nd. Th^ol.
P^o quibus orandum est? and pro nobis ipsis and pro alijs: pro impetrandis
bonis, and auertendis malis quibus precamur public and priuatim. Sicut
saluator noster in oratione dominica docuit panem nostrum etc. For whom ought
we to pray? Both for our ^elues and for others, for the obteining of good
things, and the turning away of evils, for whom we pray both publicly and
privately: as our savior taught us in that prayer, which w^e call the Lords
prayer Give us this day our daily bread, Forgive us our trespasses, Lead us not
into tempta^ion, But deliver us from evil So we see, to pray for our selves,
for the subjects, for others, are large terms, and shut out no body. But for
so much as we now speak of the Lords prayer, it shall not be amiss, somewhat
to say thereof, and to see what good doctrine to our purpose, may be gathered
therefrom.

First (therefore) concerning that prayer, Ciprian. Ser. 60 de orat. dominic.
S. Ciprian says thus, Quae enim potest esse magis spiritualis oration quam
quae a Christo nobis data est, a quo nobis and spiritus sanctus missus est?
Quae vera magis apud patrem praecatio, quam quae a filio qui est veritas, de
eius ore prolata est. For what more spiritual prayer may there be, the^ that
which is given to us of Christ: from whom also the holy ghost is sent unto us?
What more true prayer in the fathers presence then that which is from the
son: which is the truth, and was spoken by him, Aug. epist. 107.
or came forth of his mouth. S. Augustine writing to Vitalis thus says,
Orationem dominicam nosti, nec dubito te deo dicere: pater noster qui es in
coelis: lege ^xpositerem eius beatissimum Ciprianum and quemadmodum exposuerit
quod ibi dicitur fiat voluntas tua sicut in coelo and in terra diligenter
attend, and obedienter intellige: Jtem 10.7. lib. 2. de b^^^ persevere.
profecto docebit te ^rare pro infidelibus inimicis ecclesiae secundum
praeceptum domini dicentis, orate pro inimicis vestris, and hoc orate, vt fiat
voluntas dei, sicut in eis, qui iam fideles sunt, and portant imagine^ calestis
hominis, and propterea caeli nomine digni sunt; ita and in eis, qui per
infidelitatem, non nisi imaginem terreni hominis, portant, and ob hoc, terra
merito nuncupantur. The Lords praie^ thou know, And I doubt not but thou
say it to God: Our father which art in heaven, etc. Read blessed Cyprian the
expositer thereof, and how he has expounded those words, where it is said, Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven, etc. Diligently attend, and
obediently understand. Surely he will teach thee to pray for the infidel
enemies of the Church, according to the commandment of the Lord, saying: Pray
for your enemies: And this thing pray, that the will of God may be done, as in
them which now are faithful, and bear the image of the heavenly man, and for
that cause are thought worthy of the name of heaven: So likewise in them,
which through infidelity, bear none other, but the image of the earthly man,
and for this cause are worthily called earth. And it follows: Vt ipsis etiam
poscamus fidem, quam fideles habent, That we may require of God such faith for
them, as the faithful have. As if he should say, Thy will be done in these
infidel enemies of the Church, That in such sort as the faithful do, they may
come home to the faith, and praise thy name. He calls them earth, which
phrase also, the scripture favors. As, For he comes, Psalm. 96.13. Genesis 3.
Esa. ^.
for he comes to judge the earth. Thou art earth. Hearken O earth: Sing
praises thou earth: meaning herein mankind, dwelling on earth. That being
estranged from God, 49 13.
and bearing the image of the earthly man, they might be converted and know the
Lord.

Instit. lib. 3. cap. 20.43.
And upon this petition, master Calvin says thus: Inbemur ergo optare: Sicut in
coelo, nihil geritur, nisi ex d^i nutu, placedeque Angeli ad omnem
rectitudinem, compositi sunt: Sic terram omni contumacia, and prauitate
extincta) eiusmodi imperio subigi. We are therefore commanded to desire, As in
heaven nothing is done, but at the Lords commandment: and that the Angels of
God, in ready sort are set, to his direction and government: So likewise, that
the earth (all stubbornness and wickedn^sse extinguished) may in like
government and empire, be brought under, and be subjected unto him. So should
we be zealous on the Lords behalf, That we must pray, That all may know him,
that all may obey him.

Chrisost in 6. ca. Mat. hom. 20.
And Chrysostom notes hereupon, Et ru^sus communem omnium curam, vnumquemque
orantium suscipere praecepit. Non enim aixit, Fiat in me, vel in nobis voluntas
tua, sed prorsus vbique terrarum. Vt scilicet eradicetur error, and veritas
inseratur: atque vndique vitijs; explosis, virtus reuertatur, Inque illius
cultu nihil prorsus terra distet a coelo. And again he has commanded every
one that prays, to take in hand a care, common to all. For he said not, Let
thy will be done in me, or in us; but altogether every where on earth: That
surely error may be rooted out, and the truth may be graffed in, and on all
sides, vices being put to flight, virtue may return. And that in worship
belonging to God, The earth may nothing at all differ from heaven. So that for
the glory of God, he that prays, must put on a care common to all. And
again, master Calvin. Call. harmo. ^uang.
Sed hic iubemur alio modo precari, vt siat eius voluntas, nempe vt placide, ac
sine repugnantia, illi obtemperent omnes creaturae. Quod ex comparatione,
melius liquet: Nam sicuti Angelos, etc. But here we are commanded to pray in
another sort, That his will may be done, that is, that in ready so^t, and
without resistance, all creatures may obey him; which thing better appears by
a comparison. For as he has his Angels ready at all his commandments,
whereupon they are called his ministers, always ready in his obedience and
service: So desire we that the wills of all men, may be fashioned into such a
consent of Gods justice, that of their own accord, they yield themselves
whither so ever he calls them. And sure this is a godly prayer, when we
submit our selves to the will of God, and like the things, that please him. But
this prayer contains yet some thing further, that is, that God (all
stubbornness of man, which cease not to rebel against him: being abolished
and driven away:) That (I say) God would make them tractable and humble, That
they will and desire nothing, but that may please him, and be to his liking.

Lastly, Saint Cyprian has thus again, Ciprian ser^^. 6. de orat. dominic.
Ante omnia pacis doctor, atque vnanimitatis magister, singulatim noluit, and
priuatim prccem fieri: vt quis cum precatur, prose tantum precetur. Non
dicimus, pater meus qui in coelis es, nec panem meum da mihi hodie: nec dimitti
sibi tantum vnusquisque delicta postulat; aut vt in tentationem, non inducatur,
atque a malo liberetur, pro se solo rogat: publica est nobis and communis
oration, vt quando oramus non pro vno, sed pro populo toto oramus. Quia totus
populus, vnum sumus; Deus pacis and concordiae magister, qui docuit vnitatem,
sic orare vnum, pro omnibus voluit, quomodo in vno omnes, ipse portauit. Before
all things, this doctor and teacher of peace, and master of unanimity and
agreement, would not, prayer should be made for one alone, or privately: As,
that a man when he prays, should pray only for himself. We say not, My
father, which art in heaven; neither give me my bread this day; neither does
every man require, his sins to be forgiven unto himself, only: or that he
may not be led into temptation, and be delivered from evil: does he ask for
himself alone. It is a prayer public and common unto us. And when we pray,
we pray not for one alone, but we pray for the whole people; For being the
whole people, yet are we but one. The God of peace and master of concord, who
has taught unity would so; one man to pray for All men, as he in one bare us
all.

So we learn and behold, how according to the commandment and prayer set
down by our Savior Christ, the Church has prayed, in that his prayer, and
what was meant thereby, and to whom it had relation: and in these expositions,
we learn also, how we ought to be affectioned and minded toward the world,
and mankind therein. And hitherto we see, that even in this prayer of the
Lord: Prayer for all men, and for all mankind, to be obedient to the will of
their heavenly father, is a public exercise, and practice of the Church of
God. Now let us go forward.

^ent. 2. lib. 2. cap. 7.
Secondly, we read in the fornamed book, this title, Canones apostolorum ex
vetustis and catholicis codicibus descripti. That is, Canons of the Apostles,
drawn forth of ancient, and catholic books. Amongst them ye find thus,
Canon de communibus precibus: That is, a rule concerning common prayers. And it
is S. Paul's rule, Ante omnia, etc. 1. Tim. 2.
Before all things let prayers, and supplications, intercessions, and giving
of thanks be made for all men, for kings and all that are in authority: that we
may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. As
concerning this rule of prayer, and the interpretation thereof: enough has
been said heretofore: So yet the thing we are to mark here, is, the practice
thereof, and that it is a rule set up for common prayer in the Canons of the
Apostles: and I have no doubt, but even so received, by the church of God even
to this day; For as Paul delivered it to Timothy for Ephesus: So now this
teaches that it was a rule for all Christian churches; and therefore it is
written concerning S. Cyprian, C^ntur. 3. cap. 6.
Et testatur Ciprianus li. 2. epistola. 4. and li 3. epistola. 1. and in sermon.
sexto de oratione dominica: Publica (inquit) est nobis, and communis oration,
non pro vno, sed pro toto populo. Says Ciprian in his second book, etc. We
have public and common prayer; not for one, but for the whole people. And
again, Cent. 4. cap. ^ cap. 7.
they ordained holy prayers for all things necessary, for the happy state of
the empire, for emperors, for the peace of the church, for public
tranquillity, for the enemies, for infidels, and such as were not yet
converted, Orasse etiam eos pro dissentientibus and haereticis. And they prayed
also for them, that dissented from the church, and for heretics. So well agree
all these things to our Savior Christ and his Apostles, that so before had set
down and taught.

According hereunto (an example to be marked) the holy man and servant of the
Lord, Policarpus, as it is written of him: was accustomed even whole days and
nights, to continue in prayer, and to pray most humbly to God, for the peace of
all churches throughout the whole world: spoken to the shame of many of us in
these days, unto whom there is no touch, sorrow, or affection for the
afflictions of Joseph, Am^s. 6.6.
but they drink wine in boules, and anoint themselves with the chief
ointment, their eyes swell with fatnes, and they do what they list: Walking on
still, in gluttony and drunkenness, Psalm. 73.7.
in chambring and wantones, in strife and enuieng: neither crucifieng the
flesh, nor remembering the day is at hand, nor yet seeking to put on the Lord
Jesus Christ, Romans 13.14.
That they might live and rest with him for evermore. T^erfore goes my people
into captivity, because they have no knowledge, etc.

The same holy father, writing to the Philippia^s, which epistle also Irenaeus
commends, gives this ^ule of prayer, Pro omnibus sanctis orate, 1. Tim. 2.
Polic^rp. ad Philip. Dio^^s. Ar^opag Iren. aduers. haeres. valen. lip. 3. cap.
3.
orate etiam pro regibus, and potestatibus and principibus, atque pro
persequentibus and odientibus vos, and pro inimicis crucis, vt fructus vester
manifestus sit in omnibus, vt sitis in illo perfecti. Pray ye for all the
saints, pray ye also for kings, powers, authorities, and princes, and for them
that persecute and hate you, and for the enemies of the cross, that your fruit
may be made known in all things, and that you may be perfect in him.

S. Augustine, a man that highly reverenced S. Ciprian, and much allowed and
alleged his interpretations, and concerning the prayers of the church, had
much ado with many adversaries. This father disputing against them, that
thought that for the prayers of the saints, All guilty whatsoever were to be
spared, Etiam pro Angelis, quibus paratus est, Aug de ciuit. dei, lib. 21. cap.
24.
ignis aeternus, vt deus sententiam suam mitiget, and reflectat in melius,
eosque ab illo igne, faciat al^^nos, etc. Even for the Angels, for whom
eternal fire is prepared, that God would mittigate his sentence, and show
favor, and deliver them from that fire, etc. Vt misericordia non patiantur,
quod veritate merentur, quod nemo sanae fidei dixerit, nemo dicturus est, etc.
That through mercy they might not suffer that which in truth they deserve:
which thing none of sound faith has ever spoken, neither will any man speak.
At last he comes to the prayers of the church, concerning mankind,
distinguishing them from the other, and he speaks after this sort: Nunc enim
propterea pro eis orat ecclesia, quos in genere humano habit inimicas, quia
tempus est poenitentiae fructuosae. Nam quid maxim pro eis orat, 1. Tim. 2.
nisi vt det illis deus, sicut dicit Apostolus, poenitentiam and resipiscant,
de diabol^ laqueis, a quo captiui tenentur, secundum ipsius voluntatem denique
si de aliquibus, ita ecclesia certaesset, vt qui sunt illi etiam noscet, qui
licet ad huc, in hac vita sint, constituti, tamen predestinati sunt in aeternum
ignem, ire cum diabolo, tam pro eis non oraret, quam nec pro ipso. Sea quia de
nullo certa est, orat pro omnibus duntaxat hominibus, inimicis suis in hoc
corpore constitutis: nec tamen pro omnibus exauditur: pro his enim solis
exauditur; qui etsi aduersantur ^cclesiae; ita tamen sunt praedestinati, vt pro
eis exaudiatur ecclesia, vt filij efficiantur ecclesiae. That is, But now
therefore the church prays for those, whom in mankind she has her enemies,
because that now is the time, of fruitful repentance: for what especially does
the church pray for, for them; but that God would grant unto them, (as the
Apostle speaks) repentance, and that they might reclaim themselves, from the
snares of the devil, of whom they are held captive according to his will. To
be short, if concerning any persons, the church were so certain and sure, that
she did also know who they were, who although they be here placed, yet in this
life: yet are predestinate to eternal fire, to go with the deuell: the church
would no more pray for them, then she does for him himself: But because she is
certain of none, she prays together for all men, her enemies constitute in
this body: neither yet for all is her prayer heard; For she is ^eard for them
only which although they be enemies to the church: yet are they so
predestinate, as that the church is heard for them and they are made the sons
and children of the church.

The church (says S. August.) praith not for damned spirits, or devils, but
for her enemies in mankind. The reason is: it is a time of fruitful repentance:
and the church knows not amongst them, who they are, that are predestinate to
eternal fire. ^or if she did, she would pray no more for them, then she did
for the devils: but because she is certain of none, she prays only for all
men, and her enemies: though her prayer be not heard for all; a notable place
to be considered and well pondered, as well concerning public prayer, as also
concerning the judgment of the church.

Ambrose.
And S. Ambros^ as is noted before. Haec regula ecclesiastica est tradita a
magistr^ gentium, qua vtuntur sacerdotes nostri, etc. This Ecclesiastical rule
is given of the master of the Gentiles, which our priests do use, to the
intent they may make supplication for all men. And concerning the same father,
it is noted thus, Author librorum de vocatione gentium, sine is Ambrosius, sine
Prosper est, explicans locum Pauli. 1. Tim. 2.

Ex^men concilij Trid^nt. de inuocat. sanctorum.
Vt fiant obsecrationes, postulationes, and gratiarum actiones, pro omnibus
hominibus (inquit): Quam legem supplicationis, ita omnium sacerdotum and omnium
fidelium, d^uotio concorditer tenet, vt nulla pars mu^di sit, in qua huiusmodi
orationes non caelebrentur, a populis Christiani^. Supplicat ergo vbique
ecclesia deo, non solum p^o sanctis and in Christo iam regeneratis, sed etiam
pro omnibus infidelibus, and inimicis crucis Christi, pro haereticis and
s^hismaticis. The author of the book of the calling of the Gentiles, whether
it were Ambrose, or Prosper, expounding the place of Paul, 1. Tim. 2. That
prayers, interc^ssions, and giving of thanks be made for all me^ (says he):
which law of praying and entreating the Lord, the devotion of all Priests and
all the faithful, does so with one consent hold, as that there is no part of
the world, in the which this sort of prayers are not celebrated, of Christian
people. The Church (therefore) does every where entreat the Lord, not only
for the Saints, and such as are in Christ already regenerate; but also for all
infidels, and enemies of the cross of Christ, for heretics, for schismatikes,
etc. And he adds further, Et talia exempla multa extant in historijs quod
tempore belli pestis, tempestatum, terrae motuum, decretae and caelebratae
fuerint, tales publicae ad deum supplicationes. And such examples many, are
extant in histories, That in the time of war, of the plague, of tempests, of
earthquakes, such kind public supplications to God were decreed and celebrate.

Here is first to be noted, that it was the Apostles rule, and therefore
publicly, All priests, All the faithful, prayed for All people, for All
infidels: There is no part of the world, in which there is not such public
prayers: Then I doubt not, but we of the English Church, do pray like some
part of the world.

And Chris^stome upon the same rule, has thus, Chrysostom.
Quasi c^mmuni^ quidam totius orbis pater sacerdos est, Dignum igitur est, vt
omnium curam agat, omnibusque pro^ideat, sicut and d^us cuius ministerio
seruit, and fungitur vice: The Priest or Minister, is as a certain common
father of the whole world: It is meet (therefore) that he take the care of
all, and do foresee for all, as God, in whose ministry he serves, and in
whose stead he is, etc. And following, Atque id nouerunt fideles, etc. And the
faithful know, how eu^rie day, morning and evening, p^aiers are powered out to
the Lord, and how for all the world. And for kings, and for all that are in
authority, obsecrations and inte^c^ssions are done of the Church.

And saint Augustine, P^ulinus Augustin^ epist. 58.
when Paulinus moved this question: Wh^reas Saint Paul (says he) says: I
beseech you therefore, first of all prayers, supplications, interc^ssions, and
giving of thanks be made, for all men, etc. I pray you expound unto me, what
difference there is in this diversity of words. Aug. Paulin^ epist. 59.
ques^. 5.
Saint Augustine setting forth his iudgem^nt therein at large, takes occasion
to show, how in public prayer, the same rule of Saint Paul is used, making
ther^ of a long discourse (whereunto I remit the godly reader:) Part yet of the
words are after this sort: Multa quippe hic dicipossunt, quae improbanda non
sunt, sed eligo in his verbis hoc intelligere, quod omnis, vel pene omnis
frequent at ecclesia: vt precationes accipiamus dictas, quas facimus in
caelebratione sacramentorum, antequam illud quod est in domini mensa, incipiat
benedici: Orationes, cum benedicitur and sanctificatur, and ad distribuendum
comminuitur, quam totam petitionem, fere omnis ecclesia, dominica oratione
concludit. For hereof many things may be spoken, which are not to be misliked.
But I choose in these words to understand this thing, which all, or almost all,
the Church does frequent, as that we take Precationes, or Prayers, then to be
made, which we make in the celebration of the Sacraments, before that begin to
be blessed, which is upon the Lords Table: ( Orationes, intreatings or
requests) when it is blessed, and sanctified, and is broken to be distributed.
All which petition, almost the Church does conclude, with the Lords prayer. And
following: 1. Tim. 2.
Vt his breuiter perstrictis non putaretur negligendum esse, quod sequitur pro
omnibus hominibus, pro regibus and ijs, qui in sublimitate sunt, vt qui etiam,
etc. That these things thus briefly knit together, it might be thought, that
that which follows, was not to be neglected; For all men, for kings, and all
that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet life in all godliness and
honesty. Hitherto have we spoken, concerning the prayers of the Church:
Namely, of the Lords prayer, and of the rule of the Apostle, set up, used, and
followed: and that they comprehend in them the hearty desires of the Church,
and Gods children, for the propagation of the Gospel, the conversion of
mankind. That all nations may understand and see the salvation of our God.

Now then, these things being so, and that the prayer of the son of God, was
of such account, as to be repeated in the Church, and the rule of the Apostle
observed alike, with all fidelity: how dare some amongst us say, That the
Lords prayer is not to be said, or not to be repeated. The Lord says, Pray
thus: Matt. 6.9.
The Apostles did as he commanded: The Church of God customably prays it:
and we in these latter days, come and disdain the same. On the other side,
Saint Paul's rule to pray for all men, A rule of public prayer in the Church
of God, from the Apostles. And we in these latter days, say: All men are not
to be prayed for. Thus we fleet, and are carried about with every blast of
doctrine, not searching the causes or foundations thereof.

Now (therefore) say: After these examples thus showed and practiced by the
Fathers, how should the Church of England, have set down her public prayers,
Truly, to answer unto God; learnedly, for example unto others; faithfully,
for the edifying of simple ones: How (I say) should they religiously, have set
them down, for those purposes; if they had not followed the example of Christ,
of the Apostles, and of the Fathers, walking in their steps? And (therefore)
I do verily think, that the holy and reverend Fathers, so setting them down,
(as in our common prayer book appears) saw far more into the state of the
primative Church, and so successively in the church of God, then many a one,
that reprehendeth or finds fault in these days.

We end the ministration of the Sacrament of the holy Supper of our Lord, and
the Sacrament of holy Baptism, with the Lords prayer. Have not the Fathers
received it by practice? Says not Saint Augustine, as it is before, speaking
of the Sacrament, Quam totam petitionem, fere omnis ecclesia, dominica oratione
concludit. All which petition, the whole Church almost, concludes with the
Lords prayer. And have not they discharged themselves, like good men, in
following the pattern of the ancient Church, and of the Church of God?

Again, we pray in the Let^nie, That it would please thee to have mercy upon
All men. Also we pray. Have mercy upon All Jews, Turks, Infidels, and
heretics, etc. Does not the Lord so command, to pray for our enemies, to pray
for them that persecute us? Says not Saint Paul, Pray for all men? Shall not
this be a rule for Gods Church as long as we live? Nescie^tes quis ad numerum
praedestinatorum, August. Dionis. Car^hu. in 18. ca. M^^. Artic. 32 fol. 61. ^x
Aug.
and quis ad sortem, reproborum pertineat, sic affici debemus, charitatis
affectu, vt velimus omnes saluari, and ideo omnibus fraternae correptionis
debemus affectum imp^ndere, sub spe diuini auxilij. We not knowing who
b^longeth to the number of the predestinate, and who belongs to the lot of
the reprobate, should so be touched with the affection of love, as that we
would A^l men should be saved: and therefore we must bestow the affection of
brotherly reproouing, upon all: under hope of the heavenly, and divine help
of God. And if we be to bestow the affection of brotherly reproving or
chasticement, then our prayer also, and what so ever may further, the good and
amendment of our neighbors and brethren.

Also, after the reading of the Gospel, we read thus: For the whole state of
Christ's Church, etc. Almighty and everliving God, which by thy holy Apostle,
have taught us to make prayers and supplications, and to give thanks for All
men, etc. Is not this after the rule of the Apostle, and according to the
example of S. Augustine, in the place above cited? how then are these things so
much misliked? that some when they minister the Sacraments, or do preach,
leave out the Lords prayer, as unworthy to stand there, or too childi^h to be
said. Othersome by no means, will pray for All men.

When Saul pursued David, and that David now had pleaded his innocence, that
Saul could not deny the same. Then Da^id said, After whom do thou pursue? 1.
Sam. 24.14
After a dead dog, and after a flee; the Lord therefore be judge, and judge,
betwixt thee and me, and see and plead my cause, etc. So it seems to me,
that this rule of the Apostle speak^th against them. The Lord plead my cause
betwixt you and me, that have brought in errors, disquieted the church, and
abused the people infond opinions.

After the time of the fathers above mentioned, the prayers of the church began
to be corrupt; and as I read. Examen. con^. Tr^^en^^.
Pontificiorum historiae narrant inuocationem sanctorum, additam and insertam
esse litaniae, a Gregorio Magno, circa annum dom. 600. The histories of the
Popes do show, that invocation of the saints added and inserted to the
Letanie, by Gregory the great, about the year six hund^ed. T^erfore, let us
look into the practice of the reform^tion of our days, and let v^ see how
much unlike unto the church of England, in this point they are, or whether they
agree in one or no.

First therefore there is a book, whose title is thus. The church of Scotland,
and the English Geneua church.


The form of prayers and ministration of the sacramen^s etc. Used in the
English church at Geneua, approved and ^eceiued by the church of Scotland, etc.

Print^d at Edenbur^h 1565.

In that book there is a prayer named, For the whole state of Christ's church:
and therein we read thus; Furthermo^e, for as much as by the holy Apostle we
be taught to make our prayers, and supplications for All men: we pray not
only for our selves here present, but beseech thee ^lso to reduce all such as
be yet ignorant, from the miserabl^ captivity of blindness and error, to the
pure understanding of thy heavenly truth. That we all with one consent and
unity of minds may worship thee, our only God and savior.

Geneua.
The very same words ye read in the (Geneua English) with this title: Approved
by the famous and godly learned man, M. John Calvin. Printed at Geneua. 1556.

The very same words, ye read in a book of the form of Common Prayers,
Reformed ^hurches.
administration of the sacraments, agreeable to Gods word, and the use of
reformed churches: Printed at Midleburgh. 1587.

Secondly the church of Scotland, in a prayer called, Another manner of prayer
after the sermon; ye ^ead thus: Moreover we make our prayers unto thee, O Lord
most merciful father, for All men in general, that as thou will be known to
be the savior of all the world, by the redemption purchased by thine only son
Jesus Christ: even so that such as have been hitherto holden captive, in darkness
and ignorance, for lack of the knowledge of thy gospel, may through the
preaching thereof, and the clear light of thy holy spirit, be brought into
the right way of salvation.

These words the book of reformed churches, of Midleburgh above specified,
somewhat changes, saying, Moreover we make our prayers unto thee, O Lord God
most merciful father, for All men, that as thou would have all sorts of men
saved and come to the knowledge of the truth: so it may please thee, that such
as have been hitherto holden captive in darkness, and ignorance, for lack of
the knowledge of thy gospel, may through the preaching thereof, etc. As above,
so have we here, the example of other reformed churches also: all which we see,
keep the Apostles rule, pray for All men, for all such as be yet ignorant, for
all men in general, for such as are captive in darkness and ignorance. And
sometime end the same their prayers with the Lords prayer also: So do we
behold prayer for all men, and even the very Apostles rule, in the church of
God, continued from time to time: and thus much for the practice of the church.

The fifth part. The Objections against it answered.
NOw we come to the fifth and last place, which is concerning the obiectio^s,
against this ancient, public, charitable, and religious prayer of the church,
for universal mankind: which whosoever backbiteh or speaks against, he
backbiteth and speaks against the word of God, and against the ancient order
of prayer of Gods church, as sufficiently has been declared.

The first Objection. WE ought not to pray for all: because All shall not be
saved.
The Answer.

We have no such rule in scripture, that says, we ought not to pray for all:
but we have a rule of S. Paul's, that says, Pray for all men: But a rule that
says, Pray not for all men: I find none such. Him therefore that flatly
infers a contradictio^ against the scriptures of God, the church of God
ought to suspect. For Christ we know, and Paul we know, but who is this?
That he should set down a rule against the Lord his God. We may say unto him
as Moises said sometime to the presumptuous, Number. 16.11.
Ye take too much upon you, ye sons of Leui.

Secondly, the proposition here inferred, has his foundation in calling, and
in the outward service due unto God, in prayer, in his congregation upon earth:
the conclusion or reason is drawn from the purpose of God in election, and
applied and joined thereunto, which ought not to be. For from outward calling,
to secret election, we may not reason. Thirdly the Apostle, preventing all such
cauelling, teaches us to reason far better, saying: Pray for all men, For God
will have all men to be saved.

The second Objection. IN mankind there are reprobates: and we ought not to
pray for reprobates.
The Answer.

The Lord in his C^mmission says not, Go preach, to elect and ^^probate: bu^*
P^each the Gospel to ^uery creature: he does not ^^stinguish them to our
hands: but looks for increase. Again, We pray for the salvation of All, whom
w^ know to be created to the image of God: and unto whom t^ere is the same
nature with us: on the other side, we lean the d^struction of those to Gods
iudgem^nt, whom h^e himself knows to be reprobat^s Lastly, we say as master
Calvin says, Cal^in Ioh. 17.
Hunc and illum and s^ngulos, optare debemus saluos esse, atque ita complecti
totum humanum genus, quia nen dum distinguere licet electos a reprobis. We
ought to wish this man and the other man, and so every man to be saved, and so
comprehend All mankind. For as yet we may not distinguish or separate, the
elect from the reprobate.

The third Objection. Io. 17.9.
Our savior Christ says: I pray not for the world, etc. He would not pray for
the wicked ones in the world. We should do so to. etc.
The Answer.

This prayer of the Lord, was particular unto himself as the great shepherd
of our souls, and therefore not to be drawn into example of us, (whereof is
enough spoken before.)

Again as one notes upon the words, Dionis. Cart. in Johan. 17. Artic. 41.
Chr^stus vt deus and homo, nouit distinct and plene, qui and quot essent,
saluandi, qui etiam, and quot essent damna^di. etc. Christ as God and man, both
distinctly and fully knows, who and how many should be saved; who also, and
how many should be damned: We prostrate before his majesty, dare not speak
or presume any such thing.

But let us see how Christ has prayed, John 17.20.
and how he teaches ^o pray, for in the same Chapter he says: I pray not for
these alone, but for them also which shall believe in me, through their word.
He prayed not only for them which were pr^sent, as in the ninth verse: but also
for them which were to come, and should believe in him. Also according to the
prophecy long before of him: he prayed for the transgressors. Esai. 53.12.
So (as we read) in the Gospel, he fulfilled it, saying, Father, Luke 23.34
forgive them, for they know not what they do. Upon which words, a learned
Father says, Pet. Martit Loci com.
Oblitus suorum malorum pro suis crucifixoribus, id est, pro nobis orat, qui
nostris peccatis illum crucifiximus: Ignosce illis, qui a nesciunt quid
faciunt. He forgetting his own injuries, prayed for his Tormentors or
crucifiers, That is for us, who with our sins have crucified him: saying,
Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do. And in this we are to
follow the Lord; in the other, to know the Lord: and in both, to honor him.

The fourth Objection, IF it be lawful to pray for the salvation of
Reprobates: Then is it lawful to pray, for Judas, and Saul, and Esau: of whom
the Scriptures do testify, That they be rejected of the Lord. Judas is
called the lost child of perdition, and a devil. John 6. Esau is said to find
no place to repentance, Though he sought the blessing with tears. Heb. 12. And
of Saul, the Lord himself in express words said, that he had rejected him. 2.
Sam. 7.
The Answer.

Let us suppose that Esau, Saul, and Judas, were alive: and so first let us
speak of them: Secondly of the Reprobates. Of Esau first, For yer the children
were borne, and when they had done neither good nor evil, etc. It was said
unto her: Romans 9.11.12
The elder shall serve the younger. Now after this voice of the Lord concerning
the children, Let us see whether the Church cast him off also, as rejected of
the Lord, and unworthy of his house, unworthy of their prayer, unworthy of
their company. First, Genesis 25.27,
it is said, And the boys grew: Then it is said, And Isaac loved Esau; 28.
Then it is said, Make me sauory meat, that my soul may bless thee or I die.
Surely master Calvin gives this judgment: Cap. 27.4.
Consortes externa vocationis peraeque fuisse Esau and Jacob, vnde patet arcano
dei consilio, segregari quibus co^munis erat vocatio, Call. in Genesis ca. 25. ver.
23
That they were both alike, companions of outward calling, (I mean Esau and
Jacob) whereby it is plain, That they were separate, by the secret counsel of
God, unto whom yet the calling was common.

But after many his wicked fruits: Let us yet see again the judgment of the
Church, and how Jacob and his people entertained him. Jacob says to his
messengers, Thus shall you speak to my Lord Esau, etc. Genesis 32.4.
Thy servant Jacob says thus. And in his prayer, Verse. 11.
Deliver me from the hand of my brother Esau. And again, For I have seen thy
face as though I have seen the face of God, etc. And often he calls him, My
Lord. Genesis 33, 10.
Now then we see, he was not rejected of his parents: the children had one
calling outward alike. Jacob knowing the fruits of his life, disdaineth him
not, calls him not Reprobate, rejects him not: He terms him Lord,
Brother, as the Face of God: intertaineth him, as one would intertaine a
brother, in the Lord, shows the kindness of Christian to Christian: Yea, and
I doubt not, prayed often, that God would turn his heart; For why should not he
show that kinknesse toward his brother, toward whom he gave such gracious
words? And why should not he in charity, do that toward his brother, which
Abraham his grandfather had done toward the Edomites, and was accepted of God.
To conclude, In all his discourse concerning Esau, I see no cause (suppose he
were a Reprobate) why the Church should deal otherwise in these days, then
these Fathers did: or should reject him for a Reprobate, till the Lord had
revealed him, and rejected him (as we shall see of Saul.)

Seconly, concerning Saul, as if he were alive. Was he not entertained by
Samuel after this sort: 1. Sam. 9.
Did he not feast him, set him in the highest place, Said he not unto him;
Whose shall the beautiful things of Israel be, belong they not to thee, and to
all thy fathers house? powered he not oil upon him, 1. Sam. 10.
signifying the gifts of the holy Ghost? Did he not kiss him, and said, Has
not the Lord appointed thee, to be the captain over his inheritance? Did not
Saul prophecy with the Prophets, and was he not changed into an other man?
Said not Samuel to him, Verse 8.
Do what thou have to do, for God is with thee, and I will come to thee to
Gilgal, to sacrifice whole burnt offerings, 9.
and peace offerings: and did not God give him another heart? Did not also
Samuel say to the people, 24.
See ye not him, whom the Lord has chosen: and how there is none like him
amongst all the people: and did not all the people shoute and pray for him, and
say, God save the king? and did not a band of men follow him, whose hearts God
had touched? And were they not the children of Beliall that despised him? Add
hereunto all the kindnesses of David. It were too long to set down all, etc.
Now look here: what prince of Israel could be better received, and that which
^as done, was done according to the mind of God: and that which was performed
toward him, was of the Prophet of God, was of the people of God: and that not
in policy; but in Religion. He was anointed, kissed, feasted, he prophesied,
was with the Prophets, was at the service of burnt offerings, and peace
offerings: the people showted, they prayed for him, the good ones followed him,
the sons of Belial despised him, he is cherished and reverenced, for the
Lords anointed: And what more would they have done to David himself?

So Saul is received and entertained as is before, as the instrument of God,
the man that shall reign over my people, 1. Samuel 9.
he is now changed into another man, the people show their cause to him, Verse
9.
and the tidings of the men of Iabes. And the spirit of God came upon Saul;
When he heard these tidings, 1 Samuel 11.6.
he heweth the oxen in pieces, numbreth his people, came upon the enemies in
the morning watch, slew the Amonites til the heat of the day. The enemies are
scattered, the people greatly rejoice, and are knit to their king: Samuel and
the people go up to Gilgall, made Saul king there before the Lord, offered
peace offerings before the Lord, and there Saul and all the men of Israel
reioiced exceedingly.

And thus far we see the acceptance of Saul, his commendation from the mouth
of God, the prophet of God approving him, God himself assisting him with his
spirit, by the hand of God he and his people obtein a noble victory. Lastly,
we find Samuel and the king and the people serving the Lord together, and
offering peace offerings before the Lord: and all Israel and they reioicing and
triumphing exceedingly: 1. Sa. 12.3.
Samuel also declaring his integrity, and innocence, speaks before the Lord
and his anointed. Thus here is Gods hand and assistance, the prophets
approbation and counsel, the king discharging his function, the people gladly
obeying. Saul is the king, and Saul the Lords anointed. All rejoice in God; No
reiection, No contempt of the king, No name of Reprobate: And therefore no
cause, but that he was favored and taken as the good instrument of God, for
their defense, for a good man, for a captain and companion in Gods business,
and so reputed amongst them. And thus Saul had now been king one year, and he
reigned two years over I^raell, 1. Sa. 13.
that is, as some interpret, he reigned this long lawfully. Not rejected of
the Lord, nor forsaken of his spirit: and as other some say, he reigned in his
goodness and innocence this long: though in his corrupt and malicious mind, he
reigned more years; and this much of his estimation and proceedings in his
kingdom: and herein not revealed as a castaway or reprobate.

But now of his fall and reiection. Saul had great experience of the goodness
of the Lord: who chose him, when he was little in his own eyes, and adorned
him with his gifts knit the people unto him, blessed his handiwork, gave him
victory: Now then he must be tried whether in adversity, Verse. 6.7.8.
in the falling away of the people, whom before he saw stand to him: In this
streit the people being scattered, whether he will trust to the Lord, stand to
him, or depend on flesh, on the help of man, on the strength of his host, of
the people, or no. And for that Saul had destroyed a garrison of the Philistims,
Israel was an abomination unto them, the Philistims come up against them as
the sand of the sea: Israel is in distress, and hide themselves in rocks and
holes: etc. Some went over Jordan; all that followed Saul were dismayed and
afraid: Verse ^.
he tarried the seven days, the time appointed by Samuel; and without
Samuel, which he should not have done, calls for the burnt sacrifice, and
peace offeringes, and offered a whole burnt sacrifice.

For this work, what reasons soever he alleged, Samuel said unto him, Thou
art become a fool, thou have not kept the commandment of the Lord thy God,
Verse 13.
etc. But now thy kingdom shall not continue, The Lord has sought him a man
after his own heart, etc. Concerning this trespass of Saul diverse
interpreters discourse diversely what it was, and wherein it consists: which I
omit. I take it, the sum is, Gods order in taking war in hand, was not
observed; sacrifice to God, was not duly and rightly administered; V^rse 11.
Saul cast his eye too much on the defection and inconstancy of the people;
God the strength of Israel, was not in all things preferred: the enemy and
his cruelty more thought upon then Gods deliverance. For he should have
consulted with Samuel, and Samuel should have taught him the Lords will, they
both should have sacrificed and served the Lord together: and so at the
prophets mouth to have learned what he should do, as chap. 10. Verse 8. But
his heart being full of infidelity, he made a way to his own reiection:
Verse 13.
otherwise (as the prophet says) For at this time would the Lord have
established thy kingdom upon Israel for ever, but now thy kingdom shall not
continue. And this is the first defection of Saul.

Secondly, Samuel said unto Saul, Now therefore hearken thou unto the voice of
the words of the Lord, 1. Sam. 15.3.
Go and smite Amalec, and destroy all that apperteineth unto them: He returns
from the victory, He boasts saying, I have fulfilled the commandment of the
Lord, etc. Having spoken like an hipocrite, 13.
he hears from the Prophet: The Lord has dealt graciously with thee, made
thee head of the tribes of Israel, 19.
anointed thee king. etc. He bad thee go and destroy the sinners, the
Amalechites, 20
thou have not hearkened to the voice of the Lord, but have turned to the pray,
etc. Saul even against God and his own conscience, answers, That he has
hearkened to the voice of the Lord, and has gone the way which the Lord sent
him unto, etc. He is further reproved by the Prophet: To obey, is better then
sacrifice; and to hearken, is better then the fat of rams: Because thou have
cast away the word of the Lord, therefore he has cast away thee also from
being king. Lastly, 24.
he confesses, saying: I have sinned, for I have gone further then the saying
of the Lord, and thy words, because I feared the people, and obeyed their
voice. Then he hears: Thou have cast away the word of the Lord, 26.
and the Lord has cast away thee, that thou shall not be king over Israel,
and the Lord has rent the kingdom from thee this day and has given it to a
neighbor of thine, etc. And Samuel came no more to see Saul. Samuel mourned
for Saul, and the Lord said, How long will thou mourn for Saul, seeing I have
cast him away from reigning over Israel.

Now here is saul at the last in his reiection; at the first honored,
received, allowed, and prayed for: now cast off from the Lord, and from his
kingdom. Concerning him and such like, hipocriticall service and obedience to
God, Inst. li. 3. ca. 2
says master Calvin: Quemadmodu^ radicitus non haeret in reprobis, de paterno
dei amore pe^suasio: ita non sollide eum reddamant vt filij, sed mercenario
quodam affectu ducuatur. As the persuasion of the fatherly love of God, does
not stick rooted in Rebrobat^s, so they love him not again as sons: but of a
certain affection, as of an hireling. Inst ca. 4.33 1 Sa. 15.23. 2. Sa. 12.18.
And again, Cum Saulem regno abiecit, puniebat ad vindictam; cum Dauidem
paruulo suo orbanit, ad emendationem corripiebat. When he rejected Saul from
his kingdom, he punished him to further d^struction: when he deprived David of
his young infant, he chastised him to amendment, Here we are to note three
circumstances. 1. The walking of Saul. 2. The service and duty of the church.
3. The work of God.

Saul walking as an hireling, though graciously adorned by God many ways: the
church in service to God, in love and obedience, toward their king, in all
humility and subjection for that time conforming thems^lu^s. Lastly, God
himself revealing the hypocrite, and casting him out, and commanding the
Prophet not to pray for him. To conclude then, if we would in these days
discharge our duty: pray for All men, and our brethren, until the Lord
reveal the hypocrites and Reprobates, and do single them out, as he did Saul,
and as our Savior Christ did Judas, and then to reject them, (as performing
our obedience to God, because he so commands) and until that time
perform the service and duty of Gods children, and of the Church of God, all this controversy were at an end: and we should not iangle so much about the
thing, we know not what it means. In that the Prophet prays for Saul, L^ci
com. P^t. Mar^.
Martyr says, He mourned for Saul, longer than he should have done: but the
good zeal, has for the most part, love joined with it. And master Calvin
says: It is an hard point yet, to deprive the Prophet of God, of faith herein:
but of this I have spoken enough before.

Having thus much discoursed according to the Scriptures, concerning Esau and
Saul, I will speak the less of Judas. Peter Martyr says thus of Saul, and
him both, Vocatus est Saulus ad regnum, at non ad salutem: Loci com. cap. de
voca^.
and Judas quamuis ad Apostolatum ad scitus est, non tamen redemptionis per
Christum particeps fuit. Saul was called to a kingdom, but not to salvation:
And Judas though he were allotted to the Apostleship, yet was he not partaker
of redemption by Christ. First (therefore) he was not revealed, by the Apostles
which were the servants: but by the Lord, For Jesus knew from the beginning,
John. 6.^4.
which they were that believed not: and who should betray him, And again, Have
I not chosen you twelve, 70.
and one of you is a devil. And, John 13.26.
He it is to whom I give the soppe: and he wet the soppe and gave it to Judas
Iscariot: Thus Christ revealed him, and not the disciples.

Secondly, the Disciples thrust him not out: For, it is written, For he was
numbered with us, Act^ 1.17.
and had obtained fellowship in this ministration. He therefore has purchased
a field with the reward of iniquity, and when he had thrown down himself
hedlong, he brast in sunder in the midst, and his bowels gushed out, etc.
This traitor and reprobate, therefore, a repiner against good works, a lump
of covetousness, an ympe of Satan, a traitor to the Lord, an enemy to
himself: chosen yet, and put in place by the Lord, is to be thought upon, and
considered of us, especially for these three respects. 1 For judgment. 2. for
comfort. 3. for example.

For Judgment, That such as come in high place, and in the dignity of the
ministry, should attend their calling, abstain from filthy lucre, do the
work of the servant of the Lord, set before their eyes, the greedines, the
impudency, the covetousness, the sudden ruin, and fearful end of this
traitor. And that they seek not their own, as he did, but the things that
belong to Jesus Christ.

Secondly, for comfort, Though there enter into the Church ravening wolves,
seeking to devour the flock, yea Apostataes and enemies to the cross of
Christ: yea and sometime spring from amongst themselves, That they should be
comforted herein: and in patience possess their souls, To think, it is no
new thing, but as also was verified in the Church, and in the time of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, walking on earth, and having conversation among us.

Thirdly, That the fall of Judas, the blasphemies of Cerinthus, Arius, and such
like, should be examples unto us, that we fall not into the like condemnation,
that we more firmly and constantly regard the truth: And that we heartily
pray, we may be Authors of knowledge, of faith, and of good works, and not of
quiddities, cauels, and errors, to entangle the people of God, and the
inheritance of Jesus Christ.

So then the Resolution is this, Such as has been the behavior of these
Churches toward them in their time: such ought ours to be toward them, if
they were alive amongst us: and to receive them as long as God bids receive:
and to reject them, when God reuealeth them: and not to go before the
revelation of the Lord. And thus much for those three, the more at large for
the understanding of other like examples in the Scriptures.

The fifth Objection. THere is a sin unto death, 1. John 5.1^.
I say not that thou should pray for it. 1. John 5.16. If there be such a
sin, then is there such a sinner that commits that sin, and he is not to
be prayed for; and so by a consequent, All men are not to be prayed for.
The Answer.

To the answering of this objection, we will first see what the sin is:
Secondly, of the understanding of the place. For the first, Some refer this
sin unto these words of Saint Matthew, Matt. 12.31.
Wherefore I say unto you, every sin and blasphemy, shall be forgiven unto
men, but the blasphemy against the holy Ghost, shall not be forgiven unto men.
S. August. speaks thus of it, Aug. 10.7. de corrept. ^ gra. cap. 12.
De quo peccato, quonia^ non expressum est, possunt multa and diuersa sentiri:
Ego autem dico id esse peccatum: fidem, quae per dilectionem operatur, des^rere
vsque ad mortem. Of which sin because it is not expressed, many and diverse
things may be thought. But I say, That it is that sin, that is, to abandon
and forsake unto the death, the faith which works by love. An other says,
that it is Finalis impoenitentia: That is, an unrepentant heart unto the end.
Lyra.
Master Calvin calls it, Call. in 1. I^. 5. ver. 16.
Peccatum cui nulla spes veniae reliqua est, etc. Apostasiam, qua poenitus
homines a Deo se alienant, etc. Porro cum peccatum, aut blasphemia in spiritum
eiusmodi defectionem perpetuo secum trahat, non dubium est, quin hic notetur.
That is, A sin whereunto there is remaining no hope of pardon. Apostasy,
whereby men altogether alienate themselves from God: And moreover, when as
sin or blasphemy against the holy Ghost, does always draw with it such
kind a defection, there is no doubt, but that it is meant here. So here for the
sin, that is here meant, we see it is a renouncing of the faith, an
impenitencie final, a falling away from God, and Apostacy, a blasphemy
against the holy Ghost.

Loci com. Pet. Martyr.
Secondly, for the understanding of the place, Doctor Martyr gives this
judgment, Nomine constituitur alibi, vt oremus pro omnibus, 1. Tim. 2. 1. John
5.16.
and ad Timotheum ratio additur, Quod omnes Deus velit saluos fieri. Et tamen
Johannes ait peccare nonnullos ad mortem. Et pro his dicit non orandum. Quod
tamen intellige^e debemus, quando nobis fuerit compertum, illos ad mortem
peccasse. Is it not determined elsewhere, That we should pray for All men. And
unto Timothy the reason is added, For God will have all men to be saved. And
yet Saint John says, that many sin unto death, and for these he says, We
ought not to pray. Which saying yet we ought so to understand, when the same,
their sin shall be thoroughly found out and tried, that these said persons
have sinned unto death. So then in conclusion, the answer is thus: We ought to
pray for all men: but if we know thoroughly such an impenitent Apostata unto
death, we ought not to pray for such a one.

The sixth Objection. Prayer for Reprobates shall not be heard, Why then, should
we pray?
The Answer.

This is objected, as though there were no effect or end of prayer: but to be
heard. Yes, the Lord may accept the obedience, and humility of his servant:
and yet not grant the request. The prophet prays in the psalm, Psalm. 67
Let thy people praise thee O God, let all thy people praise thee. And when was
it, or when will it be, that all Gods people, will extol and praise him? yet
is this the desire and prayer of the church: and as we pray, Thy will be done
in earth, as it is in heaven. Which things howsoever they come to pass, we
leave to his divine majesty. Our request, desire, and zeal, we make known to
him. The son of God, and our Savior prayed: and in obedience to his father
prayed three times: O my father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me,
etc. Mat. 26.36.
Yet (therefore) came he into the world, that he should taste thereof. As it is
written: Father, save me from this hour, Ioh, 13.27.
but therefore came I unto this hour. Yet so would he be humbled, so would he
be obedient, so would he, in the sight of the father, fulfill all
righteousness. So likewise, let us be zealous on the Lords behalf, show our
desire to prefer his kingdom, he shall accept our service, and our obedience:
though he deal in those our suits and requests, according as shall be thought
best to his divine majesty.

And therefore one notes after this sort. Quanquam autem orationes, non debito
ordine factae, Ex collect. Marlorat. in 1. John. 5. Verse 16.
ad nullum nobis peccatum imputantur, propter charitatem qua oramus, hoc tamen
dam in facimus, quod nihil impetramus, nisi debito ordine: Ita Christus in
cruce, rogauit pro suis homicidis: pater (inquiens) remitte illis, non enim
sciunt quid faciunt. Luke 23 34. At pater non remisit nisi conuersis and
credentibus, sicati Petrus in sua concione ostendit. Act. 2.38. Coeteri
peccarunt ad mortem, and in peccato suo mortui sunt, propterque illos,
Jerusalem, and omne Indaeorum regnum vastatum est. And although our prayers
not made in due order, are not imputed to us as any sin, in regard of the
love wherewith we pray: yet the loss we receive, is this, that we obtain
nothing, but in right and due order: so Christ on the cross prayed for his
persecutors, Luke 23.34.
and murderers, saying: Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.
But the father forgave not but unto those, that were converted, and were
believers, Act. 2.38.
as Peter in his sermon shows. The rest sinned unto death, and are dead in
their sins: and for them Jerusalem, and all the kingdom of the Jews, was raced
and destroyed. Let us not (therefore) even in praieng, be weary of well doing:
for in due time shall we reap, if we faint not.

The seventh Objection. I^r. 7.15.16.
IN Jeremy the seventh, The Lord says thus, concerning the obstinate Jews,
which contemned the word of the Lord: I will cast you out of my sight, as I
have cast out al your brethren, etc. Therefore thou shall not pray for the^,
neither entreat me: for I will not hear thee. Upon which place we may reason
thus, Whosoever God has cast out of his sight, that is, out of his favor, and
will not be entreated for them, for such we must not pray: but such are all the
reprobate, therefore we must not pray for them, I ^eane for their salvation.
The Answer.

This Objection contains two parts. First the place of Jeremy, secondly the
argument. First of the one, the^ of the other. 7.15.16.11.14.14.11.
In this scripture of Jeremy, Therefore thou shall not pray for this people,
etc. We are to consider the cause, and then the words: the cause is thus set
down in the same chapter, Ye trust in lying words, saying, the temple of the
Lord, the temple of the Lord, they did steal, Ier. 7. ver. 4.
murder, commit adultery, swear falsely, etc. Walk after other gods. They
would presume and say, We are delivered, Verse. 9.
though we have done all these abominations. etc. 11.13.
The house of God became a den of thieves: God rose up early and spoke unto
them. They would not hear, they would not answer. Again, The children gather
wood, the fathers kindle the fire, Verse 18.
and the women knead the dowe, to make cakes to the queen of heaven, etc. Here
was in this people, hypocrisy: yet saying, they were religious; oppression,
sheading of innocent blood, adultery, perjury, abominable idolatry,
presumptuous sins, presuming on Gods mercies: and in the house of God, in
stead of holy ones, thieves as in a den: al estates falling and declining
from the Lord, fathers, wives, childeren, universally all setting up Idolatry,
worshipping Baal, baking cakes to the queen of heaven, and pouring out drink
offerings unto other gods: and all, that they might provoke God unto anger:
when as he still spoke unto them, and they would not hear; he called unto
them, and they would not answer.

This was a wonderful and lamentable defection: being into so gross sins,
and of the whole and all estates: and from so loving and merciful a father,
and to be sorrowed, pitied and lamented, even with floods, rivers, and
fountains of tears. Hebr. 6.7.
For surely the earth which drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, and
brings forth herbs meet for them, by whom it is dressed, receives blessing
of God: but that which bears thorns, and briers, is reproved, and is near
unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. And therefore (surely) when wickedness
had possessed the whole body of the common weal; when the scourge of God, as
pestilence, sword, dearth, has not reclaimed the people, and thirdly when a
nation has Gods word, and law, and brings not forth the fruits thereof: it
is a sign, of reprobation, they are near unto reproving, to be cast out of
Gods favor, to have the word, and the mercy, and the favor, and the
providence, and the protection of God taken from them, and bestowed on a nation
that will bring forth the fruits thereof. When Scipio beheld the city of
Carthage, burn sixteen days together, he wept sorrowfully, Chronic. Melanct.
and being asked why, he answered: I remember (says he) the miseries of man,
and such like one day, is like to be the end of our state, and famous city of
Rome. So surely the general contempt of the gospel of Christ, the universal
rejecting of the loving corrections of the Lord, the manifest corruptions in
all kinds of sin and wickedness, does portend, that it is to be feared, our
destruction and confusion is not far off: but that one day we shall taste as
Israel has tasted: we so resemble her, we are so like her in all kind of
sins, presumption and infidelity. The Lord grant us in time to be a wise and
understanding people, to know the ways of the Lord, to discern the day of our
visitation, and to bring forth the fruits of righteousness: that we may fly
from the wrath that is to come, in contrite, humble, and repentant minds,
pleasing the Lord; that he may turn away that heavy wrath and judgment that
our sins daily groan and cry for, in the sight of God our heavenly father.
But now to the matter.

As in this place of Jeremy, so also in the 11. and 14. Chapters before, that
the Lord forbids the Prophet to pray for them, The Lord sets down their
conditions, which was a general defection and falling away from the Lord, as I
have said, the very fruit of reprobatisme. And we see, The Lord says not
here, peremptorily, or indefinitely, Pray not for Reprobates, nor he uses not
this phrase, Pray not for those, that be Reprobates among them. But first he
makes the Prophet attentive: secondly, he shows forth and sets before the
Prophets eyes, the abominations and sins of the people. For though the
Prophet knew much of their wickedness of himself: yet when the Lord caused
him to behold, and set it before his eyes, he knew far more. Thirdly, he
says, Thou shall not pray for them. As if the Lord should say, Thou see more
now, then thou did before, behold what a people thou have prayed for. My
favor is ceased, my love is ceased, let thy love also cease. Thou shall not
take thee any wife, Iere. 16.^.
neither shall thou have any sons and daughters in this place: Thou shall not
pray for them. So that we see the Lord proceeds in wonderful justice
against them. First, he reuealeth them; secondly, withdraws his favor;
thirdly, forbids man's help and comfort. That they may know by the mouth of
Jeremy, the indignation and wrath of the Lord: and that they were near to
confusion and destruction. So that we see Those be revealed, not from beneath,
but from above, not from man but from God: and therefore pray not for them.

Now for the exposition of the words. Muscul. l^ci. com. de ora^.
First (therefore) Musculus of these places of Jeremy, writes after this
sort: Notwithstanding the diligent prayer of the Prophet, praying continually
for the people of God, was not condemned by these words: but he was rather
admonished hereby, That the prayers were but in vain, forasmuch as the time of
judgment, The Prophet not condemned for praying.
and the wrath of God was at hand, as we may see Iere. 14.11 after this manner:
Pray not for the people to any good purpose, etc. For I will wast them with
sword, pestilence, and famine. He left not hi^ diligence, in preachin^ and
praying.
In the mean while the prophet left not of his diligence, in preaching and
praying: albeit he heard the Lord say oftentimes: That he auailed not by his
prayer. An other says, Obserua intercessionem sanctoru^ maximae esse
efficatiae. Gerard. Lorych. in Hier.
Ait enim, Et ne obsistas mihi, hoc est ne obicem irae meae, orationem tuam
interposueris, quod Mosen fecisse legimus. Glossa, ordin. in H^er.
Caeterum ne deus videatur orationem sanctorum nihili facere quare querulos
Iudaeos non exaudiat, subnectit rationem dicens. Non contemnere se
intercessionem sanctorum, sed cor impoenitens Iudaeorum. Mark (says he) that
the intercession of the holy men, is of great effecacie. For he says, Hinder
me not, or stop me not, That is, put not forth thy prayer as a bar, and
stay unto my wrath: which we read Moses to have done. But least God might
seem, little or nothing to esteem the prayer of holy men; for what cause he
hears not the murmuring of the Jews, he adds a reason, saying: But the
hard and impenitent heart of the unbelieving Jews.

These expositions teach us, that the Prophet was not condemned for praying for
them, but their abomination in sinning, stirred up the Lord in wrath, That he
would neither the prayer of the prophet, neither any other thing by his means,
should stand in the gap: but that the Lord would pour out his wrath upon the
young, and the old, the Prophet with the Priest, the Prince with the people,
the parents with the children. For we see after the first warning, the Prophet
prayed still, and is reproved the second time, as Ier. 11.14. And he preached
and prayed still, and is reproved the third time, as Cap. 14.11. and thus much
for the place of Jeremy: But now to the Argument. We will not reason herein by
what Logic this Argument stands, (for that I reserve to my second book,
wherein I must answer to a great many things) but will suppose it to be good
for this time, and let him tell on his tale.

The Argument contains a Mayor, and a Minor proposition. The Mayor is this.
Whosoever God has cast out of his sight, that is, out of his favor, and will
not be entreated for them: for such we must not pray. This proposition (says
the objection) must have his strength from this place of Jeremy the 7. but let
us see how.

1 First then, let us see and consider what it is, to be cast out of Gods
sight and favor, that the consequent may follow, that, Not to pray for such,
etc.

2 Secondly, whether these were cast out of Gods sight, or no. That this Mayor
proposition, may have his strong foundation.

First then, To be cast out of Gods sight, is said to be sundry ways. One
way, it is said to be then, when as Gods servant and child, for a season, is as
it were forgotten of God, and turned over to the enemy, to oppressors, yea to
himself, and feels troubles, temptations and afflictions, sorroweth
inwardly, goes mourning all the day long, powers out the dolorous lamentation
of Sion, The Lord has forsaken me, my God has forgotten me: And yet after
these trials and storms, is visited, refreshed, and comforted by the Lord; and
for ever is not forsaken and cast off by the Lord; but for a season, and
received again. So the Prophet David, And when I made haste, I said, Psalm.
31.24.
I am cast out of the sight of thine eyes: nevertheless, thou heardest the
voice of my prayer, etc. Likewise Jonas, Iona. 2.4.
in the great surges of the fishes belly. Then I said, I am cast away out of
thy sight: yet will I look again toward thy holy Temple, etc. Verse 6.
yet have thou brought up my life from the pit, O Lord my God. And the Lord
said unto Is^ael, Thou art my servant, I have chosen thee, ^sai. 41.^.
and not cast thee away, etc. This teaches then, that there is a wholesome
rejecting and casting off, and as it were, a discipline in our God, whereby we
are more stirred up, and whetted to hold fast by God, and to acknowledge his
mercies: And this casting off, is not in wrath, but in love, not of a
Reprobate, or bastard, but of a son, and beloved child: not for ever, but for
a time, and season: no^ to destruction, but for reformation.

Secondly, There is a casting out in the wrath of God, open and revealed to the
face of the world, for sin, and for contempt of the word, and will of the
Lord (as is to be feared, shall come upon us for our disobedience, and sins
mul^iplied to the heavens) which the Lord threatens in the Law: 1. Reg. 9.7.
2. Chr. 7.20.
as, But if ye and your children turn away from me, Then will I cut off Israel
from the land which I have given them; and the house which I have hallowed for
my name, will cast out of my sight, and Israel shall be a proverb, and a
common talk amongst all people, 1. Chr. 28.9.
etc. And David said unto Solomon, If thou seek him, he will be found of thee,
but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever. And as God threatens
to the disobedient: Ier. 7.15.
And I will cast you out of my sight, as I have cast out all your brethren,
even the whole seed of Ephraim. Thus he speaks when he threatens judgment
and captivity unto them.

Thirdly, there is a casting out of the unrighteous, froward and reprobate:
which are vessels of wrath, prepared to destruction, Romans 9.22.
that God might show his wrath, and make his power known: and it is of two
sorts: Either in this life and reueiled, as the casting out of Pharao, of Saul,
the reueiling of Judas, and such like (as has been said before.) Or else it is
secret, or not revealed, and hid in himself. For he has put it in his own
power: and as he knows, who are his own: So knows he also, who are not
his own: and according to his good pleasure, either reuealeth them, or not
reuealeth them.

Secondly, the casting out of Gods sight, being thus distinguished, let us see,
whether these were cast out or ^o. Let us look on the proposition, and it is
thus: Who soever God has cast out of his sight: that is, out of his favor. If
he mean the first way, that cannot be, for that is proper to the holy and
righteous. Thy loving correction (says the prophet) shall make me great: Psalm.
31.8.
shall not confound me, but shall make me great. Psalm. 18.35.
Thou have known my soul in adversity: Not forsaken me, or cast me of, but
known me: after two days will he quicken, and receive us, and in the third day,
he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight: yea the Lord is on my
side, Ose. 6.2.
the Lord takes my part, Psalm. 118.6.7 14.
the Lord is my strength and my song, and is become my salvation. So that in
this casting off, the child of God is excercised. God doubleth his favor upon
him and forsakes him not, but for his good; and returns unto him, and is his
present help, in the time of trouble, is his strength, castle and deliverer.
And this serves not the turn. And (therefore) we must seek further, that
this proposition may be relieved.

The second sense, is a judgment, a plague, and more bitter, and universal,
or general: and it concerns prince, people, religion, as before: Solomon,
Israel, the temple; but this judgment, is temporal, and in this life. 2. Chapter
36.12.
As when the king of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord his God, and
humbled not himself, before Jeremiah the Prophet, V^rse 16.
at the commandment of the Lord, etc. And when they mocked at the messengers
of God and despised his words, and misused his prophets, until the wrath of
the Lord arose against his people, etc. He brought upon them, the king of the
Caldeans, Verse 17.
who slew their young men with the sword, in the house of the sanctuary,
spared neither young man, nor Virgin, ancient nor aged, God gave al into his
hand, the vessels the treasures of Gods house, the treasures of the king. Then
he burnt the house of God, 20.
brake down the wall of Jerusalem, burnt all the palaces, and all the
precious vessels, carried the people away, that were left to Babell, and they
were servants to him and to his sons, etc.

Here is a lamentable ruin, and a casting out of the people out of the sight of
God. The king, the people, the temple, religion, their priests, their Virgins,
their Matrons, their wealth, their seat, their city, their old men, their
young men: briefly al; in regard of policy, beautiful, peaceable; now by God,
shaken, disquieted, defiled, captiuate, and plunged into great misery,
desolation and obscurity. So uses God to set up in his favor: and in the
kindling of his wrath, thus does he deface and pull down. Deuteronomy. 28.58.
Thus if thou will not keep, and do all the words of this law, etc. And fear
this glorious and fearful name, The Lord, thy God: then the Lord will make
thy plagues wonderful, and the plagues of thy seed, even great plagues, and of
long continuance, etc. So great are the plagues of the sinner: Psalm. 32.11.
but mercy shall embrace him on all sides, that puts his trust in the Lord
his God.

Now our proposition is, Whosoever God has cast out of his sight, that is, out
of his favor, etc. Thus indeed has God dealt with Israel: (as we hear in
the process before) but we are to mark two things. The one, whether they were
reprobats, or no. The other, whether thy were cast off, finally and for ever,
or no. Now if they be reprobates, and that they be cast out, as God uses to
cast out reprobates, then the proceedings in them is, as in Saul, to be
rejected of God, another substituted in his place: (for God had chosen David a
better man the^ he) then to be spoiled of all heavenly ornaments, as of the
spirit of God, wisdom, the comfort and countenance of the Prophet, etc. Turned
even to Satan, to abound in most abominable sins, as, hypocrisy, persecution,
bloodshead, destroieng of the church, inchau^tment, apostasy, desperatio^; so
running on, til they had made an end of him. So Judas in reproving and
coveting, until the devil entered into him, until he took the reward of
iniquity, until he despaired and hanged himself. Such go with a swift
enforcer, for they are carried according to his will.

But in these for whom Jeremy prayed, it is not so: For in them was
repentance, to come unto the Lord, as Ier. 14. where they say, Ier. 14.7.
O Lord though our iniquities testify against us, deal with us according to
thy name. For our rebellions are many, we finned against thee. O the hope of
Is^aell, the savior thereof in the time of trouble, why art thou as a stranger
in the land, etc. Yet thou O Lord art in the midst of us, and thy name is
called upon of us, forsake us not. 15. Verse. 19.
And the Lord himself speaks unto the Prophet, of their conversion and
amendment, saying: Let them return unto thee, but return not thou unto them.
That is, follow not thou their wickedness, but let them be conformed to thy
godly example. Thus they cry unto the Lord, the Prophet teaches them a
prayer, as in the same chapter, Verse. 14. Verse. 14.
And the Lord would have them conformed to the holiness of Jeremy. And these
things import no reprobation: and this people (therefore) yet no reprobates. I
omit many such like prayers, and approbations of God, for breuities sake.

So likewise this infers the other: Though it were a sharp judgment and
casting off, yet it was not finally and for ever. For i^ is said, for their
comfort. Behold therefore says the Lord) the dai^s come that it shall no more
be said, The Lord lives, Ier. 1^.14.
which brought up the children of Israel out of the land of the North, and from
all the lands where he had scattered them, and I will bring them again into
their land that I gave unto their fathers etc. 27.7.
Meaning that even the very deliverance ou^ of B^bilon, should be so glorious,
that it should shadow, and as it were put to silence, the deliverance in
Egypt. Secondly, the term and time of their deliue^a^ce, was set down: 2.
Chapter 36.20.
as, They were servants, until the kingdom of the Persians had rule: to
fulfill the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah, 22.
until the land had her fill of her Sabats. For all the days that she lay
desolate, she kept Sabat, to fulfill seventy years, etc. In the first year
of Cirus king of Persia, the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cirus, etc. Thirdly,
their life while they were in captivity, was not as the life of reprobat^s,
and cast away, then in Babylon: as witnesses the Prophet Ezechiel, who was
sent as a wat^hman unto the house of Israel, Ezech. 3.17 Daniel 9.
and Daniel who prayed for the people: and the Psalm. sets out their sighing
and sorrowing, and service to God by the waters of Babylon. Psalm. 137.
And king Cirus in his great commandment said unto them, Who is among you of
all his people, 2 Ch 36.^3.
with whom the Lord his God is, let him go up: And there went up with
Zerubbabell, the chief captain, Ezra. 22. Verse. 64.
Iesua the high priest, and Nehemiah, etc. The whole congregation together,
forty two thousand, three hundred and three score, besid^s their servants and
their maids, etc. Thus our God is not alwais chiding, neither reserueth he his
wrath for ever, though he had driven them far off: yet he says, Come again,
ye children of men: he brings them home into their own land, is appeased
toward them, and they build his house. So that Israel though he were sharply
punished, yet was he not finally rejected from the Lord: and therefore yet not
rejected as Reprobats, and so no cause but the prophet might pray for them.

Lastly, the scripture it self, of the seventh of Jeremy, speaks thus: I
will cast you out of my sight, as I have cast out al your brethren, even the
whole seed of Ephraim. Where we are to note, that the Lord says, He will cast
them out, and he shows an example, how, None otherwise, but as I did the
whole seed of Ephraim. So that look how the Lord cast out Ephraim, so will he
cast out them: and if Ephraim was cast out as Reprobates, so shall they be: so
that we are to consider, first, what is meant by Ephraim; secondly, how they
were cast out. First then Lyra says, Lyra*
Sicut proieci omnes fratres vestros, id est, december tribus, quae iam erant in
captiuitate inter Assirios, etc. As I cast forth all your brethren, that is,
the ten tribes which now were in captivity amongst the Assirians, etc. And the
whole seed of Ephraim is said, because that tribe was the most principal tribe
amongst the ten. And because Hieroboam the first king thereof, was of the tribe
of Ephraim. Again another says: Tremeliu^.
The whole seed of Ephraim: that is, the kingdom of the Israelits, the part
for the whole, as Esaias 7.8. So then, I will cast out the whole seed of Ephraim,
that is, the ten tribes, the kingdom of Israel: and this is meant by the seed
of Ephraim.

Secondly, they were cast out so as we read. 2. Reg. 17.18. 2. Reg. 17.18.
And he put Israel out of his sight, and none was left, but the tribe of Judah
only. So as we may say of them, as the Psalm speaks of their fathers, Psalm.
99.8.
Thou heardest them O Lord our God, thou forgauest them O God, and punishedst
their own inventions. So as by scripture, by the causes or by the effects
reprobatisme appears not, but the most grievous punishment and hand of God
toward them: (which merciful father grant may work to our amendment.

Now the third sense is (as I have said) the casting out of the unrighteous,
froward, and reprobate, being vessels of wrath, prepared to destruction. And
sometime they are revealed, as enough has been said, and we ought not to
pray for them. But those that are unrevealed, and do dwell, walk, and have
their conversation amongst us; for as much as these things are in Gods own
power, it is no^ known to us whether they shall repent or no: and therefore we
must use the rule of charity and love toward All men, As enough has been
said. For which cause this third way, That is, either secret to God, or
revealed by God: is the right casting out of a reprobate indeed, and none but
this.

The Mayor proposition then, must and ought to be thus: Whomsoever God has
finally, reprobated, and cast out of his sight: and so declared and revealed
them unto his church: for such we ought not to pray. For they must be for ever
rejected, and they must be from God revealed. That we may have our warrant to
reject them also: for God rejects first, then he makes it known, then we
are zealous for our God, and we reject also. Mayor.
Now let us set the argument together: Whomsoever God has finally cast out of
his sight, and so declared and revealed them unto his church: for such we
ought not to pray. Min^r.
The Minor. But such are All the reprobat: (that is, the revealed ones) as for
the other, they are to God, and not unto us. The conclusion, Therefore we ought
not to pray for them. And this is the truth of it. And this much for this
Silogisme.

The eight Objection. ANd yet thus far the scriptures do teach us to pray for
the very known enemies of Gods church, that the Lord would vouchsafe in his
mercy, to bless them with temporal blessings, as heal^h, and plenty, and
peace, for the churches sake, that is among them: which is manifest in Ier.
29.7. Ier. 29.7.
The Jews being captiu^s in Babylon: are commanded to pray for the prosperity
of Babylon. His reason is this: For in the peace thereof, you shall have peace.
The Answer.

They that were carried captives into Babylon, had still mind of returning. The
Prophet says unto them, Ier. 29.4.
from the Lord, Build you houses to dwell in, plant, set, give your daughters
in marriage, etc. And it follows: Ver. 7.
and seek the prosperity of the city, whether I have caused you to be
carried away captives, and pray unto the Lord for it, for in the peace thereof,
shall you have peace. This place therefore of Jeremy, alleged, comprehends,
first a commandment, then the circumstance of the place, then a second
commaund^ment, lastly, a reason.

The first precept or commandment, is, Seek the prosperity of the city. God
does (no doubt) scatter his people amongst other nations, that his name might
be known unto them, that he might exercise his people with patience: and that
the good conversation and behavior of his people, might be an example and a
light unto others, to forsake Idolatry, and to know the God of Israel. To
which end, in my opinion, Ger. ^ory^h.
one notes most effectually upon these words, Ius hospitalitatis sincere vult
custodiri, and quenque animam suam, in pati^ntia possidere. The people were
entered into a strange land, they would feign be returning home as soon as
they came thither. The Prophet bids them settle their hearts, give
themselves to their several vocations, and to seek the prosperity of the
city, where they now were, noting (says this writer) that God would have
kept amongst them inuiolablie and sincerely, the right of entertainment, or
abode among that people: and that every one (though he were amongst the proud
and insolent,) should possess his soul in patience: teaching from the wisdom
of God, That innocent life and patience, in such great oppressions under so
mighty enemies, were worthy virtues to redeem peace, and get favor.

Secondly, the circumstance of the place is, as the late translation of the
bible says (Istius ciuitatis) id est totius regni Babilonici, Tremelius.
Sinecdochice. That is, seek the prosperity of the city, that is as much to
say, of the whole kingdom of Babylon, etc. The part for the whole, so that
what the Lord commands them here, must to their possible power, reach, and
stretch to the whole kingdom.

Thirdly, the second precept or commandment is this: Pray unto the Lord for
it, Or, Orate pro ea Iehouam, Entreat the Lord for it. The Lord says not here,
Pray for their welfare only, pray for their peace only, or for their
prosperous estate: but indefinitly, Pray to the Lord for it, for the city, for
the country. These two commandments thus differ: The first concerns their
manners, and behavior, in captivity: The other, their religion. Therefore as
they differ in work, the one imediately respecting man, the other imediately
respecting God: So in the verb commanding, they differ also, as Seek and
Pray; for praying unto God, no doubt, may be seeking: but all seeking, is not
praying. And therefore as in commanding, in matter, in manner, in effect and
end, they differ: so by no means they must be confounded. For in the first
commandment, it is said, Seek prosperity. But in the second, it is not said,
Pray for prosperity, welfare, or so forth, but, Pray for it. And therefore
(surely) this seems not a prayer, for outward things, or for temporal
blessings only: as health and plenty, and peace, but a commandment also, that
they should pray for their conversation, for their amendment, for the setting
forth of the glory of God amongst them, and mollifieng of their hearts toward
God, to know him: and toward those poor captives whom they so roughly
entreated. And there are three things that persuade it.

The first, I remember S. Paul the Apostle of the Lord, to approve his
ministry, says thus to the Corinthians: 2. Cor. 12.1^.
The signs of an Apostle were wrought amongst you, with all patience, with
signs and wonders, and great works. So surely, in that captivity, The very
signs and effects of sighing and groaning unto God, in holy prayer for the
conversion of them to know God, were well discerned in wonderful matters and
great works. For first we see in that captivity, how the kings heart inclined,
in choosing and calling, Dan. 13.6.
certain of the children of Israel unto favor, as Daniel, Hananiah, Misael,
Azariah, etc. Then Daniel in the exposition of the dream, hides not the power
of God, from Nabuchadnezzar, 2.
and his, as though they were castawaies and reprobates, but says: For the God
of heaven has given thee a kingdom, power and strength and glory. 2.37.
And after the exposition of those wonderful things, concerning his dream,
the king himself answers: 47.
I know of a truth that your God is a God of gods, and the Lord of kings, and
the reuealer of secrets, seeing thou could open this secret. So Daniel was
advanced, and by his means also, Sedrac, Mesac, and Abednego. Now in this
notable story, Verse 13.
shall we think that the kings heart inclined, that some of the Jews were
chosen to favor, that Daniel and his fellows were sought for to be put to
death, and by Gods good means preserved and saved with many more of their own
wise men: that the dream was interpreted, that the king confessed the name of
God and his great power, that Daniel and his fellows were advanced, and so
comfort wrought unto all the captives, without prayer and intercession to God,
of the church, of the people, of the believers of Daniel himself, for the
saving of their own lives, for the molifieng and turning of the kings heart,
that he might know God, for wisdom from above, that relief comfort and
relaxation might come to his people? No doubt, they that know and remember the
order of the church of God in their adversities, shall easily find, that they
had spent not only days but nights also, in sighing and groaning to the Lord
their God to this effect, Verse 18.
as the eighteenth verse in this chap. does import. Also we read in the next
story concerning the three children, Dan. 3.26.
They set forth the power and strength of their God: the king at last
confesses, Blessed be the God of Sedrac, Mesac, and Abednego, who has sent
his angel, and delivered his servants, that put their trust in him, etc. Then
the king sends word into his dominions abroad, of the signs and wonders that
God has wrought in his kingdom, etc.

Dan. 4.24.
Again in the fourth chapter, Daniel does not say, He will talk with the king
in those matters, that belong to him: or in worldly affairs: but he gives him
spiritual counsel, and teaches him religion, saying: Wherefore (O king) let
my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and break off thy sins by righteousness,
and thine iniquities by mercy toward the poor: Lo let there be an healing of
thine error. So in the time of Baltazer, and of Darius, still the glory and
power of God, that he may be known, is handled and not forgotten; and shall we
think that these wise and godly men, Daniel and his fellows, would practice
that to^^^ds those kings and people, that was contrary to their religion, and
contrary to their prayers in religion, and contrary to the Lords
commandment? God forbid.

But what stand I so long, in so plain a matter. This is the judgment of the
learned, Dispersione populi dei, Corr^pt. do^t. W^gandi* Mat. Iud.
in alias atque alias terras, multae gentes ad very dei agnitionem, sunt
adductae: sic Daniel cum socijs suis, and alij Iudaei, etc. By the dispersion
and scattering of Gods people into diverse and sundry countries, many nations
were brought to the knowledge of the true God: So Daniel with his fellows, and
Ezechiel and other Jews, being carried captive to Babylon, did make to flou^ish
the true worship of God in that kingdom of the Assirians, in the time of
Nabuchadnezzar, Darius, and Cirus, as appears by the book of Daniel: and
Mardochaeus and Hesler ministered the occasion, that the true knowledge of God
should be opened and made known through an hundred and twenty and seven
provinces, under Artaxerxes, Ester 8.16.
even from India unto Aethiope. And I doubt not but their hearty prayers to God
was, for this knowledge, amongst those nations: and therefore prayed for them
(no doubt) for reformation of the heart toward God: as for the temporal
blessings toward the world.

Secondly, the words are interpreted of ancient time thus, Quaerite pacem, etc
Vnde Apostolus, Glos. ordi. in Hier. 1. Tim. 2.
obsecro primum omnium fieri obsecrationes, and orationes, etc Seek the peace
of the city, etc. To which end the Apostle says, I beseech you first of all,
obsecrations and prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all
men: for kings, and all that are in authority, That we may lead a quiet life,
etc. This interpretation teaches this much: That the rule given by Jeremy
unto Gods people then, was of such account and force, as the rule given by S.
Paul, unto the C^ristians now, and so both of them, to tend, to pray for the
conversion of infidels, and not only to respect temporal blessings. And this
shows and teaches us, that God always has commended one uniform state of
love and piety, unto his people in all ages.

And unto this interpretation, the reason it self agreeing to the words of
Paul, do incline and agree. The reason is this, The reason.
For in the peace thereof, ye shall have peace. And S. Paul says: That we may
lead a quiet life, etc. So that indeed the scripture of the prophet was a most
notable rule for the direction of their life toward their enemies, and toward
God, (as sufficiently has been showed and said.)

Loc. Com. Pet. Mart. de Magist. ca. 13.2.
D. Martyr speaking of these words, gathers not a rule hereof for temporal
blessings, but says: Iudaei per vim oppressi sunt a Babilonijs, quos tamen
d^us monebat, v^ parerent, and pro rege orarent, quamuis ille tirannus esset,
and per summam iniuriam, regnu^ Hebraeorum occupasset, etc. The Jews were
oppressed through tyranie of the Babilonians, whom yet God warned that they
should obey, and that they should pray for their king, although he were a
tirant, and did hold the kingdom of the Hebrews, through great oppression and
injury. So the state of the church oppressed: yet praying for their enemies.

Tob. ^3.3.
Lastly, Tobias being a captive himself, says not, We went up amongst the
Assirians to pray for their temporal estate, or blessings; but he says,
Confess him before the Gentiles, ye children of Israel: for he has scattered
you amongst them: there declare his greatness, and extol him before all the
living, etc. And again, I will confess him in the land of my captivity, Verse
6.
and will declare his power and greatness to a sinful nation. Then he inuiteth
them to know God, saying, O ye sinners, turn and do justice before him: Who
can tell if he will receive you to mercy, and have pity on you. So by this
discourse hitherto, I doubt not, but it appears: the Lord sent his people
into captivity, for weightier causes, in prayer toward that nation, then to
pray for temporal blessings for them to the Lord their God.

But what means this speech, In the objection before.
Thus far the scriptures do teach us to pray for the very known enemies of
Gods church, That the Lord would vouchsafe to bless them with temporal
blessings, etc. The known enemies of Gods church, must have our prayer, but it
is for temporal blessings. If S. Paul were alive, and should hear these divines
thus reason, he would think himself little beholding to them: For (says he)
was not I a known enemy, did I not persecute the church: Acts. 8.3.22.4.
yea made havoc of the church? and entered into every house, and drew out both
men and women, and put them in prison? did not I persecute this way unto the
death? 5.
had not I letters unto Damascus, to take both men and women? did not I breath
out both threatenings and slaughters against the disciples of the Lord? Act. 9.
Was I not then a known enemy to the church? What was the report of the church
of him. Verse. 13.14.
Lord (says Ananias) I have heard by many, of this man, how much evil he has
done to thy saints at Jerusalem. Moreover he has here authority of the high
priests, to bind all that call on thy name. Do not these things show that he
was a known enemy? and should he be only prayed for in temporal blessings?
Hear his own confession: When before I was a blasphemer and a persecuter, and
an oppressor, 1. Tim. 1.13.
but I was received to mercy, for I did it ignorantly through unbelief: But
the grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant, with faith and love which is in
Christ Jesus. Thus Paul a known enemy to the church of God, an unbeliever;
yet a chosen vessel of God, counted faithful and put in his service. God
shows mercy, persecutors and infidels are received into favor and we
afford prayers for them, only in temporal blessings. Much far better (says a
learned interpreter) Et huiusmodi preces fiant, pro omnibus hominibus, A^sel in
1. Tim. 2.
vt nullus sit tam peccator, pro quo non oretur, cum and Saulus precibus
Stephani, sit conuersus. And let such sort of prayers be made for all men,
that there be none so great a sinner, for whom we should not pray: when as
Saul at the prayers of Steven, was converted.

Neither do I think that the Babilonians were worse enemies to the church in
Babylon, then the Jews, the Scribes, and Pharisees, rulers and priests were
unto our savior Christ, the Apostles, and martyrs: and yet Christ says,
Father forgive them. S. Steven, Lord lay not this sin to their charge. And S.
Paul says, We are evil spoken of, 1. Cor. 4 13.
and we pray. And of the priests and known persecutors were turned to the
Lord, Act. 2.41.
we read, Acts 2.41. Yet mark one thing more before we end. In the Objection
before this of the seventh of Jeremy, Ier. 7.15.16.
where it was said: I will cast you out, etc. And this proposition inferred,
Whosoever God has cast out of his sight, etc. for such we must not pray. So
there we see the people quite gone, cast out of Gods sight: and therefore, that
great Maxima builded upon it, ^er. 29.7.
etc. Now here in the 29. of Jeremy, yet forgetting how he had dealt with the
people before, and cast them quite out of Gods sight: he calls them again and
says, There is a church in Babylon which is commanded to pray for the peace of
the city, etc. If they were for ever cast out as reprobates, how come they now
to be a church? and if they be a church, as it must needs be granted; then that
casting out, was some other kind of casting out, then to be cast out as
Reprobates. The word of the Lord is precious, and ought not to be wrested to
the devices and fantasies of men.

But enough of these matters has been said. And I end with S. Ciprian.
Vnusquisque oret diomnum, Ciprian. li^. 4. epistola ^.
non pro se tantu^ sed and pro omnibus fratribus, sicut dominus Jesus orare nos
docuit: vbi non singulis priuatam precem mandauit: sed communi and concordi
prece, orare pro omnibus iussit. Let every man pray unto the Lord, or entreat
the Lord not only for himself, but also for all his brethren, as the Lord
Jesus has taught us to pray: where he has not commanded to every particular
man a private prayer: but by one common and uniting prayer, To. 16.27.
he has commanded us to pray for all men. To God (therefore) only wise, be
praise, through Jesus Christ for ever. So be it.

FINIS.

