AN ACCIDENCE OR The Pathway to EXPERIENCE.

Necessary for all Young Seamen, or those that are desirous to go to Sea,
briefly showing the Phrases, Offices, and Words of Command, Belonging to the
Building, Ridging, and Sailing, a Man of War; And how to manage a Fight at
Sea.

Together with the Charge and Duty of every Officer, and their Shares: Also the
Names, Weight, Charge, Shot, and Powder, of all sorts of great Ordnance. With
the use of the Petty Tally.

Written by Captain JOHN SMITH sometimes Governor of Virginia, and Admiral
of New ENGLAND.

LONDON: Printed for Jonas Man, and Benjamin Fisher, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Talbot, in Aldersgate street. 1627.

TO ALL THE RIGHT HONORABLE And most Generous Lords in England, and Others:
Especially of his Majesty's Pri^y Council, and Council of War.
RIGHT HONORABLE:
In regard of the Present occasion, for the Art of Navigation, and many young
Gentlemen and Valiant spirits of all sorts, do desire to try their Fortunes at
sea: I have been persuaded to Print this discourse, being a subject I never
see writ before. Not as an instruction to Mariners nor Sailors, whom I
entreat rather amend it, then condemn it, confessing it might be a task for
a most excellent Seaman; But as an intraduction for such as wants experience,
and are desirous to learn what belongs to a Seaman; for the advansing of that
incomparable faculty, seeing you are in place, both of power and Authority; I
most humbly present it to Your Honors Considerations: No more but sacring all
my best abillities to the exquisite Judgment of your renowned Virtues, I ever
rest

Your Lordships ever most humbly devoted, JOHN SMITH.

TO THE READER; AND ALL GENEROUS AND Noble Adventures by Sea; And Well-Wishers
to NAVIGATIONS. ESPECIALLY THE MASTERS, Wardens, and Assistance of the
TRINITY-HOUSE.
Worthy Readers:
HOW ever your perfections may censure my imperfections; I know not, my
greatest error in this is but a desire to do good, which disease has ever
haunted m^e since my childhood, and all the miseries and ingratitudes I have
endured, cannot yet divert me from that resolution: As both Europe, Asia,
Africa, and America can partly witness, if all their extremities has taught
me any thing, I have not kept it for my own particular, I know well I am
blamed for not concealing that, that time and occasion has taught me to
reveal, as at large you may read in the life of Sigismundus Bathor Prince of
Transiluania, writ by his Secretary Francisco Fernezsa. New Englands Trialls
With the General History of Virginia, New England, and the Summer Isles, that
the most of those fair plantations did spring from the fruits of my aduenters
and discoueries is evident, although their returns as yet does not answer the
worlds expectation, nor my desire; yet how they have proceeded every year
since their first original, to this present, by the Maps therein, you may
plainly see the Discriptions of the Countries by the Story, what they are, what
good they might be to this Kingdom, how they have bin used and abused, how the
defects might be amended, the Plainters made happy, God and the King well
pleased and served, and all the Honorable and worthy Adventurers contented!
Whatsoever malice or ignorance can feign to the contrary, for this small
Pamphelet, if I find you kindly and friendly accept it. I mean ^re long, more
largely to explain the particulars: So I rest,

To Christ and my Country a true Soldier, and faithful Servant, John Smith.

An Accidence for Young Seamen: OR, Their Pathway to Experience.
The Captains charge.
THE Captains charge is to command all, and tell the Master to what Port he
will go, or to what height, In a fight he is to give direction for the managing
thereof, and the Master is to see to the cunning the Ship, and trimming the
sails.

The Master and his Mates.
The Master and his Mate is to direct the course, command all the Saylors,
for steering, trimming and sailing the Ship, his Mates are only his Seconds,
allowed sometimes for the two Midships men, that ought to take charge of the
first prize.

The Pilot.
The Pilot when they make land, does take the charge of the Ship till he bring
her to Harbor.

The Cape-merchant and Purser.
The Cape merchant and Purser has the charge of all the Caragasoune or
Merchandise, and the Purser does keep an Account of all that is received and
delivered, but a Man of War has only a Purser.

The Gunner with his Mate, and quarter Gunner.
The Master Gunner has the charge of the Ordinances, Shot, Powder, Match,
Ladles, Spunges, Cartrages, Arms and Fire-workes, and the rest every one to
receive his charge from him according to directions, and to give an account of
his store.

The Carpenter and his Mate.
The Carpenter and his Mate is to have the Nails, Clinches, roue and
clinch-nailes, spikes, plates, rudder-irons, called pintels and gudgions,
pumpe-nailes, skupper-nailes and leather, sawes, files, hatchets and such like,
and ever ready for calking, breaming, stopping leakes, fishing or spliceing the
Masts or Yards, as occasion requires, and to give an account of his store.

The Beteswaine and his Mate.
The Boteswaine is to have the charge of all the Cordage, tackling, sails,
fids, and marling spikes, needles, twine, and saile-cloth, and rigging the
ship, his Mate the command of the long boat, for the setting forth of
Anchors, waying and fetching home an Anchor, warping, towing, and moreing, and
to give an account of his store.

The Chyrurgion and his Mate.
The Surgeon is exempted from all duty but to attend the sick, and cure the
wounded, and good care Would be had, he have a certificate from the
Barber-surgions Hall of his sufficiency, and also that his Chest be well
furnished both for Physic and Chyrurgery, and so near as may be proper for
that clime you go for, which neglect has been the loss of many a man's life.

The Marshall.
The Marshall is to punish offenders, and to see Justice executed according to
directions, as ducking at Yards arm, hawling under the Keele, bound to the
Capsterne, or maine Mast with a basket of shot about his neck, setting in the
bilbowes, and to pay the Cobty or the Morryoune. But the Boys, the Boteswaine
is to see every Monday at the chist to say their Compass, which done, they are
to have a quarter can, and a biscuit of bread.

The Corporal.
The Corporal is to see the setting and releeuing the watch, and see all the
soldiers and saylors keep their Arms clean, neat and yare, and teach them
their use.

The Steward and his Mate.
The Steward is to deliver out the victual, according to the Captains
directions, and mess them 4, 5, or 6, as there is occasion.

The quarter Masters.
The quarter Masters has the charge of the hold for stowage, rommageing, and
trimming the ship, and of their squadrons for their Watch, a Said, a
Fisgigg, a Harping iron, Fish-hookes, for Porgos, Bonetos, or Dorados, etc. and
railing lines for Mackerell.

The Cowper and his Mate.
The Cowper is to look to the caske, hoopes and twigges, to staue or repair
the buckets, Baricoes, Cans, steepe-tubs, runlets, hogsheads, pipes, buts, etc.
for wine, beer, syder, beuerage, fresh water, or any liquor.

The Coxeswaine and his Mate.
The Coxswaine is to have a choice to attend the Skiffe to go to and again as
occasion commands.

The Cook and his Mate.
The Cook is to dress and deliver out the Victual, he has his store of
quarter cans, small cannes, platters, spoones, lanthornes, etc. and is to give
his account of the remainder.

Th (...).
The Swabber is to wash and keep clean the ship and maps.

The Liar.
The Liar is to hold his place but for a week, and he that is first taken
with a lie, every Monday is so proclaimed at the maine Mast by a general cry,
A liar, a liar, a liar, he is under the Swabber, and only to keep clean the
beake-head and chains.

The Sailors.
The Sailors are the ancient men for hoysing the sails, getting the tackes
aboard, hawling the Bow-lines, and steering the ship.

The Yonkers.
The Younkers are the young men called Foremast men, to take in the Topsayles,
or Top and yeard, Furle, and Sling the maine Sail, Bousing or Trysing, and
take their turn at Helm.

The Lieuetenant.
The Lieuetenant is to associate the Captain, and in his absence to execute
his place, he is to see the Marshall and Corporal do their duties, and assist
them in instructing the Soldiers, and in a fight the Forecastle is his place,
to make good, as the Captain does the half deck, and the quarter Masters,
and mid-ships men, but in the States men of War he is allowed as necessary as
a Lieuetenant on shore.

How to divide the Company.
When you set sail and put to sea, the Captain is to call up the company, and
the one half to go to the Starreboord, the other to the Larboord, as they are
chosen, the Master choosing first one, then his mate another, and so forward
till they be divided in two parts, then each man is to choose his Mate,
Consort, or Comrado, then divide them into squadrons according to your numbers
and burden of your ship: but care would be had, that there be not two
Comorados upon one watch, because they may have the more room in their Cabons
to rest.

To give a true Arithmeticall and Geometrical proportion for the building of
ships, were they all built after one mould, as also of their Yeards, Masts,
Cables, Cordage and Sails, were all the stuff of like goodness, a
methodicall rule might be Proiected, but it would be too curious for this
Discourse, and as much too troublesome either for the Reader or Author, but the
principal names of the timbers about the building of a ship, according to his
understanding follows, and how being framed they are fixed.

The Principal names of the timbers about the building a ship.
First lay the Keele, the Stem, and Starne, in a dry docke, or upon the
stocks, and bind them with good knees, then lay all the Flore timbers, and
cut your Limber holes above the keele, to bring the water to the well for the
pumpe. Next your Navel timbers, and bind them all with six foot Skarfe at
the least, the Garbell struck is the outside plancke next the keele, be sure
you have a good sufficient Kelson, and then plancke your outside and inside up,
with your Top timbers, but the lengthes, breadthes, depthes, rakes and burdens
are so variable and different, that nothing but experience can possibly teach
it.

Notes for a Covenant between the Carpenter and the Owner.
A Ship of 400, Tons requires a planke of four inches, 300. Tons three
inch, small Ships two inch, but none less. For clamps, middle bands and
sleepers, they be all of 6. inch planke for binding within. The rest for the
sparring up of the works of square 3. inch planke; Lay the beams of the
Orlope, if the be 400. Tons at ten foot deep in howl, and all the beams
to be bound with two knees at each end, and a stardard knee at every beams
end upon the Orlope, all the Orlope to be laid with square three inch plancke,
and all the planckes to be treenailed to the beams.

Six foot would be between the beams of the Deck and Orlope, and ten
ports on each side upon the lower Orlope, all the binding between them should
be with three inch, or two inch plancke, and the upper Deck should be laid
with so many beams as are fitting with knees to bind them; laying that Deck
with spruce deal of 30. foot long, the sap cut off, and two inches thick, for
it is better then any other.

Then for the Captains Cabben or great Cabben, the stearage, the half Deck,
the round house, the Fore-castle and to bind an end with a Capsterne and all
things fitting for the Sea, the Smiths work, the caruing, joining, and
painting excepted, are the principal things I remember to be observed, for a
Charter-party betwixt the Merchant, the Master and the Owner, you have
Presidents of all sorts in most Scriueners shops.

General sea terms belonging to ships.
A dry Docke, the stocks, the keele, the steme, the stern, the starne-post,
the flower, the sleepers, rising timbers, garble struck, her rake, the fore
reach, plankes, bindings, knees, boults, trunions, brasers, riders, the Orlope,
the ports, the bend, the bow, the hawse, the hawses, the deck, the partners,
a flush deck, fore and aft, the ram heads, the Knights, a half deck, a
quarter deck, the bulk, the bulkes head, the skuttle, the hatches, the
hatches way, the holes in the commings, pitch, tar, rosen, okum, calking. In
the stearage room, the whip, the bittakell, the trauas board, the Compass,
the Fly, the needle, the lantern, the socket. About the Gun-roome, the
Tiller, the rudder, the pintels, the gudgions, the bread-roome, the ships
run. The powder-roome, the Stewards room, the cook room, the great cabbon,
the gallery, a cabben, a hanging cabben, a Hamacke, the lockers, the
round-house, the counter, the wayst, the wayst-boords, the gunwayle, stations
for the nettings, a chain through the stations, or breft-ropes.

What belongs to the Pumpe.
The Pumpe, the pumpes well, the pumpes brake, the pumpes can, the pumpes
chain, the spindle, the box, the clap, the pumpe is choked, the pumpe
suckes, the ship is stanche.

What belongs to the fore castle.
The forecastle, or prow, the beake-head, the bits, the fish-hooke, a loufe
hook, and the blot at the David's end, the Cat, Cats head and Cats holes, the
ships draught.

The Masts, Caps and Yeards.
The boule spret, the pillow, the sturrop, the spret sail, the spret sail
yeard, the spret sail top mast; the spret sail top sail yard, the foremast,
the fore yard, the fore top, the fore top mast, the fore top sail yard, the
fore top gallant mast, the fore top gallant sail yeard, coats and wouldings
for all masts and yeards, Grummets and staples for all yeards. The trussell
trees or cross trees, the maine mast, the step in the kelson, where it puts
its heel, as does also the fore mast, the maine yard, the maine top, the maine
top mast, the maine top sail yeard, the top gallant mast, the maine top
gallant sail yeard, the truck, or flagge staff. The misen, the misen yeard,
the misen top mast, the misen top sail yeard, in great ships they have two
misens, the latter is called the boneauentuer misen, then the poope, Lantern
and flagge staff: when a mast is borne by the board, they make a Iury-mast,
which is made with yards, rouftrees, or what they can, splised or fished
together.

The capsterne and other general phrases.
The Capsterne, the pawle, the whelps, the capsterne bars, a Ieare capsterne is
only in great ships to hoyse their sails, the can hooks, slings and
parbunkels, ports and ringbolts and hooks, the skuppers, the skupper holes, the
chains, the steep tubs, an entering ladder or cleats, a boy, a can boy, a ship
cranke sided, Iron sick, spewes her okum, a leake ship, the sheathing,
furring, carrying, washing and breaming, lanching, caruing, guilding and
painting a ship, ballast, kintlage, canting coins, standing coins, roufe
trees, a grating, netting or false deck for your close fights.

The ropes names in a ship.
The entering rope, the boat rope, the bucket rope, the boy rope, guest rope,
the cat rope, the port ropes, the keele rope, the rudder rope, the top ropes,
the bolt ropes, the breast ropes are now out of use, the water line is.

Concerning the tackling and rigging a ship.
The tacklings are the fore stay, the maine stay. The tackles, the mison stay,
the collers, the maine shrouds and chains, the maine top shroudes, the fore
shroud, the fore top shroud, the swifters, the mison shroudes, the mison top
shroudes, and their ratlings, and the parels to all masts, the maine hallyards,
the maine top sail hallyards, the top gallant sail halyards, the fore
hallyards, the fore top sail hallyard, the misen hallyard, and the spret sail
hallyeard, the horse, the maine sheats, the maine top sail sheats, the maine
braces, the maine top sail braces, the maine bowling and bridles, the maine
top sail bowlin, the bunt lines, the trusses, the lifts, the earring, the cat
harpings; a Ieare, leatch lines; the Robins, garnit, Clow garnits, ties,
martlits, the most of all these are also belonging to the foremast, misen and
bowlespret, and has the same denomination after their masts, only the
boulespret has no bowlines, and the misen sheats, are called the starne
sheats, they have all of them pullies, blocks, shiuers and dead men's eyes,
Lanyeards, caskets and crows feet. A snap block is seldom used but in
heauing of goods and ordinances.

There is also diverse other small cordage, as head lines, the knaulings
gassits or furling lines, marlines, rop yearne, Caburne, Sinnet, paunches and
such like.

The Cables, hawsers or stream cables, are most used in the water by the
Anchors, when they are too short, they shoot one into another when they are
galled or break, they splice them, when that way unserviceable, they serve for
Iunkes, fendors and braded plackets for breasts of defense, and then as the rest
of the ouerworne tackling: for rope yarne, caburne, sinnit an okum, sheeps feet
is a stay in settling a top mast, and a guie in staying the tackles when they
are charged with goods.

Terms for the Anchors.
The Anchor has a stock, a ring, a shanke, a flouke, the greatest in every
ship is called the sheat Anchor, the rest Anchors, a stream Anchor, graplings
or kedgers, bend your cables to your Anchors.

The names of the sails.
The maine sail, the fore sail called sometimes the fore course, the maine
course or a pair of courses, each of them has a bonnet and a drabler, the
maine top sail, the top gallant sail, and in a fair gaile your studding
sails, then your mison, your misen top sail, your spret sail, and spret
sail top sail, a drift sail, a crosiack, a netting sail, twyne, a munke
seame, a round seame, a suite of sails, a shift of sails, top Armours, wayst
clothes, pendants and colors.

The terms for the harbor
A channel, a bay, a rode, a sound, an offen, a coue, a crike, a river, clear
ground, very fast ground, or good anchoring, foul ground, osie ground, sandy
ground, clay ground, a headland; a furland, a ketch; a land mark.

For the wind^
A calm, a brese, a fresh gaile, a pleasant gayle, a stiff gayle, it
ouerblowes, a gust, a storm, a spoute, a loumegaile, an eddy wind, a flake of
wind, a Turnado, a mouthsoune, a Herycano.

Terms for the sea.
A calm sea, becalmed, a rough sea, an ouergrowne sea, the rut of the sea,
roaring of the sea, it flows, quarter flood, high water, or a still water, a
full sea, a spring tide, ebb, a quarter ebb, half ebb, three quarters ebb,
a low water, a dead low water, a nepe tide, a shoule, a ledge of rocks, a
breach, a shallow water, deep water, soundings, fdome by the mark, 3 0 d. and
a shaftment lest. 4 0 d. disimboage, a gulf, the froth of the sea.

^earmes for stearing.
Starbord is the right hand, Larbord is the left, starboord the helm, right
your helm a loufe, keep your loufe, come no near, keepefull, stidy, so you
go well, port, war, no more; bear up the helm, go roumy, beyare at the
helm, a fresh man at the helm.

Terms of (...)
A sail, how stands she, to wind ward or leyward, set him by the Compass, he
stands right a head; or on the weather bow, or ley bow, out with all your
sails, a stydy man to the helm, sit close to keep her stydie. Give chase or
fetch him up, he holds his own, no we gather on him, out goes his flag and
pendance or streams, also his Colors, his wast-clothes and top armings, he
furles and slings his maine sail, in goes his spret sail and misen, he makes
ready his close fights fore and after; well, we shall reach him by and by. What
is all ready? Yea, yea. Every man to his charge, Dowse your top sail, salute
him for the sea; Hale him: whence your ship, of Spain, whence is yours, of
England, are you Merchants or Men of War, We are of the Sea. He wayses us to
leyward for the King of Spain, and keeps his loufe. Give him a chase piece, A
broad side, and run a head, make ready to tacke about, give him your stern
pieces, be yare at helm, hale him with a noise of Trumpets. We are shot
through and through, and between wind and water, try the pumpe. Master let
us breathe and refresh a little, sling a man ouer-boord to stop the leake,
done, done, is all ready again, Yea, yea: bear up close with him, with all
your great and small shot charge him; Board him on his wether quarter, lash
fast your graplins and sheare off, then run stemlins the mid ships. Board and
board, or thwart the hawse; we are foul on each other: The ships on fire; Cut
any thing to get clear, and smother the fire with wet clothes, We are clear,
and the fire is out, God be thanked. The day is spent, let us consult. Surgion
look to the wounded, wind up the slain, with each a weight or bullet at his
head and feet, give three pieces for their funerals. Swabber make clean the
ship. Purser record their names; Watch be vigilant to keep your berth to
windward: and that we loose him not in the night. Gunners sponge your
Ordinances; Soldiers skower your pieces; Carpenters about your leakes. Boteson
and the rest, repair the sails and shroudes. Cook see you observe your
directions against the morning watch. Boy, Holla Master, Holla, Is the
kettleboyled, yea, yea, Boteswaine, call up the men to Prayer and Breakfast.

Boy fetch my celler of Bottles, a health to you all fore and afte, courage my
hearts for a fresh charge: Master lay him a board loufe for loufe; Mid ships
men see the tops and yeards well maned with stones and brass bals, to enter
them in the shrouds, and every squadron else at their best advantage, sound
Drums and Trumpets, and St. George for England

They hang out a flag of truse, stand in with him, hale him a main, a base or
take in his flagge, strike their sails and come aboard, with the Captain,
Purser, and Gunner, with your Commission, Cocket, or bills of loading: out goes
their Boat, they are lanched from the Ship side, Entertayne them with a
general cry, God save the Captain, and all the Company, with the Trumpets
sounding, examine them in particular, and then conclude your conditions with
feasting, freedom, or punishment, as you find occasion; other ways if you
surprise him or enter perforce, you may stow the men, rifle, pillage, or sack,
and cry a prize.

To call a Council in a Fleet: there is the Council of War, and the common
Council, which hangs their flags out in the main shrouds, or the misen.

Nor between two Navies they use often, especially in a Harbor or rode, where
they are at anchor, to fill old Barks with pitch, tar, train oil, linsed
oil, brimstone, rosen, reeds, and dry wood and sutets combustable things,
sometimes they link three or four together, towed together in the night, and
put a drift as they find occasion. To pass a Fort, some will make both ship
and sails all black, but if the Fort keep but a fire on the other side, and
all their pieces point blanke with the fire, if they discharge, what is betwixt
them and the fire, the shot will hit, if the rule be truly observed. To
conclude, there is as many stratagims, advantages, and inventions to be used,
as you find occasions, and therefore experiences must be the best Tutor.

Concerning sailing, or working of a Ship.
Bend your passerado to the mayne-sayle, git the sails to the yeards, about
your gear on all hands, hoyse your sails, half mast high, make ready to set
sail, cross your yeards, bring your Cable to the capsterne. Boatswaine fetch
an Anchor aboard, break ground, or way Anchor, heave a head, men into the tops,
men upon the yeards, come is the Anchor a pike, heave out your topsayles, haule
your sheates; What Is the Anchor away, yea, yea; Let fall your fore sail, whose
at the helm there, coil your cable in small slakes, hawle the cat, a bitter,
belay, loufe, fast your Anchor with your shanke painter, stow the boat, Let
sail your maine sail, on with your bonnets and drablers, steare study before
the wind. The wind veares, git your star-boord tacks aboard, hawle off your ley
sheats, ouerhawle the ley bowlin, ease your main brases, out with your
spret-saile, flat the fore sheat, pike up the misen or brade it, The ship will
not wayer, loure the maine top sail, veare a fadome of your sheat, a flown
sheate, a fair wind and a boune voyage, the wind shrinks, get your tacks
close aboard, make ready your loufe howks and ley fagnes, to take off your
bonnits and drablers, hawle close your maine bowline: It ouercasts, we shall
have wind, sattle your top sails, take in the spret sail, in with your
topsayles, lower your maine sails, tallow under the parrels, in with your
maine sail, lower the fore sail, the sail is split, brade up close all your
sails, lash sure the Ordinances, strike your top masts to the cap, make sure
your sheep feet, a storm, hull, lash sure the helm a ley, lie to try our
drist, how capes the ship, cun the ship, spoune before the wind, she lusts,
she lies under the Sea, try her with a crose-jacke, bowse it up with the
out*looker, she will founder in the Sea, run on shore, split or billage on a
Rock, a wrack, put out a goose-winge, or a hullocke of a sail, fair
weather, set your fore sail. Out with all your sails, get your Larbord tackes
aboard, hawle off your Starboord sheats, go large, laske, ware yawning, the
ships at stays, at backe-stayes, over set the ship, flat about, handle your
Sails, or trim your sails, let rise your tacks, hawle of your sheats.
Rocke-weede, adrift, or flotes,) one to the top to look out for Land, a ships
wake, the water way, the weather bow, weather coil, lay the ship by the Ley,
and heave the lead, try the dipsie line, bring the ship to rights, fetch the
log-line to try what way she makes, turn up the minute glass, observe the
hight, Land, to make Land, how bears it, set it by the Compass, clear your
leach-lines, bear in, bear off, or stand off, or sheare off, bear up,
outward bound, home-ward bound, shorten your Sails, take in your Sails, come
to an Anchor under the Ley of the weather shore, the Ley shore, nealed too,
look to your stops, your Anchor comes home, the ships a drift, vere out more
Cable, let fall your sheat Anchor, land-locked more the ship, a good Voyage,
Arms; arm, a skiffe, a frigot, a pinnace, a ship, a squadron, a fleet, when
you ride amongst many ships, pike your yards.

The terms of the boat.
To the boat or skiffe belongs oars, a mast, a sail, a stay, a halyard,
sheats, a boat-hook, thoughts, thoules, rudder, irons, bailes, a trar-pawling;
or yawning, carlings, carling-knees for the David, the boates-wayles, a dridge,
to row, a spell, hold-water, trim the boat vea, vea, vea, vea, vea, who s^^es
Amen, one and all, for a dram of the bottle.

The names of all forms of great Ordinance and pieces, and their appurtenances.
A Basillisco, double Cannon, Cannon Pedrea, demi Cannon, Culvering, Sakar,
Minion, Falcon, Falconet, Rabbenet, Murderers, slings, Chambers, Curriors,
Hargabusacrock, Muskets, bastard Muskets, Coliners, Carbines, Crabuts, long
Pistols, short Pistols, Charges, Cartrages, Match, Spunges, Ladles, Rammers,
Rammers heads, tomkins, a worm, a bore, a barrel, taper bore, hunicomed,
lintstockes, carrages, trukes, linch-pins, trunions, axell-trees, beds,
coynings, the pieces in the prow, the chase pieces in the stern, the quarter
pieces, the mid-ships, the upper tire, the middle tire, the lower tire, their
fids and leads to keep dry the touch hole: Trauers a piece, dispect a piece,
compass Calipers, a gunners quadrant, a hand spike, a crow of iron, to mount a
piece, to dismount a piece, a dark Lantern, a budge barrel, a horn, a
priming iron: wire, round-shot, crosse-barre-shot, chayne-shot, langrill shot,
a case, case-shot, lead, melting ladles, moulds, bullet bags, Musket shot,
Colyuer shot, quartred shot, Pistol shot, poisoned bullets, brass bals, iron
bals, grenades, trunkes of wild fire, pikes of wild fire, arrows of wild
fire, pots of wild fire, or dragouns? To cloye a piece: To load a piece: To
poison a piece, hooks for gunner or tacklings.

Concerning the shooting of great Ordinance.
Concerning the particular theormes, or terms for great Ordnances, as the
concaue, trunk, cylinder, the soul or bore of a piece: To know whether she be
equally bored, camber, taper, or belbored, the several names of her mettle,
the thinness and thickness, her carnooze, or base ring at her britch, her
shaft or chase, her trunnions, mousell-rings at her mouth, to dispart her, know
her level point blanke and best at random, her fortification, the differences
of powder, be it serpentine or corned powder, if she be well mounted upon a
level plot-forme or no, besides there are so many uncertain accidents, both
in the piece, shot, and powder, the ground, the air and differences in
proportion, they can no certain artificial rules be proscribed. Those
proportions following are near the matter, but for your better satisfaction,
read Mr. Digs his Pantrymetria, Mr. Smith, or Mr. Burns Art of gunry, or Mr.
Robert Nortons expositions upon master Digs, any of these will show you the
Theoricke; but to be a good Gunner, you must learn it by practice. The Gunners
scale is made in brass at Tower Hill, with prospectiue glasses, and many other
instruments by Mr. Bates.

A Table of Proportions for the use of great Ordinance. The weight of the
Pieces in pou^ds. The weight of the shot in pou^ds. The Circu^frence of the
shot in inches. The height of the shot in inches. The length of the Ladle in
inches. The breadth of the Ladle in inches. The weight of the powder in pou^ds.
Skores of paces at point blank. A Cannon. 8000 63 24 1/4 7 3/4 23 15 46 26 Demi
Cannon. 6000 32 18 ^/6 6 22 ^/^ 11 1/2 24 30 A Culuering. 5500 18 15 ^/7 5 22 9
14 33 Demi Culvering. 4500 9 12 4/7 4 20 8 9 39 A Sacar. 3500 5 1/4 10 ^/24 3
1/4 16 ^/6 6 ^/2 5 ^/4 26 A Minion. 1500 4 9 3/7 3 15 6 4 25 A Falcon. 1100 2
1/4 7 6/7 2 1/2 12 1/2 5 2 1/4 14 A Falcones. 500 1 ^/4 6 1/7 2 10 4 1 ^/4 8

Note that seldom in any Ships they use any Ordinance greater then a demi
Cannon.

How they devide their shares in a Man ^ of War.
The Ship has one third part; the Victuler the other third; the other third
part is for the Company, and this is subdevided thus.

Shares.
The Captain has 9. The Master has 7. The Mates has 5. The Gunners has 5.
The Carpenter has 5. The Boteswaine has 4. The Marshall has 4. The Corporal
has 3. The Chyrurgion has 3. The quarter Masters has 4. The Steward has 3.
The Cook has 3. The Coxon has 3. The Trumpeter has 4. The Sailers, two or
one and a half. The Boys a single share. The Leiuetenant what the Captain
will give him, or as they can agree.
They use to appoint a certain reward extraordinary to him that first discries
a Sail if they take her, and to him that first enters her.

For to learn to observe the Altitude, Latitude, Longitude, Amplitude, the
variation of the Compass, the Suns Azimuth and Almicanter, to shift the
Sun and Moon, and to know the tides, your rooms, prick your card, and say
your Compass, get some of those books, but practice is the best.

Mr. Wrights errors of Navigations. Mr. Taps Sea-mans Kallender. The Art of
Navigations. The Sea Regiment. The Sea-mans secrets. Wagganour. Mr. Gunters
works. The Sea-mans glass for the skale. The new attracter for variation. Mr.
Wright for the use of the Globe. Mr. Hewes for the same.
Good Sea Cards.
Two pair of Compasses. An Astralobe quadrant. A Cross staff. A back
staff. An Astrolobe. An Nocturnall.
If you have a Divine, his pay is most commonly both from the Adventurers and
the Saylors, so also is the Chyrurgion.

Advertisements for young Commanders, Captain^^ and Officer^.
Young Gentlemen that desires command ought well to consider, the condition of
his ship, victual, and Company; for if there be more learners then Sailors,
how slightly soever many esteem Sailors, all the work to save Ship, goods,
and lives, must lie upon them, especially in foul weather, the labor, hazard,
wet and cold is so incredible I cannot express it. It is not then the number
of them that here will say at home, what I cannot do, I can quickly learn,
and what a great matter it is to sail a Ship, or go to Sea, surely those for
a good time will do most trouble then good, I confess it is more necessary
such should go, but not too many in one ship, for if the labor of sixty should
lie upon thirty, as many times it does; they are so ouer-charged with labor,
bruses, and ouer-strayning themselves, for there is no dallying nor excuses,
with storms, gusts, over grown seas, and Icy shores; they fall sick of one
disease or other, and then if their Victuals be putrified, it indangers all.
Men of all other professions in lightning, thunder, storms and tempests, with
rain, and snow, may shelter themselves in dry houses, by good fires, and good
cheer; but those are the chief times, that Seamen must stand to their
tackelings, and attend with all diligence their greatest labor upon the
Deckes: Many supposes any thing is good enough to serve men at sea, and yet
nothing sufficient for them a shore, either for their healthes, for their ease,
or estates, or state. A Commander at sea should do well to think the
contrary, and provide for himself and company in like manner; also seriously
to consider what will be his charge, to furnish himself at sea, with bedding,
linen, arms and apparel; how to keep his table aboard, his expenses on
shore, and his petty tally, which is a competent proportion according to your
number, of these particulars following.

Fine wheat flower, close and well packed, Rise, Currands, Sugar, Prunes,
Cinnamon, Ginger, Pepper, Cloves, Greene-ginger, Oil, Butter, Old Cheese, or
Holland, Wine vinegar, Canary Sack, Aqua vitae, the best Wines, the best
Waters, the juice of Lemons for the Scuruey, white Biscuit, Oate-meale, Gammons
of Ba^on, dried neates tongues, Roasted Beef, packed up in vinegar.

Legs of Mutton minced and stewed and close packed up with butter in earthen
pots.

To entertain strangers, Marmelet, Suckets, Almonds, Comfits, and such like.

Some it may be will say, I would have men rather to feast then fight. But I
say the want of those necessaries, occasions the loss of more men, then in any
English fleet has bin slain in any fight since 88. for when a man is ill
sick, or at the point of death, I would know whether a dish of buttered Rice,
with a little Cinnamon and Sugar, a little minced meat, or roast beef, a few
stewed Prunes, a race of green ginger, a flap-Iacke, a Can of fresh water
brued with a little Cinnamon, Ginger and Sugar, be not better then a little
poor John, or salt fish, with oil and mustard, or biscuit, butter, cheese or
oatemeale pottage on fish days, salt beef, porke and pease and six shillings
beer, this is your ordinary ships allowance, and good for them are well, if
well conditioned, which is not always, as seamen can too well witness: and
after a storm, when poor men are all wet, and some not so much a cloth to
shift him, shaking with cold, few of those but will tell you, a little Sack or
Aquavitae, is much better to keep them in health, then a little small beer or
cold water, although it be sweet, now that every one should provide those
things for himself, few of them have either that providence or means. And
there is neither Alehouse, Tavern, nor Inn to burn a faggot in, neither
Grocer, Poulterie, Apothocary, nor Butchers shop: and therefore the use of this
petty tally is necessary, and thus to be employed as there is occasion, to
entertain strangers as they are in quality, every Commander should show
himself as like himself as he can, as well for the credit of the ship and his
settors forth as himself, but in that herein every one may moderate
themselves according to their own pleasures, therefore I leave it to their
own discretions. And this brief Discourse, and my self, to their friendly
construction and good opinion.

JOHN SMITH Writ this with his own Hand.
FINIS.
Errata.
Page 4. l. 19. for a biscuit read backet. p. 5. l. 18. for gang read a choice
gang. p. 7. l. 4. for midships men, r. midships, p. 12: l. 7. for the blot, r.
block, p. 15. l. 5. for clow, r. clew, p. 17. l. 12. for ^etch r. reatch,
ibid. l. 19. for mouthsoune, r. mounthsoune, p. 18 l. 3. for odd r. o -- e, p.
26. l. 10. for nor r. Nor, ibid. l. 15. for sucets r. such, p. 28. l. 22. make
them sure with your sheepsfeet, p. 30. l. 8. r. stoppers for stops. p. 31. l.
19. for dispect r. dispeart, p. 32. l. 10. for gunuer r. gunners.


