A DESCRIPTION of New England: OR THE OBSERVATIONS, AND discoueries, of Captain
John Smith (Admiral of that Country) in the North of America, in the year of
our Lord 1614: with the success of six Ships, that went the next year 1615;
and the accidents be fell him among the French men of war: With the proof of
the present benefit this Country affoords: whither this present year, 1616,
eight voluntary Ships are gone to make further trial.

At LONDON Printed by Humfrey Lownes, for Robert Clerk; and are to be sold at
his house called the Lodge, in Chancery lane, over against Lincolnes Inn. 1616.

TO THE HIGH HOPEFVL CHARLES, Prince of Great Britain.
SIR:
SO favorable was your most renowned and memorable Brother, Prince Henry, to
all generous designs; that in my discovery of Virginia, I presumed to call two
namelesse Headlands after my Sovereigns heirs, Cape Henry, and Cape Charles.
Since then, it being my chance to range some other parts of America, whereof I
here present your Highness the description in a Map; my humble suit is, you
would please to change their Barbarous names, for such English, as Posterity
may say, Prince Charles was their Godfather. What here in this relation I
promise my Country, let me live or die the slave of scorn and infamy, if
(having means) I make it not apparent; please God to bless me but from such
accidents as are beyond my power and reason to prevent. For my labors, I
desire but such conditions as were promised me out of the gains; and that your
Highness would daigne to grace this Work, by your Princely and favorable
respect unto it, and know me to be

Your Highness true and faithful servant, John Smith.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable and worthy Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, of his
Majesty's Council, for all Plantations and discoueries; especially, of New
England.
SEeing the deeds of the most just, and the writings of the most wise, not
only of men, but of God himself, have been diversely traduced by variable
judgments of the Times opinionists; what shall such an ignorant as I expect?
Yet reposing my self on your favors, I present this rude discourse, to the
worlds construction; though I am persuaded, that few do think there may be had
from New England Staple commodities, well worth 3 or 400000 pound a year, with
so small charge, and such facility, as this discourse will acquaint you. But,
lest your Honors, that know me not, should think I go by hearesay or
affection; I entreat your pardons to say thus much of my self: Near twice
nine years, I have been taught by lamentable experience, as well in Europe and
Asia, as Afric, and America, such honest adventures as the chance of war
does cast upon poor Soldiers. So that, if I be not able to judge of what I
have seen, contrived, and done; it is not the fault either of my eyes, or
four quarters. And these nine years, I have bent my endeauours to find a
sure foundation to begin these ensuing protects: which though I never so
plainly and seriously propound; yet it rests in God, and you* still to
dispose of. Not doubting but your goodness will pardon my rudeness, and
ponder errors in the balance of good will* No more: but sacring all my best
abilities to the good of my Prince, and Country, and submitting my self to
the exquisit judgments of your renowned virtue, I ever rest

Your Honors, in all honest service, I. S.

To the right Worshipful Adventurers for the Country of New England, in the
Cities of London, Bristow, Exceter, Plymouth, Dartmouth, Bastable, Totneys,
etc. and in all other Cities and Ports, in the Kingdom of England.
IF the little Ant, and the silly Be seek by their diligence the good of
their Commonwealth; much more ought Man. If they punish the drones and sting
them steals their labor; then blame not Man. Little honey has that hiue,
where there are more Drones then Bees: and miserable is that Land, where more
are idle then well employed. If the endeavors of those vermin be acceptable, I
hope mine may be excuseable; Though I confess it were more proper for me, To
be doing what I say, then writing what I know. Had I returned rich, I could
not have erred: Now having only such fish as came to my net, I must be taxed.
But, I would my taxers were as ready to adventure their purse^, as I, purse,
life, and all I have: or as diligent to furnish the charge, as I know they are
vigilant to crop the fruits of my labors. Then would I not doubt (did God
please I might safely arrive in New England, and safely return) but to
perform somewhat more then I have promised, and approve my words by deeds,
according to proportion.

I am not the first has been betrayed by Pirates: And four men of war,
provided as they were, had been sufficient to have taken Sampson, Hercules,
and Alexander the great, no other way furnished then I was. I know not what
assurance any have do pass the Seas, Not to be subject to casualty as well as
my self: but least this disaster may hinder my proceedings, or ill will (by
rumor) the behoofefull work I pretend; I have writ this little: which I did
think to have concealed from any public use, till I had made my returns
speak as much, as my pen now does.

But because I speak so much of fishing, if any take me for such a deuote
fisher, as I dream of naught else, they mistake me. I know a ring of gold
from a grain of barley, as well as a goldesmith: and nothing is there to be
had which fishing does hinder, but further us to obtain. Now for that I have
made known unto you a fit place for plantation, limited within the bounds of
your Patent and Commission; having also received means, power, and authority
by your directions, to plant there a Colony, and make further search, and
discovery in those parts there yet unknown: Considering, withal, first those
of his Majesty's Council, then those Cities above named, and diverse others
that have been moved to lend their assistance to so great a work, do expect
(especially the adventurers) the true relation or event of my proceedings which
I hear are so abused; I am enforced for all these respects, rather to expose
my imbecillitie to contempt, by the testimony of these rude lines, then all
should condemn me for so bad a Factor, as could neither give reason nor
account of my actions and designs.

Yours to command, John Smith.

In the deserved Honor of the Author, Captain John Smith, and his Work.
Damned Envy is a sp'rite, that ever haunts
Beasts, mis-nam'd Men; Cowards or Ignorants.
But, only such she follows, whose dear WORTH
(Maugre her malice) sets their glory forth.
If this fair Ouerture, then, take not; It
Is Enuie's spite (dear friend) in men-of-wit;
Or Fear, lest morsels, which our mouths possess,
Might fall from thence; or elsetis Sottishness.
If either; (I hope neither) thee they raise;
Thy Hioderers.
Letters are as Letters in thy praise;
Who, by their vice, improve (when they reprove)
Thy virtue; so, in hate, procure thee Love.
Then, On firm Worth: this Monument I frame;
Scorning for any Smith to sorge such fame.
Io: Dauies, Heref:

To his worthy Captain the Author.
THat which we call the subject of all Story,
Is Truth, which in this Work of thine gives glory
To all that tho-hast done. Then, scorn the spite
of Envy; which does no man's merits right.
My sword may help the rest: my Pen no more
Can do, but this; I'aue said enough before.
Your sometime soldier, I. Codrinton, now Templer.

To my Worthy friend and Coson, Captain John Smith.
It ouer-ioyes my heart, when as thy Words
Of these designs, with deeds I do compare.
Here is a Book, such worthy truth affords,
None should the due desert there of impare;
Since thou, the man, deserving of these Ages,
Much pain have taken for this our Kingdoms good,
In Climes unknown, Among Turks and Saluages,
T'inlarge our bounds; though with thy loss of blood.
Hence damned Detraction: stand not in our way.
Envy, it self, will not the Truth gainesay.
N. Smith.

To that worthy and generous Gentleman, my very good friend, Captain Smith.
MAy Fate thy Project prosper, that thy name
May be eternised with living fame:
Though soul Detraction Honor would pervert,
And Envy ever waits upon desert:
In spite of Pelias, when his hate lies cold,
Return as Jason with a sleece of Gold.
Then after-ages shall record thy praise,
That a New England to this I Will did raise:
And when thou dy'st (as all that live must die)
Thy fame live here; thou, with Eternity.
R: Gunnell.

To his friend Cap: Smith, upon his description of New England.
SIr; your Relations I have read: which show,
There Is reason I should honor them and you:
And if their meaning I have understood,
I dare to censure, thus: Your Proiect's good;
And may (if followed) doubtless quit the pain,
With honor, pleasure and a trebble gain;
Beside the benefit that shall arise
To make more happy our Posterities.
For would we daigne to spare, though 'twere no more
Then what o're-filles, and surfets us in store,
To order Nature's fruitfulness a while
In that rude Garden, you New England style;
With present good, there is hope in after-daies
Thence to repair what Time and Pride decaies
In this rich kingdom. And the spacious West
Being still more with English blood possessed,
The Proud Iberians shall not rule those Seas,
To check our ships from sailing where they please;
Nor future times make any foreign power
Become so great to force a bound to Our.
Much good my mind fore-tels would follow hence
With little labor, and with less expense.
Thrive therefore thy Design, who ere envy:
England may joy in England's Colony,
Virginia seek her Virgin sisters good,
Be blessed in such happy neighborhood:
Or, what-soere Fate pleases to permit,
Be thou still honored for first moving it.
George Wither, e societate Lincol.

In the deserved honor of my honest and worthy Captain, John Smith, and his
Work.
Captain and friends when I peruse thy book
(With Judgments eyes) into thy heart I look:
And there I find (what sometimes- Albion) knew)
A Soldier, to his Countries-honour, true.
Some fight for wealth; and some for empty praise;
But thou alone thy Countries Fame to raise.
With due discretion, and undaunted heart,
I (often) so well have seen thee act thy Part
In deepest plunge of hard extreamitie,
As forced the troops of proudest foes to fly.
Though men of greater Rank and less desert
Would Pish-away thy Praise, it can not start
From the true Owner: for, all good-mens tongues
Shall keep the same. To them that Part belongs.
If, then, Wit, Courage, and Success should get
Thee Fame; the Muse for that is in thy debt:
A part whereof (least able though I be)
Thus here I do disburse, to honor Thee.
Rawly Croshaw.

Michael Phettiplace, William Phettiplace, and Richard Wisfing, Gentlemen, and
Soldiers under Captain Smiths Command: In his deserved honor for his Work,
and worth.
Why may not we in this Work have our Mite,
That had our share in each black day and night,
When thou Virginia foildst, yet kept'st unstained;
And held'st the King of Paspeheh enchaind.
Thou all alone this Saluage stern did take.
Pamunkes king we saw thee captive make
Among seven hundred of his stoutest men,
To murder thee and us resolved; when
Fast by the hand thou ledst this Saluage grim,
Thy Pistol at his breast to govern him:
Which did infuse such awe in all the rest
(Since their drad Sovereign thou had so distressed)
That thou and we (poor sixteen) safe retired
Unto our helpless ships. Thou (thus admired)
Did make proud Powhatan, his subjects send
To lames his Town, thy censure to attend:
And all Virginia's Lords, and petty Kings,
Awed by thy virtue, crouch, and Presents brings
To gain thy grace; so dreaded thou have been:
And yet a heart more mild is seldom seen;
So, making Valor Virtue, really;
Who have naught in thee counterfeit, or sly;
If in the slight be not the truest art,
That makes men famoused for fair desert.
Who says of thee, this sauors of vainglory,
Mistakes both thee and us, and this true story.
If it be ill in Thee, so well to do;
Then, is it ill in Us, to praise thee too.
But, if the first be well done; it is well,
To say it does (if so it does) excel!
Praise is the guerdon of each dear desert,
Making the praised act the praised part
With more alacrity: Honors Spur is Praise;
Without which, it (regardlesse) soon decaies.
And for this pains of thine we praise thee rather,
That future Times may know who was the father
Of this rare Work ( New England) which may bring
Praise to thy God, and profit to thy King.
A DESCRIPTION OF New England, by Captain John Smith.
IN the month of April, My first voyage to New England.
1614. with two Ships from London, of a few Merchants, I chanced to arrive in
New England, a part of Ameryca, at the I Will of Monahiggan, in 43 of Northerly
latitude: our plot was there to take Whales and make trials of a Mine of Gold
and Copper. If those failed, Fish and Furs was then our refuge, to make our
selves sauers howsoever: we found this Whalefishing a costly conclusion: we saw
many, and spent much time in chasing them; but could not kill any: They being
a kind of Iubartes, and not the Whale that yeeldes Finnes and Oil as we
expected. For our Gold, it was rather the Masters device to get a voyage that
proiected it, then any knowledge he had at all of any such matter. Fish and
Furs was now our guard: and by our late arriual, and long lingering about the
Whale, the prime of both those seasons were past ere we perceived it; we
thinking that their seasons served at all times: but we found it otherwise;
for, by the midst of June, the fishing failed. Yet in July and August some was
taken, but not sufficient to defray so great a charge as our stay required. Of
dry fish we made about 40000. of Cor fish about 7000. Whilst the sailers
fished, my self with eight or nine others of them might best be spared;
Ranging the coast in a small boat, we got for trifles near 1100 Beuer skins,
100 Martins, and near as many Otters; and the most of them within the distance
of twenty leagues. We ranged the Coast both East and West much further; but
Eastwards our commodities were not esteemed, they were so near the French who
affords them better: and right against us in the Main was a Ship of Sir Frances
Popphames, that had there such acquaintance, having many years used only that
port, that the most part there was had by him. And 40 leagues westwards were
two French Ships, that had made there a great voyage by trade, during the time
we tried those conclusions, not knowing the Coast, nor Saluages habitation.
With these Furs, the Train, and Cor-fish I returned for England in the Bark:
where within six months after our departure from the Downs, we safe arrived
back. The best of this fish was sold for five pound the hundredth, the rest by
ill usage betwixt three pound and fifty shillings. The other Ship stayed to fit
herself for Spain with the dry fish which was sold, by the Sailers report
that returned, at forty ryalls the quintall, each hundred weighing two
quintalls and a half.

New England is that part of America in the Ocean Sea opposite to Noua Albion
in the South Sea; The situation of New England.
discovered by the most memorable Sir Francis Drake in his voyage about the
world. In regard whereto this is styled New England, being in the same
latitude. New France, off it, is Northward: Southwardes is Virginia, and all
the adjoining Continent, with New Granado, New Spain, New Andolosia and the
West Indies. Now because I have been so often asked such strange questions, of
the goodness and greatness of those spacious Tracts of land, how they can be
thus long unknown, or nor possessed by the Spaniard, and many such like
demands; I entreat your pardons, if I chance to be too plain, or tedious in
relating my knowledge for plain men's satisfaction.

Florida is the next adjoining to the Indes, Notes of Florida.
which vnprosperously was attempted to be planted by the French. A Country
far bigger then England, Scotland, France and Ireland, yet little known to
any Christian, but by the wonderful endeavors of Ferdinando de Soto a valiant
Spaniard: whose writings in this age is the best guide known to search those
parts.

Virginia is no I Will (as many do imagine) but part of the Continent adjoining
to Florida; Notes of Virginia.
whose bounds may be stretched to the magnitude thereof without offense to any
Christian inhabitant. For from the degrees of 30. to 45. his Majesty has
granted his Letters parents, the Coast extending South-west and North-east
about 1500 miles; but to follow it aboard, the shore may well be 2000. at the
least: of which, 20. miles is the most gives entrance into the Bay of
Chisapeak, where is the London plantation: within which is a Country (as you
may perceive by the description in a Book and Map printed in my name of that
little I there discovered) may well suffice 300000 people to inhabit. And
Southward adioyneth that part discovered at the charge of Sir Walter Rawley, by
Sir Ralph Lane, and that learned Mathematician Mr. Thomas Heryot. Northward six
or seven degrees is the River Sadagahock, where was planted the Western
Colony, by that Honorable Patron of virtue Sir John Poppham Lord chief
Justice of England. There is also a relation printed by Captain Bartholomew
Gosnould, of Elizabeth's Isles: and an other by Captain Waymoth, of Pemmaquid.
From all these diligent obseruers, posterity may be bettered by the fruits of
their labors. But for diverse others that long before and since have ranged
those parts, within a kenning sometimes of the shore, some touching in one
place some in another, I must entreat them pardon me for omitting them; or if I
offend in saying that their true descriptions are concealed, or never well
observed, or died with the Authors: so that the Coast is yet still but even as
a Coast unknown and undiscovered. I have had six or seven several plots of
those Northren parts, so unlike each to other, and most sodiffering from any
true proportion, or resemblance of the Country, as they did me no more good,
then so much waste paper, though they cost me more. It may be it was not my
chance to see the best; but least others may be deceived as I was, or through
dangerous ignorance hazard themselves as I did, I have drawn a Map from Point
to Point, I Will to I Will, and Harbor to Harbor, with the Soundings, Sands, Rocks,
and Landmarks as I passed close aboard the Shore in a little Boat; although
there bemany things to be observed which the haste of other affairs did cause
me omit: for, being sent more to get present commodities, then knowledge by
discoueries for any future good, I had not power to search as I would: yet it
will serve to direct any shall go that ways, to safe Harbors and the
Saluages habitations: What merchandise and commodities for their labor they
may find, this following discourse shall plainly demonstrate.

Thus you may see, of this 2000. miles more then half is yet unknown to any
purpose: no not so much as the borders of the Sea are yet certainly discovered.
As for the goodness and true substances of the Land, we are for most part yet
altogether ignorant of them, unless it be those parts about the Bay of
Chisapeack and Sagadahock: but only here and there we touched or have seen a
little the edges of those large dominions, which do stretch themselves into
the Maine, God does know how many thousand miles; whereof we can yet no more
judge, then a stranger that saileth betwixt England and France can describe the
Harbors and dangers by landing here or there in some River or Bay, tell thereby
the goodness and substances of Spain, Italy, Germany, Bohemia, Hungaria and
the rest. By this you may perceive how much they err, that think every one which
has bin at Virginia understands or knows what Virginia is: Or that the
Spaniards know one half quarter of those Territories they possess; no, not so
much as the true circumference of Terra Incognita, whose large dominions may
equalize the greatness and goodness of America, for any thing yet known. It is
strange with what small power he has reigned in the East Indes; and few will
understand the truth of his strength in America: where he having so much to
keep with such a pampered force, they need not greatly fear his fury, in
the Bermudas, Virginia, New France, or New England; beyond whose bounds America
does stretch many thousand miles: into the frozen parts whereof one Master
Hutson an English Mariner did make the greatest discovery of any Christian I
know of, where he unfortunately died. For Africa, had not the industrious
Portugales ranged her unknown parts, who would have sought for wealth among
those fried Regions of black brutish Negers, where not withstanding all the
wealth and admirable adventures and endeauours more then 140 years, they know
not one third of those black habitations. But it is not a work for every one,
to manage such an affair as makes a discovery, and plants a Colony: It
requires all the best parts of Art, Judgment, Courage, Honesty, Co^stancy,
Diligence and Industry, to do but near well. Some are more proper for one
thing then another; and therein are to be employed: and nothing breeds more
confusion then misplacing and misimploying men in their undertakings. Columbus,
Cortez, Pitzara, Soto, Magellanes, and the rest served more then a prentiship
to learn how to begin their most memorable attempts in the West Indes: which
to the wonder of all ages succesfully they effected, when many hundreds of
others far above them in the worlds opinion, being instructed but by
relation, came to shame and confusion in actions of small moment, who
doubtless in other matters, were both wise, discreet, generous, and
courageous. I say not this to detract any thing from their incomparable merits,
but to answer those questionless questions that keep us back from imitating
the worthiness of their brave spirits that advanced themselves from poor
Soldiers to great Captains, their posterity to great Lords, their King to be
one of the greatest Potentates on earth, and the fruits of their labors, his
greatest glory, power and renown.

That part we call New England is betwixt the degrees of 41. The description
of New England.
and 45: but that part this discourse speaks of, stretches but from
Pennobscot to Cape Cod, some 75 leagues by a right line distant each from
other: within which bounds I have seen at least 40. several habitations upon
the Sea Coast, and sounded about 25 excellent good Harbors; In many whereof
there is ancorage for 500. sail of ships of any burden; in some of them for
5000: And more then 200 Isles ouergrowne with good timber, of diverse sorts of
wood, which do make so many harbors as requires a longer time then I had, to
be well discovered.

The principal habitation Northward we were at, The particular C^untries or
Governments.
was Pennobscot* Southward along the Coast and up the Rivers we found
Mecadacut, Segocket, Pemmaquid, Nusconcus, Kenebeck, Sagadahock, and
Aumoughaawgen; And to those Countries belong the people of Segotago,
Paghhuntanuck, Pocopassum, Taughtanakagnet, Warbigganus, Nassaque,
Masherosqueck, Wawrigweck, Moshoquen, Wakcogo, Passharanack, etc. To these are
allied the Countries of Aucocisco, Accominticus, Passataquack, Aggawom, and
Naemkeck: all these, I could perceive, differ little in language, fashion, or
government: though most be Lords of themselves, yet they hold the Bashabes of
Pennobscot, the chief and greatestamongst them.

The next I can remember by name are Mattahunts; two pleasant Isles of groves,
gardens and corn fields a league in the Sea from the Main. Then Totant,
Massachuset, Pocapawmet, Quonahassit, Sagoquas, Nahapassumkeck, Topeent,
Seccasaw, Totheet, Nasnocomacack, Accomack, Chawum; Then Cape Cod by which is
Pawmet and the I Will Nawset, of the language, and alliance of them of Chawum: The
others are called Massachusetts; of another language, humor and condition: For
their trade and merchandise; to each of their habitations they have diverse
Towns and people belonging; and by their relations and desriptions, more then
20 several Habitations and Rivers that stretch themselves far up into the
Country, even to the borders of diverse great Lakes, where they kill and take
most of their Beuers and Ouers. From Pennobscot to Sagadahock this Coast is all
Mountainous and Isles of huge Rocks, but ouergrowen with all sorts of excellent
good woods for building houses, boats, barks or ships; with an incredible
abundance of most sorts of fish, much foul, and sundry sorts of good fruits
for man's use.

Betwixt Sagadahock and Sowocatuck there is but two or three sandy Bays, The
mixture of an excellent soil.
but betwixt that and Cape God very many: especialy the Coast of the
Massachusetts is so indifferently mixed with high clayie or sandy cliffes in one
place, and then tracts of large long ledges of diverse sorts, and quarries of
stones in other places so strangely divided with tinctured veins of diverse
colors: as, Free stone for building, Slate for tiling, smooth stone to make
Fornaces and Forges for glass or iron, and iron ore sufficient, conveniently
to melt in them: but the most part so resembles the Coast of Devonshire, I
think most of the cliffes would make such limestone: If they be not of these
qualities, they are so like, they may deceive a better judgment then mine; all
which are so near adjoining to those other advantages I observed in these
parts, that if the Ore prove as good iron and steel (...) those parts, as I
know it is within the bounds of the Country, I dare engage my head (having but
men skillful to work the simples there growing) to have all things belonging
to the building the rigging of ships of any proportion, and and good
merchandise for the fraught, within a square of 10 or 14 leagues: and were it
for a good reward, I would not fear to prove it in a less limitation.

And surely by reason of those sandy cliffes and cliffes of rocks, A proof of
an excellent temper.
both which we saw so planted with Gardens and Corn fields, and so well
inhabited with a goodly, strong and well proportioned people, besides the
greatness of the Timber growing on them, the greatness of the fish and the
moderate temper of the air (for of twenty five, not any was sick, A proof
of health.
but two that were many years diseased before they went, not withstanding our
bad lodging and accidental diet) who can but approve this a most excellent
place, both for health and fertility? And of all the four parts of the world
that I have yet seen not inhabited, could I have but means to transport a
Colonie, I would rather live here then any where: and if it did not maintain
if self, were we but once indifferently well fitted, let us starve.

The maine Staple, from hence to be extracted for the present to produce the
rest, St^ple commodities present.
is fish; which howeuet it may seem a mean and a base commodity: yet who who
will but truly take the pains and consider the sequel, I think will allow it
well worth the labor. It is strange to see what great adventures the hopes of
setting forth men of war to rob the industrious innocent, would procure; or
such massy promises in gross: though more are choked then well fed with
such hasty hopes. But who does not know that the poor Hollanders, The
Hollanders fishing.
chiefly by fishing, at a great charge and labor in all weathers in the open
Sea, are made a people so hardy, and industrious? and by the venting this poor
commodity to the Easterlings for as mean, which is Wood, Flax, Pitch, Tar,
Rosin, Cordage, and such like (which they exchange again, to the French,
Spaniards, Portugales, and English, etc. for what they want) are made so
mighty, strong and rich, as no State but Venice, of twice their magnitude, is
so well furnished with so many fair Cities, goodly Towns, strong Fortresses,
and that abundance of shipping and all sorts of merchandise, as well of Gold,
Silver, Pearls, Diamonds, Precious stones, Silks, Veluets, and Cloth of
gold; as Fish, Pitch, Wood, or such gross commodities? What Voyages and
Discoueries, East and West, North and South, yea about the world, make they?
What an Army by Sea and Land, have they long maintained in despite of one of
the greatest Princes of the world? and never could the Spaniard with all his
Mines of gold and Silver, pay his debts, his friends, and army, half so
truly, as the Hollanders still have done by this contemptible trade of fish.
Diverse (I know) may allege, many other assistances: But this is their Mine;
and the Sea the source of those siluered streams of all their virtue; which
has made them now the very miracle of industry, the pattern of perfection for
these affairs: and the benefit of fishing is that Primum mobile that turns
all their Spheres to this height of plenty, strength, honor and admiration.

Herring, Cod, and Ling, is that triplicitie that makes their wealth and
shippings multiplicities, such as it is, and from which (few would think it)
they yearly draw at least one million and a half of pounds starling; Which is
fifteen hundred thou and pound.
yet it is most certain (if records be true): and in this faculty they are so
naturalized, and of their vents so certainly acquainted, as there is no
likelihood they will ever be paralleld, having 2 or 3000 Busses, Flat
bottomes, Sword pinks, Todes, and such like, that breeds them Sailors,
Mariners, Soldiers and Merchants, never to be wrought out of that trade, and
fit for any other. I will not deny but others may gain as well as they, that
will use it, though not so certainly, nor so much in quantity; for want of
experience. And this Herring they take upon the Coast of Scotland and England;
their Cod and Ling, upon the Coast of Izeland and in the North Seas.

Hamborough, and the East Countries, for Sturgion and Cauiare, gets many
thousands of pounds from England, and the Straites: Portugale, the Biskaines,
and the Spaniards, make 40 or 50 Sail yearly to Cape-blank, to hook for
Porgos, Mullet, and make Puttardo: and New found Land, does yearly fraught
near 800 sail of Ships with a silly lean skinny Poore-Iohn, and Corfish,
which at least yearly amounts to 3 or 400000 pound. If from all those parts
such pains is taken for this poor gains of fish, and by them has neither
meat, drink, nor clothes, wood, iron, nor steel, pitch, tar, nets, leads,
salt, hooks, nor lines, for shipping, fishing, nor provision, but at the
second, third, fourth, or fifth hand, drawn from so many several parts of the
world ere they come together to be used in this voyage: If these I say can
gain, and the Sailors live going for shares, less then the third part of
their labors, and yet spend as much time in going and coming, as in staying
there, so short is the season of fishing; why should we more doubt, then
Holland, Portugale, Spaniard, French, or other, but to do much better then
they, where there is victual to feed us, wood of all sorts, to build Boats,
Ships, or Barks; the fish at our doors, pitch, tar, masts, yards, and most
of other necessaries only for making? And here are no hard Landlords to rack
us with high rents, or extorted fines to consume us, no tedious pleas in law to
consume us with their many years disputations for Justice: no multitudes to
occasion such impediments to good orders, as in popular States. So freely has
God and his Majesty bestowed those blessings on the^ that will attempt to
obtain them, as here every man may be master and owner of his own labor and
land; or the greatest part in a small time. If he have nothing but his hands,
he may set up this trade; and by industry quickly grow rich; spending but
half that time well, which in England we abuse in idleness, worse or as ill. Here
is ground also as good as any lies in the height of forty one, forty two,
forty three, etc. which is as temperate and as fruitful as any other parallel
in the world. Examples of the altitude comparatively.
As for example, on this side the line West of it in the South Sea, is Noua
Albion, discovered as is said, by Sir Francis Drake. East from it, is the most
temperate part of Portugale, the ancient kingdoms of Galazia, Biskey, Navarre,
Arragon, Catalonia, Castilia the old, and the most moderatest of Castilia the
new, and Valentia, which is the greatest part of Spain: which if the Spanish
Histories be true, in the Romans time abounded no less with gold and silver
Mines, then now the West Indies; The Romans then using the Spaniards to work
in those Mines, as now the Spaniard does the Indians.

In France, the Provinces of Gasconie, Langadock, Auignon, Province, Dolphine,
Pyamont, and Turyne, are in the same parallel: which are the best and richest
parts of France. In Italy, the provinces of Genua, Lumbardy, and Verona, with a
great part of the most famous Sat of Venice, the Dukedoms of Bononia, Mantua,
Ferrara, Rauenna, Bolognia, Florence, Pisa, Sienna, Vrbine, Ancona, and the
ancient City and Country of Rome, with a great part of the great Kingdom of
Naples. In Slauonia, Istrya, and Dalmatia, with the Kingdoms of Albania. In
Grecia, that famous Kingdom of Macedonia, Bulgaria, Thessalia, Thracia, or
Romania, where is seated the most pleasant and ple^tifull City in Europe,
Constantinople. In Asia also, in the same latitude, are the temperatest parts
of Natolia, Armenia, Persia, and China, besides diverse other large Countries
and Kingdoms in these most mild and temperate Regions of Asia. Southward, in
the same height, is the richest of gold Mines, Chily and Baldiuia, and the
mouth of the great River of Plate, etc: for all the rest of the world in that
height is yet unknown. Besides these reasons, mine own eyes that have seen a
great part of those Cities and their Kingdoms, as well as it, can find no
advantage they have in nature, but this, They are beautified by the long labor
and diligence of industrious people and Art. This is only as God made it, when
he created the world. Therefore I conclude, if the heart and intralls of those
Regions were sought: if their Land were cultured, planted and manured by men of
industry, judgment, and experience; what hope is there, or what need they
doubt, having those advantages of the Sea, but it might equalize any of those
famous Kingdoms, in all commodities, pleasures, and conditions? seeing even
the very edges do naturally afford us such plenty, as no ship need return
away empty: and only use but the season of the Sea, fish will return an
honest gain, beside all other advantages; her treasures having yet never been
opened, nor her originalls wasted, consumed, nor abused.

And whereas it is said, The particular staple commodities that may be had.
the Hollanders serve the Easterlings themselves, and other parts that want,
with Herring, Ling, and wet Cod; The Easterlings, a great part of Europe, with
Sturgion and Cauiate; Cape-blanke, Spain, Portugale, and the Leuant, with
Mullet, and Puttargo; New found Land, all Europe, with a thin Poor John: yet
all is so ouerlaide with fishers, as the fishing decays, and many are
constrained to return with a small fraught. Norway, and Polonia, Pitch, Tar,
Masts, and Yardes; Sweathland, and Russia Iron, and Ropes; France, and Spain,
Canuas, Wine, Steel, Iron, and Oil; Italy and Greece, Silks, and Fruits. I
dare boldly say, because I have seen naturally growing, or breeding in those
parts the same materials that all those are made of, they may as well be had
here, or the most part of them, within the distance of 70 leagues for some few
ages, as from all those parts; using but the same means to have them that they
do, and with all those advantages.

First, The nature of ground approved.
the ground is so fertile, that questionless it is capable of producing any
Grain, Fruits, or Seeds you will sow or plant, growing in the Regions before
named: But it may be, not every kind to that perfection of delicacy; or some
tender plants may miscarie, because the Summer is not so hot, and the winter is
more cold in those parts we have yet tried near the Sea side, then we find
in the same height in Europe or Asia; Yet I made a Garden upon the top of a
Rockie I Will in 43., 4 leagues from the Main, in May, that grew so well, as it
served us for sallets in June and July. All sorts of cattle may here be bred
and fed in the Isles, or Peninsulaes, securely for nothing. In the Interim till
they increase if need be (observing the seasons) I durst undertake to have
corn enough from the Saluages for 300 men, for a few trifles; and if they
should be untoward (as it is most certain they are) thirty or forty good men
will be sufficient to bring them all in subjection, and make this provision; if
they understand what they do: 200 whereof may nine months in the year be
employed in making marchandable fish, till the rest provide other necessaries,
fit to furnish us with other commodities.

In March, The seasons for fishing approved.
April, May, and half June, here is Cod in abundance; in May, June, July, and
August Mullet and Sturgion; whose roes do make Cauiare and Puttargo. Herring,
if any desire them, I have taken many out of the bellies of Cods, some in nets;
but the Saluages compare their store in the Sea, to the hairs of their heads:
and surely there are an incredible abundance upon this Coast. In the end of
August, September, October, and November, you have Cod again, to make Cor
fish, or Poor John: and each hundred is as good as two or three hundred in the
Newfound Land. So that half the labor in hooking, splitting, and turning, is
saved: and you may have your fish at what Market you will, before they can have
any in Newfound Land; where their fishing is chiefly but in June and July:
whereas it is here in March, April, May, September, October, and November, as
is said. So that by reason of this plantation, the Merchants may have fraught
both out and home: which yields an advantage worth consideration.

Your Cor-fish you may in like manner transport as you see cause, to serve the
Ports in Portugale (as Lisbon, Auera, Porta port, and diverse others, or what
market you please) before your Ilanders return: They being tied to the season
in the open Sea; you having a double season, and fishing before your doors, may
every night sleep quietly a shore with good cheer and what fires you will, or
when you please with your wives and family: they only, their ships in the
maine Ocean.

The Mullets here are in that abundance, you may take them with nets,
sometimes by hundreds, where at Cape blank they hook them; yet those but one
foot and a half in length; these two, three, or four, as often I have measured:
much Salmon some have found up the Rivers, as they have passed: and here the
air is so temperate, as all these at any time may well be preserved.

Now, Employment for poor people and fatherless children.
young boys and girls Saluages, or any other, be they never such idlers, may
turn, carry, and return fish, without either shame, or any great pain: he is
very idle that is past twelve years of age and cannot do so much: and she is
very old, that cannot spin a thread to make engines to catch them.

For their transportation, The facility of the plantation.
the ships that go there to fish may transport the first: who for their passage
will spare the charge of double manning their ships, which they must do in the
Newfound Land, to get their fraught; but one third part of that company are
only but proper to serve a stage, carry a barrow, and turn Poor John:
notwithstanding, they must have meat, drink, clothes, and passage, as well as
the rest. Now all I desire, is but this; That those that voluntarily will send
shipping, should make here the best choice they can, or accept such as are
presented them, to serve them at that rate: and their ships returning leave
such with me, with the value of that they should receive coming home, in such
provisions and necessary tools, arms, bedding and apparel, salt, hooks,
nets, lines, and such like as they spare of the remainings; who till the next
return may keep their boats and do them many other profitable offices:
provided I have men of ability to teach them their functions, and a company fit
for Soldiers to be ready upon an occasion; because of the abuses which have
been offered the poor Saluages, and the liberty both French, or any that
will, has to deal with them as they please: whose disorders will be hard to
reform; and the longer the worse. Now such order with facility might be
taken, with every port Town or City, to observe but this order, With free
power to convert the benefits of their fraughts to what advantage they please,
and increase their numbers as they see occasion; who ever as they are able to
subsist of themselves, may begin the new Towns in New England in memory of
their old: which freedom being confined but to the necessity of the general
good, the event (with Gods help) might produce an honest, a noble, and a
profitable emulation.

Salt upon salt may assuredly be made; (...) commodities.
if not at the first in ponds, yet till they be provided this may be used:
then the Ships may transport Kine, Horse, Goats, course Cloth, and such
commodities as we want; by whose arrival may be made that provision of fish to
fraught the Ships that they stay not: and then if the sailers go for wages, it
matters not. It is hard if this return defray not the charge: but care must be
had, they arrive in the Spring, or else provision be made for them against the
Winter.

Of certain red berries called Alkermes which is worth ten shillings a pound,
but of these has been sold for thirty or forty shillings the pound, may
yearly be gathered a good quantity.

Of the Musk Rat may be weil raised gains, well worth their labor, that will
endeavor to make trial of their goodness.

Of Beuers, Otters, Martins, Black Foxes, and Furs of price, may yearly be
had 6 or 7000: and if the trade of the French were prevented, many more: 25000
this year were brought from those Northren parts into France; of which trade
we may have as good part as the French, if we take good courses.

Of Mines of Gold and Silver, Copper, and probabilities of Lead, Crystal and
Alum, I could say much if relations were good assurances. It is true indeed, I
made many trials according to those instructions I had, which do persuade me
I need not despair, but there are metalls in the Country: but I am no
Alchymist, nor will promise more then I know: which is, Who will undertake the
rectifying of an Iron forge, if those that buy meat, drink, coals, ore, and
all necessaries at a deer rate gain; where all these things are to be had for
the taking up, in my opinion cannot lose.

Of woods seeing there is such plenty of all sorts, if those that build ships
and boats, buy wood at so great a price, as it is in England, Spain, France,
Italy, and Holland, and all other provisions for the nourishing of man's life;
live well by their trade: when labor is all required to take those necessaries
without any other tax; what hazard will be here, but do much better? And what
commodity in Europe does more decay then wood? For the goodness of the
ground, let us take it fertile, or barren, or as it is: seeing it is certain
it bears fruits, to nourish and feed man and beast, as well as England, and
the Sea those several sorts of fish I have related. Thus seeing all good
provisions for man's sustenance, may with this facility be had, by a little
extraordinary labor, till that transported be increased; and all necessaries
for shipping, only for labor: to which may be added the assistance of the
Saluages, which may easily be had, if they be discreetly handled in their
kinds; toward fishing, planting, and destroying woods. What gains might be
raised if this were followed (when there is but once men to fill your store
houses, dwelling there, you may serve all Europe better and far cheaper, then
can the Izeland fishers, or the Hollanders, Cape blank, or New found Land: who
must be at as much more charge, then you) may easily be coniectured by this
example.

2000. An example of the gains upon every year or from one these return.
pound will fit out a ship of 200. and 1 of a 100 tuns: If the dry fish they
both make, fraught that of 200. and go for Spain, sell it but at ten
shillings a quintall; but commonly it gives fifteen, or twenty: especially
when it comes first, which amounts to 3 or 4000 pound: but say but ten,
which is the lowest, allowing the rest for waste, it amounts at that rate, to
2000 pound, which is the whole charge of your two ships, and their equipage:
Then the return of the money, and the fraught of the ship for the vintage, or
any other voyage, is clear gain, with your ship of a 100 tuns of Train and
oil, besides the beuers, and other commodities; and that you may have at home
within six months, if God please but to send an ordinary passage. Then
saving half this charge by the not staying of your ships, your victual,
overplus of men and wages; with her fraught thither of things necessary for
the planters, the salt being there made: as also may the nets and lines, within
a short time: if nothing were to be expected but this, it might in time
equalize your Hollanders gains, if not exceed them: they returning but wood,
pitch, tar, and such gross commodities; you wines, oils, fruits, silks,
and such Straits commodities, as you please to provide by your Factors, against
such times as your ships arrive with them. This would so increase our
shipping and sailers, and so employ and encourage a great part of our idlers
and others that want employments fitting their qualities at home, where they
shame to do that they would do abroad; that could they but once taste the
sweet fruits of their own labors, doubtless many thousands would be advised
by good discipline, to take more pleasure in honest industry, then in their
humors of dissolute idleness.

But, A description of the Countries in particular, and their situations.
to return a little more to the particulars of this Country, which I
intermingle thus with my proiects and reasons, not being so sufficiently yet
acquainted in those parts, to write fully the estate of the Sea, the Air, the
Land, the Fruits, the Rocks, the People, the Government, Religion,
Territories, and Limitations, Friends, and Foes: but, as I gathered from the
niggardly relations in a broken language to my understanding, during the time I
ranged those Countries etc. The most Northren part I was at, was the Bay of
Pennobscot, which is East and West, North and South, more then ten leagues: but
such were my occasions, I was constrained to be satisfied of them I found in
the Bay, that the River ran far up into the Land, and was well inhabited
with many people, but they were from their habitations, either fishing among
the Isles, or hunting the Lakes and Woods, for Deer and Beners. The Bay is full
of great Islands, of one, two, six, eight, or ten miles in length, which diuides
it into many fair and excellent good harbors. On the East of it, are the
Tarrantines, their mortal enemies, where inhabit the French, as they report
that live with those people, as one nation or family. And Northwest of
Pennobscot is Mecaddacut, at the foot of a high mountain, a kind of fortress
against the Tarrantines, adjoining to the high mountains of Pennobscot,
against whose feet does beat the Sea: But over all the Land, Isles, or other
impediments, you may well see them sixteen or eighteen leagues from their
situation. Segocket is the next; then Nusconcus, Pemmaquid, and Sagadahock. Up
this River where was the Western plantation are Aumuckcawgen, Kinnebeck, and
diverse others, where there is planted some corn fields. Along this River 40 or
50 miles, I saw nothing but great high cliffes of barren Rocks, ouergrowne with
wood: but where the Saluages dwelt there the ground is exceeding fat and
fertile. Westward of this River, is the Country of Aucocisco, in the bottom
of a large deep Bay, full of many great Isles, which diuides it into many good
harbors. Sowocotuck is the next, in the edge of a large sandy Bay, which has
many Rocks and Isles, but few good harbors, but for Barks, I yet know. But all
this Coast to Pennobscot, and as far I could see Eastward of it is nothing
but such high craggy Cliffy Rocks and stony Isles that I wondered such great
trees could grow upon so hard foundations. It is a Country rather to
affright, then delight one. And how to describe a more plain spectacle of
desolation or more barren I know not. Yet the Sea there is the strangest
fishpond I ever saw; and those barren Isles so furnished with good woods,
springs, fruits, fish, and foul, that it makes me think though the Coast be
rockie, and thus affrightable; the Valleys, Plains, and and interior parts,
may well (notwithstanding) be very fertile. But there is no kingdom so
fertile has not some part barren: and New England is great enough, to make
many Kingdoms and Countries, were it all inhabited. As you pass the Coast
still Westward, Accominticus and Passataquack are two convenient harbors for
small barks; and a good Country, within their craggie cliffs. Angoam is the
next; This place might content a right curious judgment: but there are many
sands at the entrance of the harbor: and the worst is, it is inbayed too far
from the deep Sea. Here are many rising hills, and on their tops and
descents many corn fields, and delightful groves. On the East, is an I Will of
two or three leagues in length; the one half, plain morish grass fit for
pasture, with many fair high groves of mulberrie trees gardens: and there is
also Oaks, Pines, and other woods to make this place an excellent habitation,
being a good and safe harbor.

Naimkeck though it be more rockie ground (for Angoam is sandy) not much
inferior; neither for the harbor, nor any thing I could perceive, but the
multitude of people. From hence does stretch into the Sea the fair headland
Tragabigzanda, fronted with three Isles called the three Turks heads: to the
North of this, does enter a great Bay, where we found some habitations and
corn fields: they report a great River, and at least thirty habitations, do
possess this Country. But because the French had got their Trade, I had no
leisure to discover it. The Isles of Mattahunts are on the West side of this
Bay, where are many Isles, and questionless good harbors: and then the Country
of the Massachusetts, which is the Paradise of all those parts: for, here are
many Isles all planted with corn; groves, mulberries, saluage gardens, and good
harbors: the Coast is for the most part, high clayie sandy cliffs. The Sea
Coast as you pass, shows you all along large corn fields, and great troops
of well proportioned people: but the French having remained here near six
weeks, left nothing, for us to take occasion to examine the inhabitants
relations, viz. if there be near three thousand people upon these Isles; and
that the River does pearce many days iourneies the intralles of that Country.
We found the people in those parts very kind; but in their fury no less
valiant. For, upon a quarrel we had with one of them, he only with three
others crossed the harbor of Quonahassit to certain rocks whereby we must
pass; and there let fly their arrows for our shot, till we were out of
danger.

Then come you to Accomack, an excellent good harbor, good land; and no want of
any thing, but industrious people. After much kindness, upon a small occasion,
we fought also with forty or fifty of those: though some were hurt, and some
slain; yet within an hour after they became friends. Cape Cod is the next
presents it self: which is only a headland of high hills of sand, ouergrowne
with shrubbie pines, hurts, and such trash; but an excellent harbor for all
weathers. This Cape is made by the maine Sea on the one side, and a great Bay
on the other in form of a sickle: on it does inhabit the people of Pawmet: and
in the bottom of the Bay, the people of Chawum. Toward the South and
Southwest of this Cape, is found a long and dangerous shoale of sands and
rocks. But so farte as I incircled it, I found thirty fadom water aboard the
shore, and a strong current: which makes me think there is a Channel about
this shoale; where is the best and greatest fish to be had, Winter and Summer,
in all that Country. But, the Saluages say there is no Channel, but that the
shoales begin from the maine at Pawmet, to the I Will of Nausit; and so extends
beyond their knowledge into the Sea. The next to this is Capawack, and those
abounding Countries of copper, corn, people, and mineralls; which I went to
discover this last year: but because I miscarried by the way, I will leave
them, till God please I have better acquaintance with them.

The Massachusetts, A good Country.
they report, sometimes have wars with the Bashabes of Pennobskot; and are
not always friends with them of Chawun and their alliants: but now they are
all friends, and have each trade with other, so far as they have society, on
each others frontiers. For they make no such voiages as from Pennobskot to Cape
Cod; seldom to Massachewset. In the North (as I have said) they begun to
plant corn, whereof the South part has such plenty, as they have what they
will from them of the North; and in the Winter much more plenty of fish and
foul: but both Winter and Summer has it in the one part or other all the
year; being the mean and most indifferent temper, betwixt heat and cold, of
all the regions betwixt the Line and the Pole: but the furs Northward are much
better, and in much more plenty, then Southward.

The remarkeablest Isles and mountains for Landmarkes are these; The landmarkes.
The highest I Will is Sorico, in the Bay of Pennobskot: but the three Isles and a
rock of Matinnack are much further in the Sea; Metinicus is also three plain
Isles and a rock, betwixt it and Monahigan: Monahigan is a round high I Will; and
close by it Monanis, betwixt which is a small harbor where we ride. In Damerils
Isles is such another: Sagadahock is known by Satquin, and four or five Isles
in the mouth. Smyths Isles are a heap together, none near them, against
Accominticus. The three Turks heads are three Isles seen fa^ to Sea-ward in
regard of the headland.

The chief headlands are only Cape Tragabig^anda and Cape Cod.

The chief mountains, them of Pennobscot: the twinkling mountain of
Aucocisco; the great mountain of Sasanon; and the high mountain of
Massachusit: each of which you shall find in the Map; their places, forms,
and altitude. The waters are most pure, proceeding from the intrals of rockie
mountains; Herbs.
the herbs and fruits are of many sorts and kinds: as alkermes, currants, or
a fruit like currants, mulberries, vines, respices, goosberries, plummes,
walnuts, chestnuts, small nuts, etc. pumpions, gourds, strawberries, beans,
pease, and mayze; a kind or two of flax, wherewith they make nets, lines and
ropes both small and great, very strong for their quantities.

Oak, Woods.
is the chief wood; of which there is great difference in regard of the soil
where it grows. fur, pyne, walnut, chestnut, birch, ash, elm, cypress,
ceder, mulberrie, plumtree, hazell, saxefrage, and many other sorts.

Eagles, Birds.
Gripes, diverse sorts of Hawks, Cranes, Geese, Brants, Cormorants, Ducks,
Sheldrakes, Teale, Meawes, Guls, Turkies, Diue-doppers, and many other sorts,
whose names I know not.

Whales, Fishes.
Grampus, Porkpisces, Turbut, Sturgion, Cod, Hake, Haddock, Cole, Cusk, or
small Ling, Shark, Mackerell, Herring, Mullet, Base, Pinacks, Cunners, Perch,
Eels, Crabs, Lobsters, Muskles, Wilkes, Oysters, and diverse others etc.

Moos, Beasts.
a beast bigger then a Stagge; dear, red, and Fallow; Beuers, Wolves, Foxes,
both black and other; Aroughconds, Wild-cats, Bears, Otters, Martins,
Fitches, Musquaslus, and diverse sorts of vermin, whose names I know not. All
these and diverse other good things do heese, for want of use, still increase,
and decrease with little diminution, whereby they grow to that abundance. You
shall scarce find any Baye, shallow shore, or Coue of sand, where you may not
take many Clampes, or Lobsters, or both at your pleasure, and in many places
lode your boat if you please; Nor Isles where you find not fruits, birds,
crabs, and muskles, or all of them, for taking, at a low water. And in the
harbors we frequented, a little boy might take of Cunners, and Pinacks, and
such delicate fish, at the ships stern, more then six or ten can eat in a
day; but with a casting-net, thousands when we pleased: and scarce any place,
but Cod, Cuske, Holybut, Mackerell, Scate, or such like, a man may take with a
hook or line what he will. And, in diverse sandy Baies, a man may draw with a
net great store of Mullets, Bases, and diverse other sorts of such excellent
fish, as many as his Net can draw on shore: no River where there is not
plenty of Sturgion, or Salmon, or both; all which are to be had in abundance
observing but their seasons. But if a man will go at Christmasse to gather
Cherries in Kent, he may be deceived; though there be plenty in Summer: so,
here these plenties have each their seasons, as I have expressed. We for the
most part had little but bread and vinegar: and though the most part of July
when the fishing decayed they wrought all day, lay abroad in the Isles all
night, and lived on what they found, yet were not sick: But I would wish none
put himself long to such plunges; except necessity constrain it: yet worthy
is that person to starve that here cannot live; if he have sense, strength and
health: for, there is no such penury of these blessings in any place, but that
a hundred men may, in one hour or two, make their provisions for a day: and
he that has experience to manage well these affairs, with forty or thirty
honest industrious men, might well undertake (if they dwell in these parts) to
subject the Saluages, and feed daily two or three hundred men, with as good
corn, fish, and flesh, as the earth has of those kinds, and yet make that
labor but their pleasure: provided that they have engines, that be proper for
their purposes.

Who can desire more content, A note for men that have great spirits, and small
means
that has small means; or but only his merit to advance his fortune, then to
tread, and plant that ground he has purchased by the hazard of his life? If
he have but the taste of virtue, and magnanimity, what to such a mind can be
more pleasant, then planting and building a foundation for his Posterity,
got from the rude earth, by Gods blessing and his own industry, without
prejudice to any? If he have any grain of faith or zeal in Religion, what
can he do less hurtful to any; or more agreeable to God, then to seek to
convert those poor Saluages to know Christ, and humanity, whose labors with
discretion will triple requite thy charge and pains? What so truly suits with
honor and honesty, as the discovering things unknown? erecting Towns,
peopling Countries, informing the ignorant, reforming things unjust, teaching
virtue; and gain to out Natiuemother-countrie a kingdom to attend her; find
employment for those that are idle, because they know not what to do: so far
from wronging any, as to cause Posterity to remember thee; and remembering
thee, ever honor that remembrance with praise? Consider: What were the
beginnings and endings of the Monarkies of the Chaldeans, the Syrians, the
Grecians, and Romans, but this one rule; What was it they would not do, for
the good of the commonwealth, or their Mother-citie? For example: Rome, What
made her such a Monarchesse, but only the adventures of her youth, not in
riots at home, but in dangers abroad? and the justice and judgment out of
their experience, when they grew aged. What was their ruin and hurt, but
this; The excess of idleness, the fondness of Parents, the want of
experience in Magistrates, the admiration of their undeserved honors, the
contempt of true merit, their unjust iealosies, their politic incredulities,
their hypocritical seeming goodness, and their deeds of secret lewdness?
finally, in fine, growing only formal temporists, all that their predecessors
got in many years, they lost in few days. Those by their pains and virtues
became Lords of the world; they by their ease and vices became slaves to their
servants. This is the difference betwixt the use of Arms in the field, and on
the monuments of stones; the golden age and the leaden age, prosperity and
misery, justice and corruption, substance and shadows, words and deeds,
experience and imagination, making Commonwealths and marring Commonwealths, the
fruits of virtue and the conclusions of vice.

Then, who would live at home idly (or think in himself any worth to live)
only to eat, drink, and sleep, and so die? Or by consuming that carelessly,
his friends got worthily? Or by using that miserably, that maintained virtue
honestly? Or, for being descended nobly, pine with the vain vaunt of great
kindred, in penury? Or (to maintain a silly show of bravery) toil out thy
heart, soul, and time, basely, by shifts, tricks, cards, and dice? Or by
relating news of others actions, sharke here or there for a dinner, or supper;
deceive thy friends, by fair promises, and dissimulation, in borrowing where
thou never intendest to pay; offend the laws, surfeit with excess, burden thy
Country, abuse thy self, despair in want, and then cousen thy kindred, yea
even thine own brother, and wish thy parents death (I will not say damnation)
to have their estates? though thou see what honors, and rewards, the world
yet has for them will seek them and worthily deserve them.

I would be sorry to offend, or that any should mistake my honest meaning: for I
wish good to all, hurt to none. But rich men for the most part are grown to
that dotage, through their pride in their wealth, as though there were no
accident could end it, or their life. And what hellish care do such take to
make it their own misery, and their Countries spoil, especially when there
is most need of their employment? drawing by all manner of inventions, from
the Prince and his honest subjects, even the vital spirits of their powers and
estates: as if their Bags, or Bragges, were so powerful a defense, the
malicious could not assault them; when they are the only bait, to cause us
not to be only assaulted; but betrayed and murdered in our own security, ere
we well perceive it.

May not the miserable ruin of Constantinople, An example of secure
couetousness.
their impregnable walls, riches, and pleasures last taken by the Turk (which
are but a bit, in comparison of their now mightines) remember us, of the
effects of private couetousness? at which time the good Emperor held himself
rich enough, to have such rich subjects, so formal in all excess of vanity,
all kind of delicacie, and prodigality. His poverty when the Turk besieged,
the citizens (whose marchandizing thoughts were only to get wealth, little
conceiving the desperate resolution of a valiant expert enemy) left the Emp. so
long to his conclusions, having spent all he had to pay his young, raw,
discontented Soldiers; that suddenly he, they, and their city were all a prey
to the devouring Turk. And what they would not spare for the maintenance of
them who adventured their lives to defend them, did serve only their enemies
to torment them, their friends, and country, and all Christendom to this
present day. Let this lamentable example remember you that are rich (seeing
there are such great thieves in the world to rob you) not grudge to lend some
proportion, to breed them that have little, yet willing to learn how to defend
you: for, it is too late when the deed is a-doing. The Romans estate has
been worse then this: for, the mere covetousness and extortion of a few of
them, so moved the rest, that not having any employment, but contemplation;
their great judgments grew to so great malice, as themselves were sufficient
to destroy themselves by faction: Let this move you to embrace employment, for
those whose educations, spirits, and judgments, want but your purses; not
only to prevent such accustomed dangers, but also to gain more thereby then
you have. And you fathers that are either so foolishly fond, or so miserably
covetous, or so wilfully ignorant, or so negligently careless, as that you
will rather maintain your children in idle wantonness, till they grow your
masters; or become so basely unkind, as they wish nothing but your deaths; so
that both sorts grow dissolute: and although you would wish them any where to
escape the gallows, and ease your cares; though they spend you here one, two,
or three hundred pound a year; you would grudge to give half so much in
adventure with them, to obtain an estate, which in a small time but with a
little assistance of your providence, might be better then your own. But if
an Angel should tell you, that any place yet unknown can afford such
fortunes; you would not believe him, no more then Columbus was believed there
was any such Land as is now the well known abounding America; much less such
large Regions as are yet unknown, as well in America, as in Africa, and Asia,
and Terra incognita; where were courses for gentlemen (and them that would be
so reputed) more suiting their qualities, then begging from their Princes
generous disposition, the labors of his subjects, and the very marrow of his
maintenance.

I have not been so ill bred, but I have tasted of Plenty and Pleasure, The
Authors conditions.
as well as Want and Misery: nor does necessity yet, or occasion of
discontent, force me to these endeavors: nor am I ignorant what small thank I
shall have for my pains; o^ that many would have the World imagine them to be
of great judgment, that can but blemish these my designs, by their witty
objections and detractions: yet (I hope) my reasons with my deeds, will so
prevail with some, that I shall not want employment in these affairs, to make
the most blind see his own senselessness, and incredulity; Hoping that gain
will make them affect that, which Religion, Charity, and the Common good
cannot. It were but a poor device in me, To deceive my self; much more the
King, and State, my Friends, and Country, with these inducements: which,
seeing his Majesty has given permission, I wish all sorts of worthy, honest,
industrious spirits, would understand: and if they desire any further
satisfaction, I will do my best to give it: Not to persuade them to go only;
but go with them: Not leave them there; but live with them there. I will not
say, but by ill providing and undue managing, such courses may be taken, may
make us miserable enough: But if I may have the execution of what I have
proiected; if they want to eat, let them eat or never digest Me. If I
perform what I say, I desire but that reward out of the gains may suit my
pains, quality, and condition. And if I abuse you with my tongue, take my head
for satisfaction. If any dislike at the years end, defraying their charge, by
my consent they should freely return. I fear not want of company sufficient,
were it but known what I know of those Countries; and by the proof of that
wealth I hope yearly to return, if God please to bless me from such
accidents, as are beyond my power in reason to prevent: For, I am not so
simple, to think, that ever any other motive then wealth, will ever erect
there a Commonweal; or draw company from their ease and humors at home, to
stay in New England to effect my purposes. The planters pleasures, and profits.
And lest any should think the toil might be insupportable, though these
things may be had by labor, and diligence: I assure my self there are who
delight extremely in vain pleasure, that take much more pains in England, to
enjoy it, then I should do here to gain wealth sufficient: and yet I think
they should not have half such sweet content: for, our pleasure here is still
gains; in England charges and loss. Here nature and liberty affords us that
freely, which in England we want, or it costeth us dearly. What pleasure can
be more, then (being tired with any occasion ashore) in planting Vines,
Fruits, or Herbs, in contriuing their own Grounds, to the pleasure of their
own minds, their Fields, Gardens, Orchards, Buildings, Ships, and other
works, etc. to recreate themselves before their own doors, in their own
boats upon the Sea, where man woman and child, with a small hook and line,
by angling, may take diverse sorts of excellent fish, at their pleasures? And
is it not pretty sport, to pull up two pence, six pence, and twelve pence, as
fast as you can hale and veare a line? He is a very bad fisher, cannot kill in
one day with his hook and line, one, two, or three hundred Cods: which dressed
and dried, if they be sold there for ten shillings the hundred, though in
England they will give more then twenty; may not both the servant, the master,
and merchant, be well content with this gain? If a man work but three days
in seven, he may get more then he can spend, unless he will be excessive.
Now that Carpenter, Mason, Gardener, Tailor, Smith, Sailer, Forgers, or what
other, may they not make this a pretty recreation though they fish but an hour
in a day, to take more then they eat in a week: or? if they will not eat it,
because there is so much better choice; yet sell it, or change it, with the
fisher men, or merchants, for any thing they want. And what sport does yield a
more pleasing content, and less hurt or charge then angling with a hook, and
crossing the sweet air from I Will to I Will, over the silent streams of a calm
Sea? wherein the most curious may find pleasure, profit, and content. Thus,
though all men be not fishers: yet all men, whatsoever, may in other matters
do as well. For necessity does in these cases so rule a Common wealth, and
each in their several functions, as their labors in their qualities may be as
profitable, because there is a necessary mutual use of all.

For Gentlemen, Employments for gentlemen.
what exercise should more delight them, then ranging daily those unknown
parts, using fowling and fishing, for hunting and hauking? and yet you shall
see the wild hawks give you some pleasure, in seeing them stoop (six or
seven after one another) an hour or two together, at the skuls of fish in the
fair harbors, as those ashore at a foul; and never trouble nor torment your
selves, with watching, mewing, feeding, and attending them: nor kill horse and
man with running and crying, See you not a hauk? For hunting also: the woods,
lakes, and rivers, afford not only chase sufficient, for any that delights in
that kind of toil, or pleasure; but such beasts to hunt, that besides the
delicacy of their bodies for food, their skins are so rich, as may well
recompense thy daily labor, with a Captains pay.

For laborers, Employments for laborers.
if those that sow hemp, rape, turnups, parsnips, carrats, cabidge, and such
like; give 20, 30, 20, 50 shillings yearly for an acre of ground, and meat
drink and wages to use it, and yet grow rich: when better, or at least as good
ground, may be had and cost nothing but labor; it seems strange to me, any
such should there grow poor.

My purpose is not to persuade children from their parents; men from their
wives; nor servants from their masters: only, such as with free consent may be
spared: But that each parish, or village, in City, or Country, that will but
apparel their fatherless children, of thirteen or fourteen years of age, or
young married people, that have small wealth to live on; here by their labor
may live exceeding well: provided always that first there be a sufficient
power to command them, houses to receive them, means to defend them, and meet
provisions for them; for, any place may be ouerlain: and it is most necessary
to have a fortress (ere this grow to practice) and sufficient masters (as,
Carpenters, Masons, Fishers, Fowlers, Gardiners, Husbandmen, Sawyers, Smiths,
Spinsters, Tailors, Weauers, and such like) to take ten, twelve, or twenty, or
as there is occasion, for Apprentises. The Masters by this may quickly grow
rich; these may learn their trades themselves, to do the like; to a general
and an incredible benefit, for King, and Country, Master, and Servant.

It would be an history of a large volume, Examples of the Spanyard.
to recite the adventures of the Spaniards, and Portugals, their affronts, and
defeats, their dangers and miseries; which with such incomparable honor and
constant resolution, so far beyond belief, they have attempted and endured
in their discoueries and plantations, as may well condemn us, of too much
imbecillitie, sloth, and negligence: yet the Authors of those new inventions,
were held as ridiculous, for a long time, as now are others, that do but seek
to imitate their vnparalleled virtues. And though we see daily their mountains
of wealth (sprung from the plants of their generous endeavors) yet is our
sensuality and unto wardnesse such, and so great, that we either ignorantly
believe nothing; or so curiously contest, to prevent we know not what future
events; that we either so neglect, or oppress and discourage the present, as
we spoil all in the making, crop all in the bloominig; and building upon
fair sand, rather then rough rocks, judge that we know not, govern that
we have not, fear that which is not; and for fear some should do too well,
force such against their wills to be idle or as ill. And who is he has
judgment, courage, and any industry or quality with understanding, will
leave his Country, his hopes at home, his certain estate, his friends,
pleasures, liberty, and the preferment sweet England does afford to all
degrees, were it not to advance his fortunes by inioying his deserts? whose
prosperity once appearing, will encourage others: but it must be cherished as
a child, till it be able to go, and understand it self; and not corrected,
nor oppressed above it strength, ere it know wherefore. A child can neither
perform the office, nor deeds of a man of strength, nor endure that
affliction He is able* nor can an Apprentice at the first perform the part of
a Master. And if twenty years be required to make a child a man, seven
years limited an apprentice for his trade: if scarce an age be sufficient to
make a wise man, or a States man, and commonly, a man dies ere he has learned
to be discreet: If perfection be so hard to be obtained, as of necessirie there
must be practice, as well as theorick: Let no man much condemn this paradox
opinion, to say, that half seven years is scarce sufficient, for a good
capacity, to learn in these affairs, how to carry himself: and who ever
shall try in these remote places the erecting of a Colony, shall find at the
end of seven years occasion enough to use all his discretion: and, in the
Interim all the content, rewards, games, and hopes will be necessarily
required, to be given to the beginning, till it be able to creep, to stand,
and go, yet time enough to keep it from running, for there is no fear it will
grow too fast, or ever to any thing; except liberty profit, honor, and
prosperity there found, more bind the planters of those affairs, in devotion
to effect it; then bondage, violence, tyranny, ingratitude, and such double
dealing, as binds free men to become slaves, and honest men turn knaves:
which has ever bin the ruin of the most popular commonweals; and is very
unlikely ever well to begin in a new.

Who sees not what is the greatest good of the Spanyard, The bliss of Spain.
but these new conclusions, in searching those unknown parts of this unknown
world? By which means he dives even into the very secret of all his
Neighbors, and the most part of the world: and when the Portugale and Spanyard
had found the East and West Indies; how many did condemn themselves, that did
not accept of that honest offer of Noble Columbus? who, upon our neglect,
brought them to it, persuading our selves the world had no such places as they
had found: and yet ever since we find, they still (from time to time) have
found new Lands, new Nations, and trades, and still daily do find both in
Asia, Africa, Terra incognita, and America; so that there is neither Soldier
nor Mechanic, from the Lord to the beggar, but those parts afforde them all
imploiment; and discharge their Native soil, of so many thousands of all
sorts, that else, by their sloth, pride, and imperfections, would long ere this
have troubled their neighbors, or have eaten the pride of Spain it self.

Now he knows little, that knows not England may well spare many more people
then Spain, and is as well able to furnish them with all manner of
necessaries. And seeing, for all they have, they cease not still to search for
that they have not, and know not; It is strange we should be so dull, as not
maintain that which we have, and pursue that we know. Surely I am sure many
would taste it ill, to be abridged of the titles and honors of their
predecessors: when if but truly they would judge themselves; look how
inferior they are to their noble virtues, so much they are unworthy of their
honors and livings: which never were ordained for shows and shadows, to
maintain idleness and vice; but to make them more able to abound in honor, by
heroycall deeds of action, judgment, piety, and virtue. What was it, They
would not do both in purse and person, for the good of the Commonwealth? which
might move them presently to set out their spare kindred in these generous
designs. Religion, above all things, should move us (especially the Clergy)
if we were religious, to show our faith by our works; in converting those
poor saluages, to the knowledge of God, seeing what pains the Spaniards take
to bring them to their adulterated faith. Honor might move the Gentry, the
valiant, and industrious* and the hope and assurance of wealth, all; if we
were that we would seem, and be accounted. Or be we so far inferior to other
nations, or our spirits so far dejected, from our ancient predecessors, or our
minds so upon spoil, piracie, and such villainy, as to serve the Portugal,
Spanyard, Dutch, French, or Turk (as to the cost of Europe, too many doo^)
rather then our God, our King, our Country, and our selves? excusing our
idleness, and our base complaints, by want of impioiment; when here is such
choice of all sorts, and for all degrees, in the planting and discovering these
North parts of Amemerica.

Now to make my words more apparent by my deeds; My second voyage to New
England.
I was, the last year, 1615. to have stayed in the Country, to make a more
ample trial of those conclusions with sixteen men; whose names were Gent.
Thomas Dirmir. Edward Stalings. Daniel Cage. Francis Abbot. John Gosling.
Soldiers.
William Ingram. Robert Miter. David Cooper. John Partridge, and two boys.
Sailers.
Thomass Digbie. Daniel Baker. Adam Smith. Thomas Watson Walter Chissick John
Hall.


I confess, I could have wished them as many thousands, had all other
provisions bin in like proportion: nor would I have had so few, could I have
had means for more: yet (would God have pleased we had safely arrived) I
never had the like authority, freedom, and provision, to do so well. The
maine assistance next God, I had to this small number, was my acquaintance
among the Saluages; especially, with Dohannida, one of their greatest Lords;
who had lived long in England. By the means of this proud Saluage, I did not
doubt but quickly to have got that credit with the rest of his friends, and
alliants, to have had as many of them, as I desired in any design I intended,
and that trade also they had, by such a kind of exchange of their Country
commodities; which both with ease and security in their seasons may be used.
With him and diverse others, I had concluded to inhabit, and defend them
against the Terentynes; with a better power then the French did them; whose
tyranny did enforce them to embrace my offer, with no small devotion. And
though many may think me more bold then wise, in regard of their power,
dexterity, treachery, and inconstancy, having so desperately assaulted and
betrayed many others: I say but this (because with so many, I have many times
done much more in Virginia, then I intended here, when I wanted that
experience Virginia taught me) that to me it seems no danger more then
ordinary. And though I know my self the meanest of many thousands, whose
apprehensiue inspection can pearce beyond the bounds of my habilities, into
the hidden things of Nature, Art, and Reason: yet I entreat such give me leave
to excuse my self of so much imbecillitie, as to lay, that in these eight
years which I have been conversant with these affairs, I have not learned
there is a great difference, betwixt the directions and judgment of
experimental knowledge, and the superficial conjecture of variable relation:
wherein rumor, humor, or misprision have such power, that often times one is
enough to beguile twenty, but twenty not sufficient to keep one from being
deceived. Therefore I know no reason but to believe my own eyes, before any
man's imagination, that is but wrested from the conceits of my own proiects,
and endeavors. But I honor, with all affection, the counsel and instructions
of judicial directions, or any other honest advertisement; so far to
observe, as they tie me not to the cruelty of unknown events.

These are the inducements that thus drew me to neglect all other employments,
and spend my time and best abilities in these adventures. Wherein, though I
have had many discouragements by the ingratitude of some, the malicious
slanders of others, the falsenesse of friends, the treachery of cowards, and
slownesse of adventurers; but chiefly by one Hunt, who was Master of the ship,
with whom often arguing these proiects, for a plantation, howeuer he seemed well
in words to like it, yet he practiced to have robbed me of my plots, and
observations: and so left me alone in a desolate I Will, to the fury of famine,
and all other extreamities (lest I should have acquainted Sir Thomas Smith, my
Honorable good friend, and the Council of Virginia) to the end, he and his
associates, might secretly ingrosse it, ere it were known to to the State: Yet
that God that always has kept me from the worst of his dissimulations.
Notwithstanding after my departure, he abused the Saluages where he came, and
betrayed twenty seven of these poor innocent souls, which he sold in Spain
for slaves, to move, their hare against our Nation, as well as to cause my
proceedings to be so much the more difficult.

Now, returning in the Bark, in the fifth of August I arrived at Plymouth: where
imparting those my purposes to my honorable friend Sir Ferdinando Gorge, and
some others; I was so encouraged, and assured to have the managing their
authority in those parts, during my life, that I engaged my self to undertake
it for them. Arriving at London, I found also many promise me such assistance,
that I entertained Michaell Cooper the Master, who returned with me, and
others of the company. How he dealt with others, or others with him I know
not: But my public proceeding gave such encouragement, that it became so well
apprehended by some few of the Southren Company, as these proiects were liked,
and he furnished from London with four ships at Sea, before they at Plymouth
had made any provision at all, but only a ship cheefely let out by sir
Ferdinando Gorge; which upon Hunts late treachery among the Saluages, returned
as she went, and did little or nothing, but lost her time. I must confess I
was beholden to the setters forth of the four ships that went with Cooper; in
that they offered me that imploiment if I would accept it: and I find, my
refusal has incurred some of their displeasures, whose favor and love I
exceedingly desire, if I may honestly enjoy it. And though they do censure me
as opposite to their proceedings; they shall yet still in all my words and
deeds find, it is their error, not my fault, that occasions their dislike:
for having engaged my self in this business to the West Country; I had been
very dishonest to have broke my promise; nor will I spend more time in
discourie, or fishing, till I may go with a company for plantation: for, I
know my grounds. Yet every one that reads this book can not put it in
practice; though it may help any that have seen those parts. And though they
endeavor to work me even out of my own designs, I will not much envy their
fortunes: but, I would be sorry, their intruding ignorance should, by their
defailements, bring those certainties to doubtfulnesse: So that the business
prosper, I have my desire; be it by Londoner, Scot, Welsh, or English, that are
true subjects to our King and Country: the good of my Country is that I
seek; and there is more then enough for all, if they could be content but to
proceed.

At last it pleased Sir Ferdinando Gorge, The occasion of my return.
and Master Doctor Sutliffe Deane of Exceter, to conceive so well of these
proiects, and my former employments, as induced them to make a new adventure
with me in those parts, whither they have so often sent to their continual
loss. By whose example, many inhabitants of the west Country, made promises of
much more then was looked for, but their private emulations quickly qualified
that heat in the greater number; so that the burden lay principally on them,
and some few Gentlemen my friends, in London. In the end I was furnished with a
Ship of 200. and another of 50. But ere I had sailed 120 leagues, she broke
all her masts; pumping each watch 5 or 6000 strokes: only her spret sail
remained to spoon before the wind, till we had reaccommodated a Jury mast, and
the rest, to return for Plymouth. My reimbarkment, incounters with py^^^s and
imprisonment by the French.
My Vice Admiral being lost, not knowing of this, proceeded her voyage: Now
with the remainder of those provisions, I got out again in a small Bark of 60
tuns with 30 men (for this of 200 and provision for 70) which were the 16
before named, and 14 other saylors for the ship. With those I set sail again
the 24 of June: where what befell me (because my actions and writings are so
public to the world, envy still seeking to scandalize my endeavors, and
seeing no power but death, can stop the chat of ill tongues, nor imagination of
men's minds) lest my own relations of those hard events, might by some
constructors, be made doubtful, I have thought it best to insert the
examinations of those proceedings, taken by Sir Lewis Stukley a worthy Knight,
and Vice admiral of Devonshire; which were as follows.

The examination of Daniel Baker, late Steward to Captain John Smith in the
return of Plymouth; taken before Sir Lewis Stukley Knight, the eight of
December 1615.

Who says, Captain Fry (...)
being chased two days by one Fry, an English Pirate, that could not board us,
by reason of foul weather, Edmund Chambers, the Master John Miner, his mate,
Thomas Digby the (...), and others importured his said Captain to yield;
houlding it impossible he should defend himself: and that the said Captain
should send them his boat, in that they had none: which at last he concluded
upon these conditions, That Fry the Pyrate should vow not to take any thing
from Captain Smith, that might overthrow his voyage, nor send more Pirates
into his ship then he liked off; otherways, he would make sure of them he
had, and defend himself against the rest as he could.

More: he confesses that the quarter masters and Chambers received gold of
those Pirates; but how much, he knows not: Nor would his Captain come out of
his Caben to entertain them; although a great many of them had been his
sailors, and for his love would have wasted us to the Isles of Flowers.

At Fyall, The one of 200, the other 20.
we were chased by two French Pirates, who commanded us Amain. Chambers,
Minter, Digby, and others, importuned again the Captain to yield; alleging
they were Turks, and would make them all slaves: or Frenchmen, and would throw
them all over board if they shot but a piece; and that they were entertained to
fish, and not to fight: until the Captain vowed to fire the powder and split
the ship, if they would not stand to their defense; whereby at last we went
clear of them, for all their shot.

At Flowers, The Admiral 140 tuns, 12 pieces, 12 murderers, 90 men, with long
pistols, pocket pistol, musket, sword and poniard, the Vice Admiral 100 tuns,
the Rere-admiral 60, the other 80: all had 250 Men most armed as is said.
we were chased by four French men of war; all with their close fights
before and after. And this examinants Captain having provided for our defense,
Chambers, Minter, Digby, and some others, again importuned him to yield to the
favor of those, against whom there was nothing but ruin by fighting: But if
he would go aboard them, in that he could speak French, by courtesy he
might go clear; seeing they offered him such fair quarter, and vowed they
were Protestants, and all of Rochell, and had the Kings commission only to
take Spaniards, Portugales, and Pirates; which at last he did: but they kept
this examinates Captain and some other of his company with him. The next day
the French men of war went aboard us, and took what they listed, and divided
the company into their several ships, and manned this examinates ship with the
Frenchmen; and chased with her all the ships they saw: until about five or
six days after upon better consideration, they surrendered the ship, and
victuals, with the most part of our provision, but not our weapons.

More: he confesses that his Captain exhorted them to perform their voyage,
or go for New found Land to return fraughted with fish, where he would find
means to proceed in his plantation: but Chambers and Minter grew upon terms
they would not; The gentlemen and soldiers were ever willing to fight.
until those that were Soldiers concluded with their Captains resolution,
they would; seeing they had clothes, victuals, salt, nets, and and lines
sufficient, and expected their arms: and such other things as they wanted, the
French men promised to restore, which the Captain the next day went to seek,
and sent them about loading of commodities, as powder, match, hooks,
instruments, his sword and dagger, bedding, aqua vitae, his commission,
apparel, and many other things; the particulars he remembers not: But, as for
the cloth, canuas, and the Captains clothes, Chambers, and his associats
divided it amongst themselves, and to whom they best liked; his Captain not
having any thing, to his knowledge, but his wastecoat and breeches. And in this
manner going from ship to ship, to regaine our arms, and the rest; they seeing
a sail, gave chase until night. The next day being very foul weather, this
examinate came so neete with the ship unto the French men of war, that they
split the maine sail on the others spret sail yard. Chambers willed the
Captain come aboard, or he would leave him: whereupon the Captain commanded
Chambers to send his boat for him. Chambers replied she was split (which was
false) telling him he might come if he would in the Admiralls boat. The
Captains answer was, he could not command her, nor come when he would: so
this examinate fell on stern; and that night left his said Captain alone
amongst the French men, in this manner, by the command of Chambers, Minter, and
others.

Daniel Cage, Edward Stalings, Gentlemen; Walter Chissell, David Cooper, Robert
Miller and John Partridge, being examined, do acknowledge and confess, that
Daniel Baker his examination above written is true.

Now the cause why the French detayned me again, A double treachery.
was the suspicion this Chambers and Minter gave them, that I would revenge my
self, upon the Bank, or in New found Land, of all the French I could there
encounter; and how I would have fired the ship, had they not ouerperswaded me:
and many other such like tricks to catch but opportunie in this manner of leave
me. And thus they returned to Plymouth; and perforce with the French I thus
proceeded.

Being a Fleet of eight or nine sail, A ^^eet of nine French men of war, and
^ights with the Spaniards.
we watched for the W'est Indies fleet, till ill weather separated us from the
other 8. Still we spent our time about the Isles near Fyall: where to keep my
perplexed thoughts from too much meditation of my miserable estate, I writ this
discourse; thinking to have sent it you of his Majesty's Council, by some ship
or other: for I saw their purpose was to take all they could. At last we were
chased by one Captain Barra, and English Pyrat, in a small ship, with some
twelve pieces of ordinance, about thirty men, and near all starued. They sought
by courtesy relief of us; who gave them such fair promises, as at last we
betrayed Captain Wolliston (his Lieftenant) and four or five of their men
aboard us, and then provided to take the rest perforce. Now my part was to be
prisoner in the gun-roum, and not to speak to any of them upon my life: yet
had Barra knowledge what I was. Then Barra perceiving well these French intents,
made ready to fight, and Wolliston as resolutely regarded not their threats,
which caused us demurre upon the matter longer, some sixteen hours; and then
returned their prisoners, and some victuals also, upon a small composition.
The next we took was a small English man of Poole from New found Land. The
great caben at this present, was my prison; from whence I could see them
pillage those poor men of all that they had, and half their fish when he was
gone, they sold his poor clothes at the maine mast, by an outcry, which
scarce gave each man seven pence a piece. Not long after, we took a Scot
fraught from Saint Michaels to Bristow: he had better fortune then the other.
For, having but taken a boats loading of sugar, marmelade, suckets, and such
like, we discried four sail, after whom we stood; who forling their maine
sails attended us to fight. But our French spirits were content only to
perceive they were English red crosles. Within a very small time after, we
chased four Spanish ships came from the Indies: we fought with them four
or five hours, tore their sails and sides; yet not daring to board them, lost
them. A poor C^ruell of Brasile, was the next we chased: and alter a small
fight, thirteen or fourteen of her men being wounded, A prize worth 16000 crow^
which was the better half, we took her, with 370 chests of sugar. The next
was a West Ind^es man, of 160 tuns, with 1200 hides, 50 chests of cutchanell,
14 coffers of wedges of silver, A prize worth 200000 crowns.
8000 ryalls of 8, and fix offers of the King of Spaines treasure, besides the
pillage and rich coffers of many rich passengers. Two months they kept me in
this manner to manage their fights against the Spaniards, and be a prisoner
when they took any English. Now though the Captain had often broke his promise,
which was to put me ashore on the Isles, or the next ship be took; yet at
last, he was entreated I should go for France in the Caruell of sugar: himself
resolved still to keep the Seas. Within two days after, we were haled by two
West Indy men: but when they saw us wave them for the King of France, they gave
us their broad sides, shot through our main mast and so left us. Having lived
thus, near three months among those French men of war; with much ado, we
arrived at the Gulion, not far from Rochel; where instead of the great promises
they always fed me with, of double satisfaction, and full content, they kept
me five or six days prisoner in the Caruell, accusing me to be him that burnt
their Colony in New France; to force me give them a discharge before the Judge
of the Admiralty, and so stand to their courtesy for satisfaction, or lie in
prison, or a worse mischief. To prevent this choice, in the end of such a
storm that beat them all under Hatches, My escape from the French men.
I watched my opportunity to get ashore in their boat; where-into, in the
dark night, I secretly got: and with a half pike that lay by me, put a drift
for Rat I Will: but the Current was so strong and the Sea so great, I went a drift
to Sea; till it pleased God the wind so turned with the tide, that although I
was all this fearful night of gusts and rain, in the Sea, the space of 12
hours, when many ships were driven a shore, and diverse split (and being with
sculling and bayling the water tired, I expected each minute would sink me)
at last I arrived in an oazie I Will by Charowne; where certain fowlers found me
near drowned, and half dead, with water, cold, and hunger. By those, I sound
means to get to Rochell; where I understood the man of war which we left
at Sea, and the rich prize was split, the Captain drowned and half his
company the same night, within seven leagues of that place, from whence I
escaped alone, in the little boat, by the mercy of God; far beyond all men's
reason, or my expectation. Arriving at Rochell, upon my complaint to the Judge
of the Admiralitie, I found many good words, and fair promises; and ere long
many of them that escaped drowning, told me the news they heard of my own
death: these I arresting, their several examinations did so confirm my
complaint, it was held proof sufficient. All which being performed according
to the order of justice, from under the judges hand; I presented it to the
English Ambassador then at Bordeaux, Sir Thomas Edmunds.
where it was my chance to see the arrival of the Kings great marriage brought
from Spain. Of the wrack of the rich prize some 36000. crowns worth of goods
came a shore and was saved with the Caruell, which I did my best to arrest: the
Judge did promise me I should have justice; what will be the conclusion as yet,
I know not. They betrayed me having the broad seal of England and near
twenty sail of English more, besiles them concealed in like manner were
betrayed that year
But under the color to take Pirates and West-Indie men (because the Spaniards
will not suffer the French trade in the West Indies) any goods from thence,
though they take them upon the Coast of Spain, are law full prize; or from any
of his territories out of the limits of Europe.

Leaving thus my business in France, I returned to Plymouth, to find them that
had thus buried me amongst the French: and not only buried me, but with so
much infamy, My return for England, 1615
as such treacherous cowards could suggest to excuse their villainies: But my
clothes, books, instruments, Arms, and what I had, they shared amongst them,
and what they liked; saying, the French had all was wanting; and had thrown
them into the Sea, taken their ship, and all, had they not run away and left
me as they did. The cheeftaines of this mutiny that I could find, I laid by
the heels; the rest, like themselves, confessed the truth as you have heard.
Now how I have or could prevent these accidents, I rest at your censures. But
to the matter.

Newfound-land at the first, I have heard, was held as desperate a fishing, as
this I project in New England. Placentia, and the Bank, were also as doubtful
to the French: But, for all the disasters happened me, the business is the
same it was: and the five ships (whereof one was reported more then three
hundred tons) went forward; and found fish so much, that neither Izeland-man,
nor New foundland-man, I could hear of has been there, will go any more to
either place, if they may go thither. The success of my vice Admiral and the
four ships of London, from New England.
So, that upon the return of my Viceadmirall that proceeded on her voyage when
I spent my masts, from Plymouth this year are gone four or five sail: and
from London as many; only to make voyages of profit: where the Englishmen have
yet bneene, all their returns together (except Sir Fr. Popphames) would scarce
make one a sauer of near a douzen I could nominate; though there be fish
sufficient, as I persuade my self, to fraught yearly four or five hundred
sail, or as many as will go. For, this fishing stretches along the Coast
from Cape Cod to Newfound-land, which is seven or eight hundred miles at the
least; and has his course in the deepes, and by the shore, all the year long;
keeping their hants and feedings as the beasts of the field, and the birds of
the air. But, all men are not such as they should be, that have undertaken
those voiages: and a man that has but heard of an instrument, can hardly use
it so well, as he that by use has contrived to make it. All the Romans were
not Scipioes: nor all the Geneweses, Columbuses: nor all Spaniards, Corteses:
had they diued no deeper in the secrets of their discoueries, then we, or
stopped at such doubts and poor accidental chances; they had never been
remembered as they are: yet had they no such certainties to begin as we. But,
to conclude, Adam and Eve did first begin this innocent work, To plant the
earth to remain to posterity: but not without labor, trouble and industry.
Noe, and his family, began again the second plantation; and their seed as
it still increased, has still planted new Countries, and one country another:
and so the world to that estate it is. But not without much hazard, travel,
discontents, and many disasters. Had those worthy Fathers and their memorable
offspring not been more diligent for us now in these Ages, then we are to
plant that yet unplanted, for the after livers: Had the seed of Abraham, our
Savior Christ, and his Apostles, exposed themselves to no more dangers to
teach the Gospel, and the will of God then we; Even we our selves, had at
this present been as Saluage, and as miserable as the most barbarous Saluage
yet vnciuilized. The Hebrews, and Lacedaemonians, the Goths, the Grecians, the
Romans, and the rest, what was it they would not undertake to enlarge their
Territories, enrich their subjects, resist their enemies? Those that were the
founders of those great Monarchies and their virtues, were no siluered idle
golden Pharisees, but industrious iron-steeled Publicans: They regarded more
provisions, and necessaries for their people, then jewels, riches, ease, or
delight for themselves. Riches were their servants, not their Masters. They
ruled (as Fathers, not as Tyrants) their people as children, not as slaves:
there was no disaster, could discourage them; and let none think they
incountered not with all manner of encumbrances. And what have ever been the
works of the greatest Princes of the earth, but planting of countries, and
ciuilizing barbarous and inhumane Nations, to civility and humanity? whose
eternal actions, fill our histories. Lastly, the Portugales, and Spaniards:
whose everliving actions, before our eyes will testify with them our
idleness, and ingratitude to all posterities, and the neglect of our duties in
our piety and religion we owe our God, our King, and Country; and of want
charity to those poor saluages, whose Country we challenge, use and
possess; except we be but made to use, and mar what our Forefathers made,
or but only tell what they did, or esteem our selves too good to take the
like pains. Was it virtue in them, to provide that does maintain us? and
baseness for us to do the like for others? Surely no. Then seeing we are not
borne for our selves, but each to help other, and our abilities are much alike
at the hour of our birth, and the minute of our death: Seeing our good deeds,
or our badde, by faith in Christ's merits, is all we have to carry our souls
to heaven, or hell: Seeing honor is our lives ambition; and our ambition after
death, to have an honorable memory of our life: and seeing by noe means we
would be abated of the dignities and glories of our Predecessors; let us
imitate their virtues to be worthily their successors.

FINIS.
At London printed the 18. of June, in the year of our Lord 1616.
To his worthy Captain, the Author.
Often thou have led, when I brought up the Rere
In bloody wars, where thousands have bin slain.
Then give me leave, in this some part to bear;
And as thy servant, here to read my name.
It Is true, long time thou have my Captain been
In the fierce wars of Transiluania:
Long ere that thou America had seen,
Or led wast captiued in Virginia;
Thou that to pass the worlds four parts do deem
No more, then it were to go to bed, or drink,
And all thou yet have done, thou do esteem
As nothing. This does cause me think
That thou I'aue seen so often approved in dangers
(And thrice captived, thy valor still has freed)
Art yet preserved, to convert those strangers:
By God thy guide, I trust it is decreed.
For me: I not commend, but much admire
The England yet unknown to passers by-her.
For it will praise it self in spite of me;
Thou it, it thou, to all posterity.
Your true friend, and soldier, Ed. Robinson.

To my honest Captain, the Author.
MAlignant Times! What can be said or don,
But shall be censured and traduc't by some!
This worthy Work, which thou have bought so dear,
Ne thou nor it, Detractors need to fear.
Thy words by deeds so long thou have approved,
Of thousands know thee not thou art beloved.
And this great Plot will make thee ten times more
Known and beleu'd, than ere thou were before.
I never knew a Warryer yet, but thee,
From wine, Tobacco, debts, dice, oaths, so free.
I call thee Warrier: and I make the bolder;
For, many a Captain now, was never Soldier.
Some such may swell at this: but (to their praise)
When they have don like thee, my Muse shall raise
Their due deserts to Worthies yet to come,
To live like thine (admired) till day of Doom.
Your true friend, sometimes your soldier, THO. CARLTON.


