A DEFENSE OF THE BLESsed mass, and the sacrifice thereof, proving that it is
auayleable both for the quycke and the dead. and that by Christ's own and his
apostles ordinance, made and set forth by Richard smyth doctor in divinity,
and reader of ye kings highness lesson of divinity, in his majesty's
university of Oxforde. Wherein are diverse doubts opened, as it were by the
way, over and above the principal, and cheyfe matter.

Multo melius est uera rustice, quam falsa diserte proferre.

It is much better to bring forth true things rudely, then false things
eloquently.

Hiero. ad Damasum in exposi. primae uisionis Esaiae. A DEFENSE OF THE
SACRIfice of the mass. Made and set forth by master Richard Smyth doctor in
divinity, and reader of the kings hyghnes lesson of divinity in his majesty's
university of Oxforde. Wherein are diverse doubts opened, over and above the
principal matter.

Multo melius est uera rustice, quam falsa diserte proferre. Ibero, ad damasum.

It is much better to bring forth true things rudely, then false things
eloquently.

1546

To my most gracious sovereign lord Henry the eyghte, by the grace of god
king of England, France, and Ireland, defe^der of the faith, and of the
church of England and also of Ireland, in earth supreme head next under
christ, al health and felicity.
MOst gracious sovereign lord, having made of late.ii, treatises, the one
entitled The assertion, and defense of the sacrament of the altar, and the
other the defense of the sacrifice of the mass, determining with my self
according to my most bounden duetye, to dedycate them both unto your most
excellent highness, as well for that your said hyghnes is the most worthy
defender of christ's religion, as also for the consonaunce, and vicinitie of
the matter and argument herein. I do now, according to the said determination
exhibit, present, and offer this treatise of the sacrifice of the mass unto
your royal majesty, semblably as already I have done the other of the
assertion, and defense of the sacrament of thaulter, most humblye besechynge
your highness gratiouselye to accept this my poor doing, and to favor it.

Your graces most humble subject, chapleyne, bedysman, and servant.
Richard Smythe,

THEOPHILI AD AVtolycum, lib. 1.
LIngua quide^ diserta, and dictio tersa, delectationem and laude^ afferunt,
nec non plurimum conducunt miseris mortalibus, quoru^ animus deprauatus est, ad
uanam gloriam parandam. Caeterum ueritatis studiosus non animum adijcit
sermonibus corruptis, verum sedulo inquirit quaenam materia, sieve quis
effectus, aut quodnam opus sit orationis. That is to say, A well spoken tongue,
and eloquence, do bring delectation and praise, they also do much profytte
miserable men (whose mind is corrupted) to get vayneglorye. But he that
loves the truth, settethe not his mind to corrupt speeches, or sayenges,
but he enquyrethe dylygentlye, what the matter is, either what the effect, or
what is the work of the oratoin.

Eme, lege, iudica, Bye, read, judge
The autours names out of the which this treatice is gathered, and the time
when they were that thereby men may se that the mass is not set up of late by
the coueteousnes of preistes as some say falsely it is.
The greakes.
Dionisius Ariopag, anno d. 47 Ignatius Anno. d. 104 Clemens anno. 142 Ireneus
anno. 203 Origines, anno. 225 Gregory Nazian. anno. 369 Athanasius anno, 345
Eusebius anno 306 Cyrillus anno 369 Epiphanius anno. 369 Chrisostomus anno 412
Basilius. anno 369 Gregorius Emyss. anno 340 Theophilus, anno 360 Demascenus
anno 440 Theodoretus anno 306 Theophilactus Iulianus episcopus Toletanus 845

The Latyns.
Anacletus anno 101 Euaristus anno 110 Alexander. anno 119 Tertulianus anno 203
Arnobius an. 305. Lacta^tius 305 Cyprianus anno 259 Hylarius anno 345 Ambrosius
anno 429 Hieronimus anno 429 Augustinus anno 440 Fulgentius anno 497 Gregorius
Magnus anno 609 Beda anno 683 D. Hugo Etherius anno 1160 Rupertus anno. 1123
Innocentius anno 1200 Isodorus anno 630

RICARDVS SMYTHAEVS Candido Lectori. S D.
DESVDA Thie libellus, optime lector, aut solum penitus rudibus, and indoctis
in christiana philosophia, aut certe una cu^ ijs and illis, qui no^ ita multu^
in illius studio promouerint. Hos enim du^taxat istac mea Inueni^tur omnium
penemalorum m^ter esse ignorantia D. Clement. 4. recog. and 5.
qualicumque opella iuuare studio habui, ne quis horum ab ipsa pietate, quod ad
rem, de qua hic controuertitur, attinet, ignorantia, and inscitia very aberret,
vel male sanis hominum contionibus persuasus, vel librorum, qui haeresibus
respargu^tur, lectione, vt sic ineptiat, dementatus, et si quis ab huius rei
religione iam desciuerit, is in procinctu atque parato habeat, quo suum
agnoscat errorem, agnitum ex osum habeat, respuat, and funem (ut est in
paraemia) reducat, quo albo germane christianorum, a quo temere, and impie
nomen suum expunxerit, denuo adcenseatur, alioqui tanque extrema (ut habet
vetus dictum) faba disperiturus. Quam vero feliciter in hac re sim versatus,
and spartam, quam sum indeptus, dextre adornauerim, iudicent eruditi, qui
candide and recte de rebus diuinis sentiunt, ut quos solos moror, and quorum
iudicio, ac calculo stet velim, aut cadat haec, quam ieci alea. Quod si quis
hic quaerat Britannici sermonis laenocinia, and leporem, spe frustrabitur sua.
Du^ enim hanc appararem conflictatiunculam, consultissimum mihi est illico
visum, omnia planius, intelligibilius, ac crassiore (ut aiunt) minerua hominum
lectioni credere, quo ad imperitam multitudinem, quam institue^dam suscepi,
mayor, vberior, ac lucule^tior, ex hoc meo labor d^^anaret utilitas, nec esset
quod illoru^ remoraret^ progressu^. Nihil certe pensi habeba^, tam etsi viderim
ex dictionis ipsius inuenustate quibusdam, quibus nihil nisi undique tersum ad
blandiatur, and arrideat, plurimu^ fastidij suborituru^ and hinc quosda^ ab
libelli lectio^e, vix ia^ vno and altero perfecto folio decessuros, meumque
nomen apud illos, vel hoc nomine obscurius fore, ac nonnihil eleuatum iri meam
quale^ cumque in literis aestimatione^. Si quid itaque, Christian lector tibi
interim, dum hunc libellum perlegis, forte occurret, quod tuo displiceat
palato, sieve quod id genuinu^, and germanum non spiret nostratis eloquij
nitorem, quem ipse non ita magni duco, ut ingenue fatear, sieve quod sententia
vna, vel altera, seu scripturarum enarratio, seu argume^toru^ profligatio, and
depulsio, tuo limato excussoque iudicio alicubi parum arrideat. Primum
cogitame, data opera, anglici sermonis co^tempsisse lauticias, quo (ut iam
antea commemorauerim) minori negocio a rudibus intelligerer, de inde me hominem
esse, and proinde nihil humani (ut comicus ait) a me alienum, falli posse,
decipi, and errare, nolle tamen in errore pertinaciter edurare, sed erratorum a
quoque commonefactum, incu^ctanter, ac perque libenter consilium in melius
commutaturu^, and gratiam, vel multo maximam admonitori ex animo habiturum,
tantum abest ut cum eo sim quicque expostulaturus, seu illi succensurus.
Consultu^ est illud Di. Gregorij Nazianzeni. Optabile est na^que mihi and
praeclarum, usque ad ultimam discere se nectutem, quoniam nulla aetas ad
perdiscendum sufficere potest. oratione.vii. Postremo hoc tibi, optime lector,
in mentem subeat, quoties tibi quippiam in hac elucubratione displicet, me
occupatissimii^ esse, ac tantum non negocioru^ vndis adobrutum, ut non iam
integer (uti par fuit) sed aut prelege^do, aut de rebus arduis disserendo,
delas satus, and propemodum a studendo abhorre^s, no^ integros dies, sed vix
horas aliquot succisiuas, seu furtiuas, (ut Hieroni. loquitur) vnius tantum
mensishoc libello contexendo insumpserim. Nec sum omnia hic complexus, ca^dide
lector, quae hac de re a uiris doctis prodita legerim, sed multa de industria,
and ueluti destinato, transmisi silentio, ne uolumen iusto maius esset, and
ipsius prolixitas lectori, aut paulo occupatiori, aut nause abundo, cieret
nauseam, and fastidium pare^et. Porro, non sum nescius, lector pie, esse inter
nostrates no^ paucos ^uic proninciae obeundae long magis idoneos, quam me esse
citra from ^is iactura^ ipse queam agnoscere, si id oneris, aut subire non
recusarent, aut per negotia subire illis liceret. Quod tamen cum a nemine, vel
leuiter attactum, neque attentatum, hactenus viderim, malui equidem meam qualem
cunque in caelelestium literarum cognitione estimationem nonnihil perielitari,
du^ no^ ita dextre and feliciter instituto tam sancto coronis, aut manus
suprema accesserit, quam pati meaegentis fide^, ia^ no^nihil co^cussam, and
labefactatam, ullius imposturis, and praestigijs, pessum iri, ac interire, modo
per me staret, ne id fieret, effectu^ dare, and ita quoru^da^ impij^ conatibus
obu^a^ire, ne illis qua^tu^ libeat, liceat, neue uirus suum pro sua libidine,
and improbo studio mortalibus afflent, and eos in suaru^ haereseon nassa^, unde
illis nunqua^, nisi apprime aegre, se postea extricare liceat, pro suo
arbitratu pertrahant. Hoc si contigisse videro, abu^de co^pensatu^ hu^c meu^
labore^, satque feliciter eum mihi cefsisse ex istimauero, tametsi multoru^
interim dentes, plusque theoninos, me subinde morsica^tes, senserim, quoru^
uituperium mauelim, qui laudem, ut a quibus laudibus tolli, est plane
uituperari: pios sane, and eruditos, admodum moror, quos nihil addubito hu^c
meu^ conatu^, ut sedulu^ quide^, and a pio profectu^ ai^o, candide Seimus deo
de ^eptum esse quicquid sit per^iribus. D. G. N^^i. orat. 7.
probaturos, quippe quos no^ preterit illud flacci. Est quodam prodire tenus,
si no^ datur vltra. Nec quod uidua euangelica, quae exile plane, and le^^t
leuidensae (ut est in prouerbio) mu^us contulerit in corbonam, a chri^^o cordis
expensore, adeo non au^ierit male, ut illo nomine praecla^o fuerit ornata
encomio. Age ^taque lector, boni co^sule, quod nu^c ^uulgo. Si enim id feceris,
facturu^ ^utem non diffido, calcar mihi ad des haud mediocre, ad plura hoc
genus aggrediendum, concinnandum, and inuulgandum, ut hinc pij lectores
nonnihil referant compendij, and commodi, cum ad alio^u^, tu^ ad sua^ ipsoru^
constabilie^ da^ fidem, atque ad eos christianae religioni denuo asciscendos,
qui illi ualefecerint, absque ea desciuerint, non tam inconsulte, quam impie.
Vale, lector pie, and aut his fruere mecum, (ut habet ille) aut meliora,
Horatiu^.
quod hominis fuerit christiani, imparti. Oxoniae Anno ab orb asserto. 1546.
Mense Septembri.

Note, good reader, this godly saying of saint Basyll the great.
WHen saint Basyll (as the tripertite ^riper. Histo. li. 7 Cap. 36.
story tells) was advertised and moved by a certain officer of the emperor
Valens, to follow the time, and not to suffer so many churches to be
piteouslye vexed through a small subtlety o^ doctrine, as then it was, and the
said officer had promised to him the emperors favor and amity if he would
cease, speaking against heresye then being conpronge up and spread among the
people, he made this godly and catholyke answer. Adolescentibus haec
conueniunt uerba, illi and illorum similes talia recipient. Na^ qui diuinis
inutriti sunt eloquijs, corru^pi de diuinis doginatibus, ne unam quidem
syllabam patiuntur, sed pro his (s^ contingat) etia^ omnes mortis species
amplectuntur. Amicitiam autem imparatoris magna^ quide^ cu^ pietate iudico,
sine qua pernitiem potius hanc appello. That is to say in englysh. These
words are mete for spryngoldes, or yonkers, they and like to them do regard
such. For they, which are nourisshed up with or in scripture, do suffer, no
not one syllable of gods doctrines to be corrupted, but if it happen they
embrace yea al kinds of death. But I do judge the emperors amity or
frendshyppe verily great, being coupled or joined with godlynes, without the
which I do call it rather destruction, then amitee. This was undoubtedly a
very godly answer, and wondrous semely for a good and a holy bishop, worthy
not to be read only of all learned men, and especially of bysshoppes, but to
be also diligently noted, printed in memory, and followed of them, that they
being thereby instructed do not let for any man's frendshyppe or for any
benefits offered to them, to stand stoutely, and manly in defense of the true
doctrine of Christ and his church, the foundation and pyller of the truth not
sufferinge one ^ote or syllable thereof to be taken away, and abolyshed by the
crafty, and deuellisshe persuasions of ill writers, or teachers, but
continuallye by scriptures, the authority of christ's church and strong
reasons defendyng it. For s. Austen says. Co^tra ratione^ nemo sobrius, co^tra
scriptura^ nemo christianus, contra De ^rini. 4. ca. 6.
ecclesia^ nemo pacificus senserit. That is to say. No sobre, or well aduysed
man will judge against reason, no christian man against scripture, no quiet man
against the church. Would god that all men, and women readyng, or hearing
this notable and catholic sentence, pronounced by the ancient and great
clerk saint Austen, would receive it, and in all points of our religion follow
it. For then there should not be among us christian people so many schysmes, and
ill opinions against the faith, as they now are, but they should shortly
cease, and the true doctrine of CHRIST, and his church florisheth again,
which is known (as Vyncentius Lyrmensis writ a thousand years since) by
aunciente, generalytie and agreynge of the fathers in it I was moved (gentle
reader) to write this catholyque, and godly sentence of Saint Basyll, partly
because there lacked matter to fill the shete of paper in printynge, and
partly for that it was very notable and worthy to be observed of all learned
men.

Hereafter follows the preface.
The preface unto the reader.
THE holy prophet Dauyd, good christen reader, says that the truth of our
lord abides for ever, and therefore Psalm. ^^.
albeit many and diverse men have from time to time, even from the beginning of
the church, both spoken, and written also books against it, yet they could
never prevail, but lost their labors, and got their confusion, and endless
damnation. Wherefore though the prophet Daniel does say, Prosternetur Danie^is. ^
veritas in terra. The truth shall be trodden under the feet on the earth, yet
ye is not meant that all the people of god should treede it under their fete, and
despise it, but that in the time of Antichriste, fygured by Antiochus, of whom
the prophet saw a vy^^on, as in the eight chapter of Daniel it apereth: the
continual sacrifice, that is the sacrifice of the mass, as I will by gods
grace hereafter prove, should be abolished and put away, for the space of three
years and the half, (how long Antichrist shall reign) Daniell in the twelfte
chaptre testifienge the same. Of the which place, and other mo like, written
Luther is antichrists messanger, to make all redye against his coming which
first of all men spoke agenst the sacrifice of the holy mass. except one
Peter debruis.
by Daniel, we may well gather, that Antichrists time approaches and draws
very nie, for as much as Marten Luther, and his folowers, do travail so
earnestly (but yet all in vain) to take away the holy sacrifice of the
blessed mass, which all christen nations from the first institution thereof,
made by christ our savior at his last supper, even till our time, the space
of a thousand and five hundred years, was ever believed, accepted, and received,
for a sacrifice auayleable, and profitable both for the quick and the dead,
which thing shall be openly, and plenteousely declared, god wyllyng, here
after in this book, not only by the scripture, but also by general cou^celles,
and the expositions of the eldest, and best learned doctors, declarynge the
said scripture, so that no man, which lists not to wink at the light of the
truth, nor is not married to his o^ne opinion, shall have any excuse to lay for
his error, through want, and lack of knowlage of the truth. Therefore read
this book without al affection diligently, not regardyng who made it, nor
against whom it is made, but what matter it does co^teyne, be it never so
rudely, and grossly set fourth, for the easyer understanding of it. Follow the
wise man's counsel, saying. Non contradicas Eccle. 4.
verbo veritatis. Say not against the word of truth, for if thou do, thou
shall labor all in vain, and gain thereby the wrath of god, and his
indignation, with pain ever to endure, in hell, with the devil, which stood
not in the truth, as Christ does affirm. Ioa^. 8.
This says Paul writing to the Romans after this sort. Iis aute^ Romans 2.
qui sunt ex co^tentione, and qui non acquiescunt veritati, credunt autem
iniquitati, ira and indignatio. To them the wrath, and indignation of god shall
come, which are given to contention, or strife, and do not quietly obey the
truth, but believe the wrong or falsitie. Remember this our savior christ's
Math. 16
saying, What shall it avail man, if he win the whole world and thereby lose
his soul? What eschaunge Mat. 16.
shall a man make for his soul? If thou have therefore erred with Peter,
receauynge false doctrine, defe^ding it, and persecuting the teachers, and
mayntainers of the truth, be not ashamed to forsake thine error, and again to
embrace the truth. Paul persecuted the truth, but he forsook his error when
god called him. Saint Austen erred, but he returned again to the truth, and
unfeignedly recanted his error. Thus many other have done, which had gone
from the truth, when it pleased god of his great mercy to call them, and to
give them the spirit of truth, for the exilyng the spirit of error. I may
well say to them, that follow Martyn Luthers wicked Luther.
errors, and damnable heresies, and namely that, which is against the
sacrifice of the holy mass (never improued before his days) as saint Paul
said to the Galathians, greatly wonderinge Gala. 3.
at their blyndnes. Quis vos fascinauit non obedire veritati? Who has
bewytched you not to obey the truth? As though he had said, ye have had the
truth so plainlye, and perfectly taught you, that except ye were witched, ye
could not so err, as ye now do, forsaking the same. If saint Paul did iustlye
judge the Galathians witched, because they had forsaken the truth of the
gospel, (which they learned not long before) through the inticement,
provocation, and persuasion of false teachers, that then did preach to them,
how much more iustlye may a man say to them which are shamefullye
deceived, and blinded by Martyn Luthers fond, folyshe, and deuellysshe
doctrine? Quis vos fascinauit veritati non obedire? Who has witched you, not
to obey the truth? hath-Marten luther deceived, and witched you? Has he
blinded you, that ye can not se the truth, which heretofore, sense Christ's
birth, no man attempted to do in this matter of the mass? Has he deceived you
Except one Peter de br^^s which was in saint Berna^des time.
which is the autoure, maintenar, and defender of many, and sundry plain
heresies? Has he witched you not to obey the truth, concerning the sacrifice
of the blessed mass, which so sets forth, and auaunceth only faith, that
he sticks Only f^yth.
not to say, and defend, that only through faith god forgeueth man's sins,
nothing helpyng thereunto his penance, fear, charity, prayer, forgiuinge his
neighbors George Joys opinion.
trespaces, nor any like thing, yea that only faith should save man, though he
lived never so ill? And because saint James in his epistle does plainly
condemn, and reprove that his deuyllysh opinion, and saint Ihons Apocalypsis
also disproueth the same error, he was not ashamed to deny them both,
affirmynge that these books are not scripture, nor written by James, and Ihon
the apostle. Is not this a blind doctor? Is not he worthy to have credence
given to him, in matters of our faith, which does not fear to deny the holy
scripture, for the mayntenaunce of a fond, and a wicked heresye, against the
scripture, the hole church of christendom, and all writers, that truly write
upon the scripture, even from christ's time, to these our days? What man, or
woman, is so mad, to be Luther denies ma^s f^e will, which did Simon Magus
(as S. Clement testifiethe) that was the fyist heretik^ after christian birth.
leave him which denies the fre will of man, and ascribes both sin and virtue
only to necessity, and ^othinge to man, as Luther does, saying that we can
not chose but sin when we do sin, nor chose but we must neades do well,
when we do any good deed? Is not this a great blyndnes? What can be more
against reason, and gods holy word? What doctrine can he more pestilent,
and noisome to good living? For if this doctrine were true, as it is most
false, we should neade no law of man, nor of god, no preaching, no teaching,
^o good counsel, nor any sembla^le, or like help to live the better with
all. Martyn Luther also de^^eth Luther says that god does give no grace by
the sacraments.
that god gives any grace man through the blessed sacraments. Is not this man
worthy^ to be believed of us christian people^ He teachethe that a christen man
should not war against the Turks. Is not this wholesome doctrine and godly:
yea is it not rather met^ for a Turk thus to write, then* christen man? Beware
therefore good christen reader, of his pestilent, and contagious doctrine.

Read not his books, nor none o^ Heresye books should not be read.
his disciples making. They a^^ full of poison, although th^^ seem never so
good, and frutefull^ as commonly does all heresy, at the first taste and
sight. The kynge^ majesty, like a most christian princ^ has put fourth a
proclamation o^ late, straightly chargynge, and co^maundinge, that no man, or
woman do keep after the last day o^ August next insuinge any book i^ Englysh,
that conteyneth in it an^ ill, and hurtefull doctrine.

This godly commandment ought to be obeyed of us, not only for fear of
temporal, and bodilye punishmente, but to eschew also gods displeasure and
wrath, whose ministre he is, and by whom he Prouer. ^
^eygneth, as ye scripture affirms. If thou have ben deceived by Luther To.
13.
this blind teacher, return again to the truth, with a penytent heart. Follow
this holy Tobias Tobie. 14.
counsel. Serve the lord in dread, and truth. Bye the truth, and sell it
not again, as Salamon Prouer. 23.
does counsel the. Instauntly pray with the holy prophette Dauyd, Psalm. 118.
saienge. Ne auferas de ore meo verbum veritatis. Let not o lord, the word of
the truth, be taken from my mouth. Abide in christ by love and charity, and
keep his commandments, and then thou shall know the truth (as our savior
says) and the truth shall make Ioa^. ^.
the fre, from al error, ignorance sin, and wretchedness, and bring the to
the endless joys of heaven, the which Christ the truth, dyeng for the truths
sake, bought most dearly, with the sheddynge of his precious blood, for his
faithful servants, to whom with his father, and the holy gooste, be glory
and honor for ever. Amen.

Take in good worth this my labor, gentle reader, though in all points the
treatyce shall not like the, and no maruayle, for because it was made in haste
within the space of a monethe, when I might steal an hour from my other
business of study.

At London, the year of our lord. M. D. xlvi. The xx. day of Iulye.

A certain lesson, or an instruction to discern, and to put difference
between a false doctrine and a true.
TErtulian, good Tertulianus. 203.
reader, an ancient writer, for he was within.clxxx years of Christ's birth,
in his book made of the prescription against heretics, declaring how we may
know without al dout what doctrine is true, and what is false, and heresy,
thus writes. Christ in a certain parable says that good Math. 13.
seade of corn was first sowed of the lord, and afterward his enemy the
devil sowed cokle, and evil seade. Ita ex ordine ipso manifestatur, id esse
dominicum, and verum, quod sit prius traditum, id vero extraneum, and falsum
quod sit posterius immissum.

That is thus much in english. Luthers sede of doctrine against the mass is
cokle and erroneous doctrine because it was sowed after the good sede of the
truth.
It is plain by the order of the sowynge of good seade, of good and godly
doctrine, which Christ first sowed in the field his church, and the deuyls
after sowynge of ill seade, of false and erroneus doctrine in the same, by
heretics his ministers, yt to be our lords, and true, which is first taught,
and that to be strange, and false, that was after brought in. This sentence
(says Tertulian there) shall abide and remain, against other heresies,
which shall hereafter rise, to whom no man, that is constante in his faith,
and of a good conscience, does give, or grant any thing to defend that they
have the truth on their side. Lo, good reader, here thou have an euydent
lesson, to perceive, that Martyn Luthers doctrine, which Chrisosto. homilia.
17, in Heb.
he does mayntaine against the blessed mass, and the holy sacrifice thereof,
the very self same offering of our saviors very flesh and blood, which he
him self once offered to his father on ye cross, to pacify his wrath, is very
strange, false, and manifest heresy, for as much as it was sowed by the
devil in the church of Christ long and many years, forsooth no fewer than a
thousand and five hundred, after that our savior at his maundye, and his
holy apostels ^ad sown the seade of that godly doctrine, teachinge the mass
to be ^ sacrifice, profitable both for the quycke and the dead, as I shall
^roue manifestly, in this book fo^owyng. Moreover the same ancient, and great
clarke Tertulian teaches us an other lesson to discern ^n other tu^e to know
heresy by from holsom and true doctrine.
heresye from true doctrine, saying. That heresy by interpretation, or
exposition of the greake word, is that doctrine, which a man of him self, or
of his own chosinge, does institute, set forth, or take, and maiteine, being
by an other man's choice before invented. And therefore the apostle Paul did say
that an heretic was condemned even by his own judgment, and conscience,
Quia and in quo damnatur, sibi elegit, because ^i. 3.
he has chosen to him, that in the which he is condemned. This rule also does
sufficientlye prove that Martyn Luthers doctrine Luter wa^ by his own
judgment and conscience condemned, as al heretics be.
against the sacrifice of the mass, is ill, and yt he was condemned even by
his own judgment, for as much as he chose this doctrine of his own head,
having neither scripture with him but against him, nor any other good
autorytie, to defend that his wicked heresye, as hereafter it shall be opened
at large, by gods grace, to the utter abolyshynge, and confutacion of this
leude, fond, and deuyllyshe opinion. But I will let this pass, and set upon
mine enterprise, and purpose. Look not good reader, to have this matter
garnished and painted with stran^ge terms of french, or of any other tongue,
whereby y^ unlearned might not understand, without great labor and difficulty,
where about I should goo, nor take but little profit by y^ teadyng of this book.
The truth, Lactan. lib. 3. Cap. 1. de falsa sapien.
as Lactantius did writ, twelte hundredth years before this time, god would
should be of this nature, that it being simple and bare should be more esteemed
and set by. Quia satis ornata per se est, ideoque ornamentis extrinsecus
additis fucata corrumpitur, because it is of it self garnyshed sufficiently,
and therefore it is corrupted, being colored or painted with orname^tes
outwardlye added. Also in an other place Lib. 5 de diui^a iusticia, ca. 1
he says. Eloquentia seculo seruit, populo se iactare, and in rebus malis
placere gestit. Eloquence serves the world, it desires to boste it self to
the people, and to please in evil things. To be short, the scripture, was
written without eloquence, and colors of Rhetorike, as Paul says to the
Corinthia^s, 1. Cor. 2.
lest the conversion of the world to the faith, by the preaching of the
apostles, and their books, should be ascribed, and imputed unto the eloquence
of them, and their clean terms to persuade, if they had used any such, and
thereby the virtue why the ^^ripture was written without much eloquence.
and strenght of Christ's holy cross, and death should have been of none
effect, nor force, the people beleuyng yt men had been brought to Christ's
faith through the eloquence of the prechers, and not by the great virtue, and
strength of Christ's death. Therefore I would not, if I could never so well,
paint this my book with many terms of Rhetoric, or of any other strange
speech, whereby the matter (as I have said before) might be the more obscure,
and dark to the reader, which is not of the best learned, especially saying I
ough^ as well to study for the edifienge of y^ simple and the rude, as of the
wise and the cunnyng. But now I will begin this matter, and Romans ^.
prove by good auctorite of ye old, and new testament, the doctors of the
church, and of certain general councelles, that the mass is a sacrifice,
auayleable not only for the priest, which says it, but also for the living,
and dead, first declarynge the name of the mass, whereby it shall appear very
plainly, that it is a sacrifice, or else the apostles would not have given to it
y^ name, which in Hebrew does signify a sacrifice, and an oblacio^.

The name of the mass shows, that it is a sacrifice.
THe mass, good reader, has that name, and is so called, by reason it is a
sacrifice, for in the Hebrewe tongue missah is named that which the greeks do
call liturgiam, the latins oblationem, and we i^ englysh, a sacrifice. For
wherein the book of Moses called Deuteronomium Dou^e. 1^.
the.xvi. chaptre we read in the hebrew missach, and in the latin, oblatio,
the english has an oblation, or else a sacrifice, so yt even thereof we may well
se, and perceive, that the holy mass has that name, because it is a
sacrifice, which undoubtedly the apostles of our savior Christ Jesus, did
first so call, understanding by these words, Hoc facite in mea^
co^memorationem, Luc. 22.
Do ye this for my remembrance, that Christ gave the^ autorite to make
sacrifice of his very true and natural flesh and blood at their masses, which
thing he him self had the^ before done, at his last supper, as it shall
manyfestlye be proved, by gods grace, hereafter in this book. Peter the
apostle said the first mass of al at Antiochia, which ordained a greatte part
of the ceremonies now used in the mass, and also instituted the self same
order of prayers, with which the priest does consecrate the very flesh and
blood of christ at his mass, as we read in diverse well learned men's R^migius d^
officio (...). Hugo (...) ^sodo^^^ lib. de o^fic^^s. Cap. 15.
books. Ihon Wiclep he was therefore justly condemned in the general counsel,
holden at Co^sta^tia, because he said yt the mass was not instituted, and
ordained by Christ, but invented only by man: of y^ which more largely
hereafter I will entreat by ye help of god. But let us se what is a sacrifice,
and what y^ scripture says of ye sacrifice of ye mass. S. Austen, good
reader, in ye x. book de ciui. de^, and the.vi. cha. thus describes a
sacrifice. A very sacrifice what is sacrifice.
is every work, which is done, yt we might cleave unto god with a holy
fellowship, referred to ye end of goodness, whereby we may be truly, happy, or
blessed. Moreover sacrificare in latin is to make sacrifice, and a priest in
latin is called sacrificus, because he makes sacrifice by his priesthod, and
orders, which is his chief, and principal office, as it appears in s. Paul's
epistle y^.v. cha. to ye Heb. 5.
Hebr. ye which I will declare also herafter. Daniel ye prophet made mention,
good reder, in ye xii. chap. of this sacrifice saying. Impie age^t impij, neque
intellige^t oe^s impij, porro docti i^tellige^t, and a te^pore cu^ ablatu^
fuerit judge Luther. Bully, bucer Mesa^ Regiuo. etc. are of that number.
sacrificiu^, and posita fuerit abominatio in desolatione^ dies mill, duce^ti
nonaginta. Ungracious or ungodly me^ shall do ungraciously, or ungodly, and the
ungracious or ungodly shall not understand, but ye learned me^ shall understand,
and from the time, when the continual sacrifice is taken away, and abominatio^
put in to desolation, yt is to wit, Antichrist destroyed, a M. days.ii. C.
and xc. The which do make.iii. years and ye half, by which space antichrist
shall reign, and persecute christian people, after he has caused masses to
cease, and taken away the sacrifice of them.

Thus we se that the prophet did prophecy yt a continuing or continual
sacrifice should be destroyed or taken away, in the time of cursed
antichriste, for of him the prophet did there speak, as the text it self
does show, which Christ did allege, entreatyng of Antichriste, as Matthewe
writes the xxiiii. chapter, but this continual sacrifice ca^ be none other but
the sacrifice of the mass. First because y^ prophet speaks of that one
sacrifice, which should cease the space only of three years, and the half,
but the Jews sacrifices were many, and This prophise ca^ not be understand of
the sacrifice of prayer, geuinge thanks nor like other spir. sacryfyces, for
the godly, shall use those the^ most of all being a time of persecution
are abolished for ever. Secondlye because they have been taken away these
M.cccc. years, and yet antychrist is not come, therefore by this continual
sacrifice was mente the sacrifice of the blessed mass, which antychrist,
labouringe all that he can to destroy christ's faith, and his whole religion,
shall abolisshe and cause to cease for three years space, and the half, for
so long by Daniels, and saint Ihons saying, he shall reign, wherefore Martyn
Luther, and his scolers, endeuourynge them selves to take away this holy
sacrifice of the mass, are the messangers of Antichryst, making ready and
preparyng against his coming, that people may receive, and honor him for
the verytue messyas, and savior of the world, Christ our savior rejected,
and utterly forsaken, as he him self did prophicye, saying to the Jews. I
came in the name of my Ioa^. 5.
father, and ye did not receive me, an other shall come in his own name, ye
will receive him. But I will pass over this, and goo forward upon my purpose,
to prove that the mass is a very sacrifice, and first by fygures of the old
testament. We read in the, xiiii. chap. of ye Gene. that Melchizedech, wh^che
was both a king and also a priest Of Melchisedech.
did offer in sacrifice bread and wine, when Abraham was returned from the
kyllyng of.iiii. kings, for these be the words of y^ letter. At vero
Melchizedec rexsale^, profere^s pane^ and vinu^ (erat enim sacerdos Gene. 1^.
dei altissimi) benedixit ei. etc But verily Melchizedec king of Sale^,
bringinge forth or offering bread and wine (for he was a priest of god y^
higheste) blessed Abraham. This text does prove sufficiently ye Melchizedec did
offer to god bread and wine in sacrifice, to thank him for y^ victory given to
Abraham, and therefore it must needs thereupon follow, yt christ did make
sacrifice under y^ form of bread and wine, at his last supper, instituting ye
mass, for as much as Melchizedec was a figure of him, and his preisthode
likewise a figure of christ's preisthode according to ye prophecy of David ^n
ye Psalm, which is. Tues sacerdos Psalm. 109.
in aeternu^ secu^du^ ordine^ Melchizedec, Thou art (said god ye father to
christ his son) a priest for ever, after ye order of Melchizedec. No man ca^
truly say, yt christ was a priest after this order of Melchiz, when he offered
up him self on the cross to his father for our sins, for the^ he did not
offer his body under ye form of bread and wine, but under ye form of flesh,
and blood, and therefore he was that time, so offering sacritice, a priest after
ye order of Aaron, and not of Melchiz. so yt this figure of Melchiz. and the
prophicy of the holy ghost pronounced by David, were fulfilled by christ at
his mandy, and last supper, when he took bread, gave thanks to god, blessed
y^ bread, brake it, and gave it to his apostles saying. Take, eat, this is my
body, which shall be given, to death for you, and therefore Christ did then
offer his flesh and blood in sacrifice to god his father, and the same also
does the priest in the mass, having autorite so to do, and commanded of him
to do that same thing, which he did before, when he said to his apostles Hoc
faicte in mei commemorationem. Luc. 22.
Do ye this for my remembrance, as Luke makes mention in his gospel. But
now let us se what they say, which are of the contrary opinion, that the
mass is no sacrifice, to prove that this authority of the Genesis, makethe not
for us, to persuade that Melchiz. did at that time offer to god bread and wine
in sacrifice. First they say that the text of the Genesis An obiecti^.
has not offere^s, vel sacrifica^s panem and vinum, offering, or sacrifisynge
bread and wine, but proferens, bryngyng forth bread and wine, and therefore
this place proves not that Melehiz. did make then sacryfyce to god. To that
I answer that the text in deed has even so, as they say, and yet it proves
right well, and sufficiently that Melchiz. did then offer sacrifice to god,
with bread and wine, or else why should Moses have added a sentence
declarynge that Melchiz, did that thing as a priest, and because he was a
priest. For if he had not offered that bread and wine to god in sacrifice, there
should have been no cause, to say. Erat enim sacerdos dei altissimi, for he was
a priest of the highest god, because he might have done it then being no
priest. For it is not the office of a priest to bryuge forth breadde and wine
to refresshe the hungrye people, but rather of a lay man, as no man can say
nay, and therefore sith Melchizedec did this as a priest, and exercising y^
office of a priest, the which is cheifely to offer sacrifices for the sins
of the people, as Paul says, it follows that (...)
Melchizedech did make the^ sacrifice, with bread and wine. Moreover this
argument is very weak and sclender, the text of the Genesis says that
Melchizedec did bring forth bread and wine, therefore he did not offer them
in sacrifice, for as these two, to bring forth bread and wine, and to offer
them are not contrary even so Melchizeder did bring forth those things not to
feade Abraham, and his soldiers, as anon it shall appear but to offer them
unto god in sacrifice, to give him thanks for the great victory by him given
to Abraham. Now where many men, following therein the Jews, as it appears in
Lire upon the Genesis, do affirm that Melchizedech Lir^
did not of^re bread and wine in sacrifice to god, but only brought the^
forth to refresh Abraham, and his soldiers, they are very bli^d so to say. For
they neaded not his bread nor wine, having sufficient vittals brought with the^
there hence, where they got ye victory, as it appears in y^ letter. Also is it
like yt Melch. had bread and wine enough in store, to refresh so many soldiers
being in number above.iii. c.? Beside this who yt wise is would say ye Abraham,
if he had had any such need, would not have gone rather to some other man for
succoure, then to the priest of the highest god? Abraham also gave to
Melchyzedech tithes of y^ spoils gotten in war, as Paul witnesses, which
he would not Heb. 7.
have done if he had wanted necessaries for him and his souldyers. Finally
Abraham brought with him all Lothes goods besides the substance of the four
kings, which he had sleane before, and therefore he neaded not to beg
bread and wine of gods preeste Melchizedech.

But ye will say to me, the text An objection
has not in Hebrewe a word declaringe a cause, for the Hebrewe word
signifies only in english (and) and therefore that text makes not
sufficiently to prove that Melchy. did offer that bread and wine in sacrifice.
To that I make The answer.
answer, first that saint Hierom, which was excellently learned in ^he
Hebrew tongue, did so translate the Hebrewe word, to whom more credence ought
to be given, then to twenty Luthers, Bucers, Byllygers, or any like, which
neither for learning nor holiness of living are worthy to be compared with
him, as all good Christen men will grant. Secondly I say that this latin word
Et, which is in englysh (and) is many times used in scripture, for enim
sygnifienge in english (for) as in Esai Esai. 65.
the prophette, saying. Lo thou art angrye with us, and we have sinned, where
(and) is put instead Psalm. 59.
of this word for. Also in the psaltre it is thus written. Lord give to us
help, and the health of man is vain. Here also, and, is put for this word
for. Likewise in the new testamente that word is used as in Luke the first
chapter, where the most blessed, and honorable vyrgyn our lady, mother of
christ, was thus said unto, by Elizabeth Zacharias wife. Benedictatu in
mulieribus, and benedictus fructus ventris tui. Thou art blessed Luc. 1.
among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb, where (and) is put for
(enim) declaring y^ cause why our lady was blessed, which was because she
brought forth our savior most blessed of al, by whose death all the
faithful, living godly should be saved, and blessed in heaven, according to the
promysse of God, made unto Abraham as the Genesis does plainly tell. Many
other textes of scripture Gene. 15. 22.
manyfestly do show that it is no seldom thing ye (and) should be used instead of (enim) which I will not rehearse at this time, least I should be tedious
to the reader, especyallye sith these places already recyted, are sufficient to
prove my purpose, yt which is approved by many doctors expositio^s not only of
Hebrews, but of the greeks and the Ltayns also: for amongst the Hebrew
writers, one called Rabbi semuel expoundynge this text of Rabbi semuel
ye Genesis, entreatyng of Melchi. thus writes. Hic Melchi. mysteria
sacerdotij, tradidit. Erat enim ipse sacrificans pane^ and vinu^ deo sancto,
and benedicto, that is to wit This Melch. taught, or delivered mysteries, or
things secret in words and ceremonies, of preisthod. For he was doing
sacrifice with bread and wine to god holy, and blessed. Here we se yt this great
clerk being an Hebr. writer, and an Hebr. borne did understand this before
said text of Melchizedeches oblatyon, or sacryfyce. Now ought not more
credence to be given unto him in this point specially, than to any man of this
our time laboring to teach an heresy by wrestynge of this place from his right
sense? Also an other of the Hebrewe doctors Rabbi pinhas
called Rabbi Pinhas, confirms plainly this matter saying, In the time of
messiah, or y^ Gene. 14. Psalm. 109.
anointed (meaning our savior) all sacrifices shall seace, but the sacrifice of
bread and wine shall never cease. Forthwith he alegeth this text of the
Genesis and the verse of Dauydes Psalter, wherein mention is made of Christ's
presthode. This might be proved by the saienges of many other Hebrewe doctors,
but I will let them pass to be short, and rehearse some of y^ greek writers
to prove Eusebius lib. 5 cap. 3. De cua^ge. demonstra
this my purpuse. Eusebius which was above twelfe hundred years passed, thus
writes of this matter speaking of the prophets saienge. Tues sacerdos. etc.
Psalm. 109.
Thou art a priest after the order of Melchizedec, for ever. The end (says
Eusebi.) of the prophesy is wonderful to him, which does behold after what
manner our savior Jesus, which is the anointed of god, does accomplish by
his ministers after the order of Melchizedec, those things, that appertain,
to the vsyng, or exercysynge of priesthod among men. For like as he, which was
a priest of the gentiles, does appear in no place to have used corporal
sacrifices, as Aaron did with beasts, but only with bread and wine, when he
blessed Abraham, so truly first the savior and our lord, afterward the
preistes which were instituted by him, exercising the spiritual office of
preisthode, among all people after the laws, or ordinances of the church, do
present, show, or bring in presence with bread and wine the mysteries, or
secret things both of his body, and also of his wholesome blood. The which
mysteries verily Melchizedec so long before did know through the holy ghost,
and did use the ymagies, or figures of things to come. Hitherto Eusebius,
euydently saying that Melchyzedech fygured Christ, and offered sacrifice with
bread and wine, for a figure of Christ's sacryfyce, which he should offer
under the form of bread and wine, (and even so he did) sacrifisynge to his
father, his very flesh and blood, as the preistes now do instituted, and
made by him, and his auctorytie. who^ ^restes are ordained by christ.
will not rather believe this holy father, and aunciente clerk, then Martyn
Luther, which labors dylygentlye to abolyshe all holy and godly
sacraments* But now let Chrisostom speak his Chrysostom.
mind in this controversy, which for his au^cienty being before our time.xii.
c. years, and for his learning ought to be admitted among good christen men to
the decysing In Hebr. Ca. 5
of co^trouersyes risen in their religion, which thus writes. To who^ was it
said, you art a priest for ever, after the order of Melchiz.? who is a priest
after the order of Melchizedec? None other but christ, for all other were under
ye law, al did keep ye sabbath days, al were cyrcu^cised, ye Jews could find
none other but Christ, that should be a preiste after the order of
Melchizedech. But thou wylt say to me ye An objection
text has not offerens offering, but proferens bringing forth, It is very
true, but yet the greek word, that the.lxxii. translatours, which turned the
Hebrewe letter in to greake, do use in this place, (...) a. proferre, pro
offerre.
which is prospherin signifiethe not only to bring forth, but also to offer
sacrifice, as it appears in many places of the new testament in greake, but
specially the fyfthe Cap. 7. and. 9.
of Matthewe. Si obtuleris. etc. The fifth of Paul to the Hebre. and in other
certain places of that epistle, and therefore this objection is of no force,
nor strength but it makes rather for my purpose: Lib. 3. To: ^. Haeresi. 9.
Epiphanius moreover a greake doctoure being about twelfe hundred years
passed, confyrmeth this plainly, saying. Abraham iustus sacrificat deo, and
Melchizedec sacerdos dei altissimi, Abraham rightuous does sacrifice to god,
and Melchizedech ye pressed of ye highest god. Also thus he says speaking of the
same matter. Melchizedec Abrahamo ob^^iam Lib. 2. To. 1. Haeresi. 55.
venit, et proposuit ipsi pane^ and vinum, mysteriorum aenigmata praefigurans,
and exemplaria, cum dominus noster dicat. Egosum panis viuus, and exe^plar
sanguinis ipsius, qui ex latere ipsius compuncto Io. 6.
fluxit, ad purgationem inquinatoru^, and respersione^, ac salutem animarum
nostrarum. That is, Melchizedec met Abraham, and set out, or showed to him
bread and wine, before fyguryng dark thinge^ and samples of mysteries or
secret things, forasmoche as our lord says. I am the quyck bread, and a
sample of that blood which did run out of his side pricked, to the purgynge
of the defiled, and sprinklyng, and health of our souls here we se that after
this ancient writers mind, y^ bread and wine which Melchiz. showed to Abraham,
figured our savior christ's flesh and blod, which ran out of his side stryke^,
yt he offered to his father, under the form of bred and wine, at his last
supper, and not upon the cross, for there he offered himself to his father
under and in his own propre form, after ye order of Aaron only. Damascene
also a greek doctor, which was above a thousand years before our time,
confirms plainly this our Lib. 4* ca. 14.
purpose, entreatynge of Melchizedeches sacrifice offered to god in bread and
wine, when thus he says Haec mensa, hanc mysticam praefigur^uit mensam, velut
and sacerdos Gene. 14.
ille christi very sacerdotis figuram Psalm. 10^.
praeseferebat, et imagine^. Tues enim (inquit) sacerdos in aeternu^ secundum
ordinem Melchizedec That is, This table of Melch. figured before this mistical
table of Christ, like as this preiste Melchyzedec did bear the figure and
image of christ the very priest. For the holy ghost says by Dauyd y^ prophet,
rehersing god ye fathers words to christ his son. Thou art a priest for ever
after the order of Melchize. Is not this plainly spoken of this old writer and
great clarke? Is it not mete to believe him rather the^ Martin Luther, or any of
his disciples, nothing so well learned as he was, nor so virtuous in living?
But to be short, I will allege now Theophilactus Theophila.
words, which was also a greek doctor, and then go to y^ rehearsal of In Heb.
5.
latin doctors. He says after this manner. But whom can the Jews bring beside
christ, which may, or should be a bishop, or a preiste after the order of
Melchizedec? were not all other preistes under the law? did not they all
observe the sabbath days, and offer sacrifices? Therefore it is most evident
that it was spoken of Christ, for he, and only he, did make sacryfice with
bread and wine, after the manner of that Melchizedec. Anon after he asks how
Christ is a priest for ever. To that he makes this answer, that he is
called a priest for ever, not only because he does always pray for us to his
father, showing to him his body, which he offered up for ye sins of the
world unto his father upon the cross, to obtain mercy for us, saying, o
father have mercy on them, for whom I have suffered death, but he is also a
preiste for ever because he is offered daily, or else because an oblation, or
sacrifice is continuallye offered by gods mynisters the preistes, which has
in it Christ our lord, bishop, and sacrifice, that for our sake does
sanctify, halowe, or make holy him self, break, and give: this he. Hitherto
I have alleged the Hebrewe and the Greake writers to prove that Melchyzedec did
offer bread and wine in sacrifice to god, in figure of our savior christ's
sacrifice, which he should then offer, and now has in deed offered to his
father at his maundy, verily none other thing, then his own natural and
lively body, flesh and blood under the form of bread and wine. Now let us
see what the latin Latin autours touching this matter.
doctors say in the same matter, but yet not al, which I have red,
entreatynge of it, but certain of the eldest and best learned only, as S.
Austen, Hierom, Ambrose, Lacta^t. Arnobius, and the holy martyr Cypriane, S.
Austen. the year of our lord.cccc.
Of ye which S. Auste^ thus says upon the.xxxiii. Psalm of Dauyd. Melchize.
was in Abraha^s time. Of what other says god ye father. Thou art a priest for
ever, Psalm. ^0^.
after the order of Melch. but of him, whose sacrifice ye know? The sacrafice
of Aaron is taken away, and a sacrifice after ye order of Melchi. is begone.
Also in another place he says, Melch. did know to To. 2. ePist. 95
figure ye eternal preisthod of our lord, with a sacrament, or a holy sign of
our lords table, showed To. 5. de ciui dei. lib. 16: ca. 22.
forth. Again he says speaking of Melchi. and his sacrifice. Ibi quippe
primu^ apparuit sacrificiu^, q^ nu^c a christianis offertur deo toto orb
terraru^, impleturque illud, quod long post hoc factu^, per propheta^ dicitur
ad christu^ qui fuerat venturus in carne^. Tues sacerdos secu^du^ ordine^
Melch. inaeternu^. No^ scilicet secu^du^ ordine^ Aaron, qui ordo fuerat
aufere^dus, illucesce^tibus rebus, quae illis vmbris praenotaba^tur. That is to
say in english. Surely there first did appear ye sacrifice, which now is
offered of christian people to god through all the world, and ye is fulfilled,
which long after this deed of Melch. is said by ye prophet David to christ ye
should come to be made man. Thou art a preiste for ever after the order of
Melch. As who says, not after ye order of Aaron, which order should be taken
away, ye things being clear, or manifest, which were before noted or figured
with those shadows. Hitherto S. austen, which was above eleven. C. years past,
and of such cunning, and learning in holy scripture, beside many other
things, as never was any sense the holy apostles time, therefore sith he does
so plainly approve this matter of the sacrifice of the mass, as we have
alredye showed, and will do hereafter more at large, god willing, is not he a
very mad man, that will rather believe Martyn Luther than this ancient
father, and godly writer? But now to go forward on this purpose, I will
bring in saint Hieroms mind in this matter, which thus says therein.
Melchizedec pane and vino, simplici, Hierom ad ^u^grium.
puroque sacrificio, Christi dedicauit sacramentum. That is, Melchizedec with
bread and wine a simple and a pure sacrifice, did dedicate christ's sacrament.
Again upon the sautre Quo modo Melchize. rex salem obtulit panem and vinum, sic
et tu offeres corpus tuum and sanguinem, verum panem and vinum. ^ste
Melchizedec, ista mysteria, quae habemus, nobis dedit. Ipse est qui dixit. Qui
mandu cauerit ex hoc pane viuet in aeternum. Ioh. ^.
Secundum ordinem Melchizedec tradidit nobis sacramen^u^ suum. In what manner
Melchizedec king of Salem has offered bread and wine, even so thou also shall
offer thy body, and blood, very bread, and very wine. This Melchi. gave to
us these mysteries, which we have. He it is, which Johan ^.
said. He ye shall eat of this bread, shall live ever. He has delivered to us
his sacrament, after the order of Melchyze. Are not these plain words of this
ancient, and excellent clerk Hierom, and sufficient to stop all their
mouths, that babble, and bark against the holy sacrifice of ye mass, which
ever since christ's time was had in honor till Marten Luther began to write
against it? But yet ons more let holy Hierom say his mind, in this
co^trouersi, to ye utter co^futatio^, of Hierom^ in Mat. 26.
ye masses (ye of christ's, which did institute it) adversaries. Thus he
writes, after he had rehearsed our saviors words spoken at his last supper,
when he did institute this blessed mass, and the sacrifice of it. After ye
pasouer, which was a figure, was fulfilled, and christ had eaten ye flesh of a
la^be, with his apostles, he takes bread which comfort ma^s heart, he passes
over to y^ very sacrament of easter, or y^ pasouer, y^ like as Melch. ye priest
of ye highest god, in a figure before of him had done, offering bread and wine,
he also should bring in presence or lay before me^, the truth of his body and
blood. Who ca^ desire more plain words tha^ these are of s, Hierom, to prove
yt Melch. offered bread and wine in sacrifice to god as a figure of christ's
sacrifice instituted of him under ye form of bread and wine at his mau^dy. S
Ambrose in like manner Ambrosius lib 4. de sacram^tis.
confirms this verity saying. Occurrit Melch. sacerdos Abrahae, and obrulit
ei pane^ and vinsi. Melchi. a priest met Abraham and offered to him bread and
wine. Also in an other Lib, 1. de Abraham patriarch^. Ca. 3.
place thus he says intreatinge of Melch. Who is king of rightousnes ye priest
of god? but he to who^e it is said. Thou art a priest, for ever after ye order
of Melchi? Hoc est, dei filius, sacerdos patris ^ sui corporis sacrificio,
patre^ nr^isre propitiauit delictis? y^ is, y^ son^e of god, y^ priest of ye
father, which with y^ sacrifice of his body has appesed or made merciful y^
father to our liu^s These words do plainly declare ye saint Ambrose believed
that christ did offer his own body to his father, after the order of Melchize.
to appease his wrath, which can not be understand of the sacrifice made upon
the cross, because there he was not a priest, or he did not offer sacrifice
there, after ye order of Melchizedec under the kinds of bread and wine, but
after the manner, and order of Aaron offeringe his body, and blood under, or
in his own form visible. This also is approved by an old doctor Lactantius
lib. 4. cap. 14 de uera sap. Psalm. 109.
named Arnobius, writynge upon the sawtre, which sayethe. Hic per mysterium
panis and vini sacerdos factus est in eternum secundu^ ordine^ Melchizedec, qui
panem solus obtulit, and vinum in sacerdotibus. This (meaning Christ of whom
ye prophet spoke) by reason of the mystery of bread and wine, was made a
preiste forever after the order of Melchize. the which only among preistes
offered bread and wine. This was written above twelve hundred, and fortye years
passed, manyfestlye affirmynge that christ by reason of the mystery or the
secret thing, that is the sacrament, of bread and wine, was made a priest for
ever, after the order of Melchizedec: which he could not be, except he had
offered his own body and blood in sacrifice to his father at his maundye
under form of bread and wine, as I have declared already, therefore ye mass
must neades be a sacrifice, wherein he is continually sacrificed, by the
preistes, his ministers, after the order of Melchize. Five bisshops, which
were Aurelius, Alipius, Augustinus, and Possidonius, wrote an epistle to
Innocentius, in the which they said Melchizedec prolato sacramento mensae
dominicae, nouit aeternum eius sacerdotiu^ figurare. That is Melchizedec did
know to figure our lords everlasting preisthode with a sacrament or a holy
sign of his table showed forth.
The which thing is so evidently affirmed by the holy martyr S. Ciprian (which
was almost thirtene hundred years passed) that nothing ca^ be more plainly
said, for this he writes. In sacerdote Melchizedec sacramentum dominici
sacrificij praefiguratum videmus, We se (says holy Cypriane) the sacrament of
our lords sacrifice before fygured in the priest Melchizedec. Than he proves
that his saienge both by the words of the Genesis.xiiii. chaptre spoken of
Melchizedec, and his sacrifice made with bread and wine, and by the words also
of Dauyd spoken of god the father to Christ our Sauyoure his son, which are
these. Thou art a preiste for ever, after the order of Melchizedec. Anon
afterward he lays thus. The which order of Christ truly is this coming
of that sacryfyce, and thereof descendynge, that Melchizedec was a preiste of
the higheste God, because he offered bread and wine, and blessed Abraham. Nam
quis magis sacerdos dei summi, qui dominus noster Jesus Christus, qui
sacrificium deo patri obtulit. Et obtulit hoc idem, quod Melchizedech
obtulerat, id est, panem and vinum, suum scilicet corpus and sanguinem. That is
to say. For who is rather the priest of god the highest, than our lord Jesus
Christ, which did offer sacrifice unto his father? And he offered the very
same ye Melchizedec had offered, that is to wit, bread and wine, surely his
body and blood. Moreover Cipryane ^peaking of the sacrifice of Melchizedech in
bread and wine, the which went before as a figure of Christ's sacryfyce that
was to comme in bread and wine, says after this manner. Quam rem adimple^s
dominus, and perficiens, panem and calicem mixtum Cyprianus.
vino obtulit, and qui est plenitudo, veritatem praefiguratae imaginis
adimpleuit. The which thing (that is to wit, the sacrifice of Melchizedec,
that was a figure of christ's sacrifice to come, under form of bread and
wine) our lord fulfyllynge, and accomplysshynge, has offered bread, and a
cup, or chalyce mengled with wine and water, and he, which is fullness,
has fulfilled the truth of the image, or figure before figured. Who could have
spoken more plainly, than this holy martyr here speaks, that christ's
sacrifice in form of bread and wine, was fygured before by the sacryfice of
Melchizeder? And to put away all doubt, anon after this he says. Vnde
apparet sanguine^ Christi non offerri, si desit vinum calici, nec sacramentum
dominicu^ legitima sanctione celebrari, nisi oblatio et sacrificiu^ nostru^
passioni respond erit. Whereby it appears that christ's blood can not be
offered, if there be no wine in the chalyce, neither our lords sacrament
celebrate, or made, after the laufull ordinance, except our oblation,
offeringe, and sacrifice shall agree, or be like the passion. Hitherto this
blessed martyr saint Cyprian, a man nere the apostles time, and of a very deape
knowelage in gods holy word, we ought therefore to give credence rather unto
him in this present controversy of our religion, than to Martyn Luther, or else
any other of that sort, which upon no ground, as it shall hereafter appear
manifestlye, deny the mass to be a sacrifice propitiatory, that is, appeasynge
or pacifieng gods displeasure, and wrath, which all me^ (se^ce christ did
first institute it at his last supper, til now Martyn Luthers coming) ever
believed undoubtedly, and steadfastly, but I will proceed upon this purpose, and
make yet a further probation, to leave no doubt in the matter, if it may be by
my small learning. The twelve loves of bread spoken of in Leuitico, were a
figure of this blessed sacrifice made in the Leui. 24.
mass under form of bread, as saint Dainascene does affirm saying. Hunc
pane^, panes figurabant Damas. lib. 4. Cap. 14.
propositionis. The loves of show, did figure this bread. And therefore, where
our text in Latin has, panes propositionis offert, He offers bread of
show, the Hebrewe has, as Galatinus testifies. Galatinus lib. 10. cap. 7.
Quia carnem dei tui ipse est, vel erit sacrificans, that is, because he is or
shall be sacrifisynge the flesh of thy god. S. Origin Origines in Leui. 24.
does plainly confirm the same saying. If a man look on ye bread, which
descended down from heaven, and on that co^memoration, or remembrance, of the
which ye lord says, Hoc facite in meam commemorationem, Luc. 22.
Do ye this for remembrance of me, and do remember also the mysteries of ye
church more dylygently lokyng on them, In his, quae scribit lex, futurae
veritatis inuenies imaginem praeformatam, He shall find in those things,
which the law writes, an Image, or a symylytude of the truth before
fourmed. This sacryfyce also was fygured by the continual sacrifice of the old
law mentioned in the book of Moses called Exodus the xxix. chap. For like as
the twelve Exodi. 29.
loves were set out to show daily, and this sacrifice continually done by the
preistes of the old law, even so in the mass the priest does show daily to
the people our saviors blessed body under the form of bread, and
continually offers it in sacrifice to god for to appease his displeasure, and
to make him merciful and favorable unto us, that yet live, and to the dead
also. Now the prophet Malachias shall come forth to say his mind in this
matter, which this writes. Non est mihi Mala. 1. ^. 3
voluntas in vobis, dicit dominus exercituum, and munus non suscipia^ de manu
vestra. Ab ortu enim solis vsque ad occasum, magnu^ est nomen meum in gentibus,
and in omni loco facrificatur and offertur nomini meo oblatio munda, quia
magnum est nomen meum in gentibus. I have no will or mind to you, says the
lord of hosts, and I will not receive of your hand a gift, or a sacrifice.
For from the risinge of the son unto the going down, my name is great
among the people, and sacrifice is made, and a clean oblation is offered to my
name, because my name is great among the people. Lo, good christen reader,
here we se that god said by this his prophet, that he had no mind to the Jews
mening that he would forsake the^, by reason of their infidelite, lack of
faith, refusing his son christ at his coming, and sin, and that he would
no more receive of them sacrifices made with beasts as he had done before
christ came in the time of the old testamente, but that all such sacrifices
should be utterly abolysshed, and left clean, as shadows, and fygures of
christ's sacrifice the very thing shadowed, and figured by them, which should,
and does in deed, as much excede, amou^t, and excel them, as the body does
the shadow, and the thing fygured, the figure, or pycture representynge it.
That this is mente, and spoken by the sacryfyce of the mass, diverse old
writers, men so well learned, as none are now these days, do plainly testyfye,
of the which I will bring a few. Damascene Dam^s. lib. 4. Ca. 14.
above a thousand years sense thus wrote on this text of the prophet
Malachias. Haec est pura scilicet hostia, and incruenta, quam ab ortu vsque ad
occasum ipsi offer riper prophetam dominus loquitur, Christi videlicet corpus
and sa^guis, in stabilimentum animae nostrae, and corporis, inconsu^ptu^ and
incorruptu^, non in secessu^ iens (absit enim) sed in nostra^ substantia^, and
conseruationem, omnimodi nocumenti reparatio, sordis omnis purgatio. This is
the english thereof. This is the pure hooste, or sacrifice offered to atteyne
victory of our enemies, and vnblouddy, or offered without blood sheding, the
which our lord says by his prophet should be offered to him from the risinge
of the son to the going down, surely the body, and blood of christ, to keep
steadfast or stable our soul and body, or to be that thing, which does
stablish our soul and body, not consumed, * incorrupted, not going into the
draught (for god forbid that) but into our substance, and conservation, a
repayringe of all manner of The mass is a sacryfice propiriatory^ for one
sins.
hurt, a purgation or purgynge of al uncleanness. Mark here good reader, that
this old writer Damascene affirms that our lord said by the prophet that
a clean host should be offered to him, without blood sheddyng, verily the
body and blood of Christ, and none other sacrifice, than the sacrifice of the
mass, though Luter Bucer, Bullyger, and like other do never so much say the
contrary, without al good ground. Secondly note, that the same host, or
sacrifice should be a stay, or a stablishment both of our body and the soul
also. Thyrdlye that it goes not into the draught, as other bodily meats do,
but it is turned in to the spiritual sustinaunce of the soul, and co^seruatio^
of it. Fourthly note well, that he calls this holy sacrifice, a reparation of
all harine (which came to the soul through sin) and a purgynge, or
clensynge of all fylth of sin, against them, which deny that the mass is a
sacrifice propitiatorye, that is, making god merciful to us, and appeasynge
his wrath toward us for our sins. Some Diverse objections are here soyled.
men say that this prophetment of a sacrifice, which the Jews did make to
god, but they are far deceived. First because he prophesied of a sacrifice,
which should succeed, ye jews sacrifices abolyshed. Secondly because he spoke
of a sacrifice which all people in every place should offer to gods name,
therefore it can not be understand of any sacrifice of the jews, which they
only in the temple of jerusalem did offer, as it apereth by the law plainly.
Moreover, some understand this prophecy of the sacrifice, fulfilled by christ
on the cross, but as untruly as the other, for that sacrifice was offered of
christ only in one place, which was the mount of caluarie, but the prophet
entreats there of a sacrifice, that should be offered to god in all places,
and therefore he spoke not of christ's sacrifice ones done on the cross.
Again the prophet wrote of that sacrifice, which should be offered to god,
when his name should be great and famous among the gentylles, which was not
renoumed among them, before christ Mat.vi. Mar. 16
did suffer death, but after his resurection, when he sent his apostles to
preach the gospel through all the world to every man. Thyrdly As bucer
bulliger and other of that sortt.
they are likewise deceived, that understand by this sacrifice here mentioned,
laudyng of god, thanks gyuynge to him, confessing of his name, contritio^ of
man's heart, preaching of ye gospel, mortifyenge of the body, and carnal
lusts, or desires of the flesh, or any like, first because none of these
succeeded, or came in to the place of the Jews sacrifices done away, anulled,
and undone for ever, for they all were in the time of the law of nature,
before Moses law was put forth, and under Moses law, and after it was
abolysshed, as no man can say nay, and therefore this prophecy can not be taken
of them, or any one of them. Again the prophet spoke of one sacrifice in the
synguler number, and the^e are many, wherefore he may not be understand of
these. Moreover the prophet did speak of a pure, and a clean sacrifice, but
our works are not pure, and clean, because we offend, says saint James, in
many Iacobi. 3. 1. Ioh. 1.
things, And John says, if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selfs,
and the troth is not in us: Therefore this prophecye must be understand of
Christ's very body, and blotidde, a lamb without spotte of all fylthe, and
sin, as Peter says, and saint Paul 1 Peter. 2. 2. Cor. 5.
also, which he offered under form of bread and wine at his last supper, and
gave autorite to his apostles and their successors, prestes and bishops, to
do the same for his Luke. 22. 1 Cor. 1^.
remembrance, till his coming again at the last day. But I will bring
forth Eusebius an old Eusebius lib. Primo de euangelica demonstra.
greek writer, to conferme this my purpose, which thus writes. Mosaicis
sacrificiis reiectis, quod futurum erat nostrum ipsarum institutum, propheta
diuinitus nu^ciat dicens, Quoniam ab ortusolis. etc. That y^ prophet shows of
god, or by the inspiratio^ of ye holy ghost, yt which should be our own
ordinance or institution, ye sacrifices of Moses rejected, sayng, because from
ye rysyng of the son^e, to ye going down, sacrifice is made, and a clean
oblation is offered to my name in every place. Therefore we do sacrifice (says
Eusebius) to god ye highest a sacrifice of laud, we do sacrifice to god a full
sacrifice, and bryngyng fear, Et sacrosa^ctum sacrificium. A consecrated
sacrifice hallowed, and that which ought not to be touched but reuerentlye. We
do offer in sacrifice to god, with a new manner after the new testament, an
host clean. This can not be understand of any other sacrifice, than of the
sacrifice of the mass, for none other is offered to god now after a new
manner, according to the new testament, as every learned man may easily
perceive, and therefore it must neades be taken of that sacrifice only. Again
he says thus, after very many words spoken of this matter, as concludyng
I^aque Christus quasi mirabilem qua^dam victimam, sacrificiu^ quod eximium deo
patri operatus, pro nostra omniu^ salute obtulit, eiusque rei memoriam vt
nosipsi ipsi deo pro sacrificio offerremus, instituit. That is to wit.
Therefore Christ after he had wrought, offered to god the father for all our
health, or salvation, as who says a certain wonderful, and an excellent
sacrifice, and has ordained that we our selfs should offer to the same god
for a sacrifice, the remembrance of the same thing. If Marten Luther or his
scolers had seen this holy fathers sainges, and not ly^^ed to like, and esteem,
their own iudgemnet more than his, they would not have so rashely, and The
sacrifice of the mass was ordined by Christ and not by man, as some me^ say.
ungodly denied the mass to be instituted, and ordained a sacrifice of our
savior Christ him self, as they do, ascribynge it, and the setting up of it,
unto prestes avarice and covetousness. Whose fond, Ireneus. lib. 4 Ca. 32, 33,
^4,
leude, and ungodly opinyon Ireneus an other greek writer, which was
within.clxxx. years, of Christ's birth, and saw saint Polycarpe saint John
the euangelystes disciple, yea whose scholar he was (as some men say) does thus
euydently write in this matter, but Christ also geuyng counsayll to his
disciples to offer unto god of his creatures the first fruits, not as who says
nedynge, but yt they should be neither unfruitful, nor unkind, took that bread
which is of his creation, or his creature, and gave thanks, sayng. Hoc est
corpus Christ at his last supper taught his apostles a new sacrifice, which
is the holy mass.
meum. This is my body. And he took likewise the cup, and confessed it his
blood, and he taught a new sacrifice of the new testamente, which the
church receyuynge of, or from the apostles, offers to god throw al ye hole
world. What can any wise christen man desire to be more plainly spoken of any
man than this, in defense of ye sacrifice of ye mass? May not (I beseech the
good reader) men be greatly ashamed either to deny the mass to be a sacrifice,
or else to say that it is nothing but an ydoll, set up by prestes covetousness,
for lucre and gaynes? Ought not we rather to believe this ancient father,
which was instructed by them, that learned the troth of Christ's religion of
the apostles scholars, then Marten Luther, or any of his Luther.
teaching, and schole, which now after xv. hundred years, do labor to bring
up a new religion, and faith among christen people? Came not the holy ghost
to teach men the truth, which Christ promised Note reader Io. 14. 16*
to send to the apostles, till Marten Luther came, the fountain almost of all
heresy? Has Christ suffered his dear spouse the church (for which h^ shed
his most precious blood) to err in his religion and the faith* thus long, the
space of xv. hundred years? Did not he promise his apostles Matt.vlt. Ioh. 14.
to be with them, and the holy church till the worlds end, that he leadyng
them, which is the truth, as he him self says, they could not be disceyued
so foul in their belefe, to think the mass a sacrifice ordained by Chrtste
in the gospel, and it nothing so? Truly every wise man does judge much other
wise, but it is better to pass over this, and to return again to holy
Ireneus, which after he has aleged the prophecy of Malachias, which I have
now in hand, to prove that Christ as his maundye did offer his body and
blood in sacrifice to his father, teaching the apostles even so to do, and
they the hole church, which offers the same also through all the world,
Anon after this he writes, Quonia^ ergo nomen filij propriu^ patris Caep. 33.
est, et in deo omnipotente, per Iesum Christum offert ecclesia, been ait
secundum vtraque, et in omniloco incensum offertur nomini meo, et sacrificium
purum. That is. Therefore because the sons name is proper to the father, and
in god almighty, the church offers sacrifice by Jesus Christ, the prophet
Malachias says well after both the things, both inc^se, or a sweet perfume,
is offered in every place to my name, And also a pure sacrifice again. Igitur
ecclesie Cap. 34.
oblatio, quam dominus do cuit offerri in vniuerso mundo, purum sacrificium
reputatum est apud deum, and acceptum est ei, no^ quod ille indigeat a nobis
sacrificium, sed quoniam is, qui offert glorificatur ipse in eo, quod offert si
acceptetur munus eius. That is thus much in our speech. Therefore Mathe well this
reder.
the sacrifice of the church, which our lord taught to be offered in the
hole world, is rekened with god a clean sacrifice, and it is accepted of him,
not because he neadeth our sacrifice, but because he which does offer it, is
glorified, or renoumed, by that, which he does offer if his gift, or
sacrifice be accepted of god. Lo, good reader, here eftsoons, and again, this
holy man plainly affyrmeth, that ye church does offer sacrifice, which our
savior Christ did teach so to do, and not any covetous priest, or bishop,
myndyng to get vau^tage, and gaynes thereby, though many through envy, and
malice conceived against the clergy, (which no heretic ever lacked) are not
ashamed so shamefully, and falsely to say of the^. But now to S. Hiero^e, S.
Hierome ^po^ Mala. 1
which writes after this manner, upon this prophet Malachie. Non in vna orbis
prouincia Iudaea, nec in vna vrbe Iudaea Jerusalem, sed in omni loco offerri
oblationem, nequaque immunda^, vt a populo israel, sed mundam vt in caeremonijs
Christianorum. That is to wit. God spoke to ye prestes of ye jews by the
prophet, the which do offer the blind, the lame, and faint, to make sacrifice
with, that thereby they might know that spiritual sacrifices should succeed the
carnal, and that not bulls and gootes blood, but a sweet perfume (that is ye
saints prayers) should be offered to the lord, and that not in one prouynce of
the world Jury, another in one city of Jury, Jerusalem, but in every place
should be offered a sacrifice, in no wise unclean, as by the people of Israel
was offered once, but clean, like as in the ceremonies of christea^s, or
christen people is offered. Lo. Here good reader, saint Hierome understands
the prophet of one pure and clean sacrifice, which should (as now daily it
is in the mass) be offered in christen men's ceremonies, which must neades be
spoken of the sacrifice of the mass, wherein are many ceremonies used, with
diverse holy prayers. And that the prophet me^t that sacrifice of the blessed
mass, he himself declares openly in the third chapyter following For
Malachi. 3.
there he does prophecy of Christ's coming by his birth, saying, lo he comes.
Who can attain by thought the day of his coming? Who shall stand to se
him? For he like as fire blows, like as one blows the fire and as the herb
of fullers of clothe. And he He means the apostles which christ cleansed by
making the^ ryghteuos and good men, before they should offer sacrifices to god
his father.
shall sytte bloyng together or blowyng like as one blows the fire and
making clean like as gold, and like as silver, and he shall purge, or make
clean the sons of Leui. Et colabit eos quasi aurum, et quasi argentum, et
erunt domino offerentes sacrificia in iusticia. And he shall strain out their
lycoure like as gold and silver, and they shall offer to our lord sacrifices
in ryghteousnes. S. Hierome understands here the sons of Leui, all preistes
of the new law, which only should succeed the prestes of the old law, and
these clensyd, and purged, as gold and silver, should offer to our lord
sacrifices in righteousness. Et placebit domino sacrificium judah et jerusalem,
sicut dies seculi anni antiqui. That is the sacrifice of Jude and Jerusalem
shall please the lord, like as the days of time, and the old years. This
letter is not so plain, and easy to be understand, as men think the
scripture is, which saint Hierome thus expounds the sacrifice of the prestes,
which they do offer for Judah and Jerusalem, that is for them, that do confess
our lord, and se his peace with the mind, shall please the lord, like as
days of time, and as old years, that is, as they pleased him at the
beginning, so after penance done for sin committed, when they shall be
cleansed from the fylth of all sins, they shall begin to please god with
their sacrifices again. It is called also the sacrifice of Judah, because
Christ did institute it, which was borne of the tribe, and in bethelem Judah,
Also the mass is called of the prophet, the sacrifice of Jerusalem, because
it was there first institute by christ. Therefore since this was prophesied of
christ's coming by birth, which should make clean, and purge the prestes of
the new testament, that they might (being so cleansed) offer sacrifices to god
for the people, which confess Christ to be our savior, and do se his peace
with their mind, every man plainly may perceive, that this prophecye
touches y^ sacrifice of ye mass, for that only does appertain to the
preistes of the new testament, as no man can deny. Hitherto of the old
testament. Now to the new, wherein are certain places, and textes, evidently
prouyng the mass to be a sacrifice, not of laud and thanks geuynge only,
but also of appeasynge gods displeasure Textes of new law, prouyng the mass
to be a sacrifice.
toward us for sin, and making him merciful both to the living, and the
dead. Of the which the first is this of Lukes gospel. Hoc facite in meam
commemoratione^. Do ye this for my remembrance. Luc. 2^.
That is to wit. I give you authority, power, and command you also to do,
y^ which I have done even now at this my maundye, that is, take ye bread,
give thanks to god for all his benefits given to man, bless it, consecrate
it, turnyng the substance of it in to my flesh, offer it to my father, not
only to give him thanks for his benefytes bestowed on man, but to purchase
his grace also for the people, and to appease his displeasure, conceived and
taken against man for his sin. Finally receive it your selves saying mass,
and distribute the same to the people, for their housle, and all this do ye in
remembrance of Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11.
my death and passion, continuing so to do, till y^ worlds end. That Christ
did offer his blessed body to his father a sweet sacrifice for our sins at
his last supper, and commanded his apostles likewise to do, and all preystes,
in and by them, the ancient and old fathers sentences do plainly prove, of
the which I will allege here some, that be most strong and euydent. Ireneus a
greek doctor being within.clxxx. years of christ, expou^dynge Ireneus: lib.
4. cap. 32.
these words of christ Hoc est corpus meum, and hic est sanguis meus, This is
my body, and this is my blood (which he pronounced at his last supper,
consecratinge, and offeringe his body and blood in sacrifice to his father)
thus writes, as I have ones before rehearsed. Our lord took bread, and gave
thanks saying. This is my body. Also he took the cup, and confessed it to be
his blood. Et nouam docuit noui testamenti oblatione^, qua^ ecclesiam ab
apostolis recipiens, in vniuerso mu^do offert deo. And he taught them a new
sacrifice of the new testamente, which the church receauynge Christ did
institute the sacrifice of the mass, and the apostels taught the church.
of the apostles (he says not of the bishop of Rome nor of any other bishop,
or priest) does offer to god in all the hole world. These words are so
plain, that no man can deny, but that this saint says, that Christ did offer
his body and blood in sacrifice to god at his maundye, and that Christ's
mynystres, the preistes of the new law, do dayelye offer the same at mass,
instructed that lesson of the apostles, which were taught it of their master,
our savior christ. Shall it not therefore be much more mete, and convenient, yt
we christen men, and women give credence rather unto this holy, and aunciente
fathers teaching in this matter, (especially being so agreeable with gods
word, yea being plainly set forth by it) than to Martyn Luther, n^yther like
to him in auncientie, nor virtue, nor learning? Marvel not (reader) that I
do here expound this word facere, to signify as much as to make sacrifice,
partly because this holy martyr saint Ireneus, saint Cyprian, and many other
of the eldest, and best writers upon the scripture, so do take it in this
commandment of christ given to his apostles, Hoc facite. Facere to do, i^
christ's words is to make sacrifice.
etc. Partly for as much as it is so used both in profane writers, and also
in the holy scripture. For Vergylle says. Cum faciam Vergilius:
vitula pro frugibus ipse venito. When (says Dametas) I shall do sacrifice, or
offer sacrifice, to Ceres the gods of corn, with an heffar for the corn,
come thou thy self. Also Theocritus Theocritus,
a greek poet so uses this word saying: Quum facies agno, Nymphas veneratus
agrestes. When thou shalt make sacrifice with a lamb, honoring the wild or
rude maide^s of ye sea. Likewise baptista Ma^tuanus (a christian man) Mantuanus,
used this word, saying of Abel the first shepeherd. Nunc oue, nunc pingui
vitula faciebat, and agno. He made sacrifice sometime with a sheep, sometime
with a fat heffer, and a lamb. Now to the scripture, which in this
signification often times does use this word. For the third book of the
kings ye eleventh chapter, thus has, Et fecit Solomon astartae abominatio ni
Sydoniorum, That is. And Solomon Lege Ezech, 45: and, 46: et Iudicum. ^^,
did make sacrifice to the idol the abominatio^ of the Sydonio^s: Is not here
facere which is in englysh to do, used for sacrificare, to make sacrifice? Many
other textes of the old testament do show Leui. 23. Et facietis hyrcum pro
peccato.
plainly that this word is oftentimes used for to make sacrifice, which I
pass over to be the shorter, and bring one place out of the new testamente,
which is in Lukes gospel, the second chapter after this form of words. Et
cum inducerent puerum Iesum parents eius, ut facerent secundu^ consuetudine^
legis pro eo, Sim eo^ accepit eu^ in ulnas suas. etc. That is, And when the
father and mother of the child Jesus brought him into the temple, that they
might do for him after the custom of the law, Symeon took him into his
arms. What else I beseech the good reader is meant by (doing) in this place, but
making of sacrifice, or offeringe of sacrifices according to the law of Moises?
The text a little before in Luke declares this plainelye, which shows that
our Lady Christ's honorable, and most blessed mother, Marye our saviors
blessed mother.
and his father Joseph (at the lest which was judged his father of the people)
at the day of purification, presented Christ in the temple of jerusalem, Vt
darent hostiam, secundum quod dictum est in lege domini, par turturum, aut duos
Leui. 12:
pullos columbarum, that is to say. That they should give an host, a pair of
birds called turtelles, or two pygeons, according to the commandment of the
law of our lord. Thus we se that christ's Christ's parents did give to the
preiste these things not off^ryng^ in sacrifice (for that is the office of a
priest but presentyng them to the priest, that he should offer them in sacrifice
as the law required.
father and mother presented and brought in to the temple, either a pair of
turtelles or.ii. pygeons, that the priest should offer them in sacrifice after
the law, and so (facere) does sygnifye in this place of Luke sacrificare to
make sacrifice in the which signification both greek writers, and latin also
do often use that word, and not only the Hebrewe speech, as it appears by
the places above recyted. Why therefore may we not well understand by these
words of our savior Christ, Hoc facite in meam commemorationem, Do ye this
for my remembrance, that he commanded them to offer sacrifice for his
remembrance? especyally seeing the aunciente writers of Christ's church, and
the whole church has even so taken those words ever since they were spoken,
no man otherwise expoundynge them, till Martyn Luther came, lerna fere omniu^
haereseo^, in whom was almost all heresies? Homilia. 17. in Hebre.
To be short, saint Chrysostom understood, that Christ did offer his body
and blood in sacrifice at his maundy, and gave commandment Read more of
Chrisost. in the chaptre of the doctors sayenges.
to his apostles to offer it also, in remembrance of his death, whose words
are these, Po^tifex aute^ noster ille est, qui hostia^ mu^dante^ nos obtulit,
ipsam offerimus, and nunc, quae tunc oblata quidem consumi non potest. Hoc
autem, quod nos facimus, in commemorationem quidem eius fit, quod factum est.
Hoc enim facite Luc. 22.
(inquit) in mei commemoratione^. That is. Our bishop is he, which has offered
an hooste, or sacrifice Note this well reader against the enemies of the mass:
making us clean, the same we offer also now, the which than offered,
truly can not be consumed, but this that we do, is done for a remembrance of
that thing which was done, for christ said, do ye this for remembrance of me.
Who is so blind, that he can not see, that Chrysostom, a greake autour,
learned as excellentlye in the scripture, as ever any was of the greakes since
the apostles time, and their scolers, does say playnelye, that we (meaning
preistes, of whom he was one him self) do offer the self same sacrifice,
which Christ ones for ever offered by death and bloudde shedynge on the
cross? but we do it for remembrance of that his passion, and blouddy
sacrifice, not without authority, power, and commandment, as the which all
three we have of him, saying, Hoc facite in mei commemorationem, Luc. ^^.
do ye this for a remembrance of me. Would to God christen men would look
well on these words, considering both the auncientie of the writer, and also
his greatte learning, and holiness, which may cause them rather to believe his
sayenges tha^ any other, nothing like to him in those qualities, but it is
better to let this pass, and to here saint Cypryan that holy martyr, which
wrote above twelve hundred and lxxx. years past. He this writes after
Cyprianus ii. ^, epist 3
many words spoken of the holy sacrifice of the mass. Qua in part inuenimus
calicem mixtum fuisse, quem obtulit, Vnde apparet sanguine^ Christi non
offerri, si desit vinum calici, nec sacramentum dominicum legitima
sanctificatione celebrari, nisi oblatio and sacrificium nostrum passioni
responderit. That is. In the which part we do find that the cup was
mengled or meddled (that is wine and water were therein mixed together) which
Christ did offer. Whereby it does appear that christ's blood is not offered if
there want wine in the cup or chalice: neither is our lords sacrament
celebrate with halowynge according to the law, except our offering and
sacrifice be like the passion. In these words note that he says we find y^
the cup which christ offered, was mixed with wine and water, which was at none
other time, but only at his last supper, for at the time of his death he had
no cup so meddled, nor then he offered not his blood under form of wine, but
only under ye form of blood, therefore he offered his blood in sacrifice at
his maundy, after this holy martyrs mind, and preistes do even that same after
his law and ordinance, as he says likewise here again, for thus he writes.
Quo modo aute^ de creatura vitis, nouu^ vinum cu^ christo in regno patris
bibemus, si in sacrificio dei patris, and christi, vi nu^ non offerimus, nec
calicem dn^i traditione dominica miscemus? That is to say, How shall we
drink new wine with Christ of the creature of a vine, in the kyngedome of
the father, if we Mark whose is the sacrifice of the mass
offer not wine in the sacryfyce of God the father, and of Christ, or if we do
not meddle or myxe the lords cup, after the teaching, or co^myssyon of our
lord? Lo, our lord taught the preistes at the mass to myxe in the chalyce
wine with water, and so to offer in sacryfyce his precious bloudde, which he
did never but at his last supper, as it is euydente, and therefore he did
there offer his body, and blood in sacryfyce, and gave commyssyon to his
apostelles, and to all preystes in, and by them, to do the same. Also in the
same epistle he says again. Ab eua^gelicis praeceptis Cyprianus. Luc. ^2.
non est omnino recedendum, eaque quae magister docuit, and fecit, discipuli
quoque obseruare, and facere debent. We ought not to goo from the
commandments of the gospel, and the dyscyples must of duetye observe, and
do also, those things, which the master taught, and did. Lo, here Saint
Cypryane sayethe, that Christ offered him self, and taught his scolers that
same lesson, and commanded them also to offer sacryfyce, as he had Matt. 26.
Luc. 2^.
done before, when he took bread, and so forth, and thereby he bond them to
keep, and do the self same thing that he did.

What would any manne desire more? To prove all this he allegeth saint Paul
the eleventh chapter of the first epistle to the 1: Cor. 11.
Corinthians. This holy martyr shows wherefore christ did myxe wine and water
together in the cup, which he blessed, and consecrated at his maundye,
saying that he so did because the water signifies the people (as we read in
the Apocalypse of saint John, Apoca 17. why water is mengl^d with wine, in the
chalice when the priest says mass.
the.vii. chapter) so that likewise as the water in the chalice is meddled and
myxed together with the wine, and so meddled that the one ca^ not be separate
from the other, even so by shedynge of christ's blood, the people, which
believe in him, trust in gods mercy promised to the^ for christ's deaths
sake, fear god, forsake their sins thorough perfytte penance, love god and
their neighbor, and finally do keep gods commandments, and abide therein,
nothing can separate or disseuer the^ from gods favor, and love, as Paul
affirms the eight chapter to ye Romans. But yet mark by the way (good
reader) that Cyprian does say that Christ did myxe wine and water together in
the cup, which he did bless, and consecrate at his last supper, and did
also teach, and command preistes to keep, and do that same, as we now in
deed do at our masses, and yet there is no text of all the scripture, that
makes any mention of this deed, lesson, and commandment of our savior
Christ, therefore they are foul deceived A verytye not written in scripture
thorough ignorance: or rather malice, which affirm, that we ought to believe
nothing, except it be mentioned in scripture. But I will return eftesones
to holy Cypryan, and allege out of him a few moo sentences for my purpose, of
the which this is one, against them, that put only water in the chalyce
at mass. Quaerendum est enim, ipsi quem sunt secuti^nam si in sacrificio, quod
Christus est, non nisi Christus sequendus est, vti^ id nos obaudire, and facere
oportet, quod Christus fecit, and quod faciendum esse mandauit, non debemus
attendere, quid aliquis ante nos faciendum putauerit, sed quid qui ante omnes
est, Christus prior fecerit. For we must ask (says Cyprian) whom they have
Cyprianus.
followed. For if in ye sacri^ice, which christ is, none, except Christ,
^uste be followed, truly it is necessary that we obey, and do that which
Christ has done, and that the which he commanded to be done, we ought not to
mark what any man before us thought to be done, but what Christ which is before
all men, first has done. Note dylygentlye (good reader) that this holy
martyr says that Christ is the sacryfyce offered of the preiste, and that he
did make sacryfyce, in the cup being myxed wine, and water together, and
commanded the apostles, and all preystes to follow that same his manner, and
form of sacrafice at their masses. These words hitherto rehearsed (good
Christen reader) are very plain to persuade every man, not utterly unapt to
be taught for want of faith, to believe the mass to be a sacryfyce, ordained
not by any man, but by our Sauyoure CHRIST, at his maundye, but yet here more
plain words of him (if it may be). Thus he says (declaringe that gods
ordinance ought not to be changed by any man's tradition, the which should
be, if wine and water were not myxed together in the chalice at mass,
according to Christ's institution) Nam si Jesus Christus dominus and deus
noster, ipse est su^mus Cyprianus*
sacerdos dei patris, and sacrificium deo patri ipse primus obtulit, and hoc
fieri in sui commemoratione^, praecepit: vtique ille sacerdos vice Luce. 22.
Christi vere fu^gitur, qui id, quod Christus fecit, imitatur. Et sacrificium
verum, and plenu tunc offert Mark this reader dilygently:
in ecclesiam deo patri, si sic inc^piat offerre, secundum quod ipsum Christum
videat obtulisse. This is the englysh. For if Jesus christ our lord and god, be
the hygheste prepsie of God the father, and he first has offered a sacryfyce
to God the father, and commanded that to be done for remembrance 1. Cor. 11.
of him, verelye that preiste does exercise Christ's office, or place truly,
which follows that thing, which Christ has done. And then he offreth to
god ye father in the church, a true and a full sacrifice, if he begin so to
offer, as he may se ye christ himself has offered. Are not these words
plain, and sufficient to prove the mass to be a sacrifice set up by our
savior Christ Jesus? The apostles saying mass, did make sacrifice to god.
We read moreover in the acts of the apostles the.xiii. that the apostels
according to the power, authority, and commandment given them of their
master Christ at his maundy saying, do ye this for a remembrance of me did
make sacrifice to god, for there we find these words after Erasmus
translation, Quum aute^ sacrificarent Act. 1^.
dn^o, ieiunare^tque dixit illis spiritus sa^ctus. Segregate mihi Paulum and
Bernaba^ in opus, ad quod assumpsi eos. That is. When the apostles did make
sacrifice to our lord, and fasted, the holy gooste said to them. Sever, or
separate for me Paul and Bernabe, to the work, unto the which, I have taken
them. Here we se that the apostles offered then sacrifice to god, and that in
the greek tongue was written by Luke the euangelyste, which uses here the
same greek verb of ye which the mass in the greek speech is called (...), as
in the hebrewe it is named (...) Litourgia.
(missah) and that name is used in latin. Chrysostom writ a book of the
mass, which he calls in greake. (...), and Erasmus, Pelargus, with diverse
other translatours of that book in latin, do turn that greek word by the
hebrewe word (missa) which the latin men commonly do use, and it can not be
otherwise conveniently turned into ye latin tongue but by that same hebrewe
word (missah) which name the holy apostle Peter (that first said mass) did
belyke give to that dyuyne, and holy office, which we call the mass in
englyssh. And that most blessed, and holy sacrifice, with the whole order and
manner of godly suffrages, prayers, petitions, and lauds commonly now used in
the church, from yt time of Christ and his apostles, until this our time
has always ben received, and taught by ye very self same name, without again
saying of any man, except one Peter Brusian, which denied sacrifice to be
offered to god. Though the greake word, (...). Luc. 1. Heb. 9.
which Luke uses there signifies many things, yet not only in that place,
but also in other diverse, it signifies to offer sacrifice as a priest does,
and therefore the apostles did offer sacrifice to god instructed by their
master Christ at his last supper. Moreover it may thus be proved, that
Christ did offer him self in sacryfice at his last supper to god his father.
It is written in the first chapter of John's gospel, and the fyfth chaptre of
the first epistle of Paul to Joan. 1. 1. Cor. 5.
ye Corynthians, yt Christ is ye very true Easter lamb, pascal lamb, and
passover, in a figure of whom ye Jews by gods commandment did offer in
sacrifice a lamb (as we find in the book of Moses called Exodus) upon the
which Exo. 12:
I make this reason for my purpose The thing fygured must agree with the
figure, and therefore as ye pascall, or passover lamb, was a figure of
Christ, even so must neades the manner of offering, and eating of Christ (the
lamb figured by the passover, or paschall lamb) be like the offrynge in
sacrifice, and eating of that figure, but that could not be except christ had
offered his very body and blood at his maundye and afterward received it, (as
S. Hierom Hedibi^.
says that he did in very deed), for the Jews did first offer the pascall
lamb in sacryfice, and afterward Exo. 12.
eat him, as Moses testifies, Therefore Christ did at his last supper
offer his body in sacrifice to his father, first in a figure offering the
pascal lamb, and after that in very deed without a figure, eating it
himself, and geuynge it to his apostles to eat also. The which is done daily
of the preiste by his autorite, power and commission, as I have declared
already, and will declare hereafter more at large, by gods help, and grace.
Saint Ambrose Li^. 1. ^ Luca^
does gather of Paul's words, the first epistle, and ye fyfth chapter to the
Corynthians, that christ is sacrificed by the priest at mass, for thus he
says. Non dubites assistere angelum, quando Christus 1. Cor. 5.
assistit, Christus immolatur. Etenim pascha nostru^ immolatus est Christus.
That is. Doubt not the angel to be here, syns that christ is here, Christ is
offered in sacryfyce. For our pascal, or our passover lamb christ is offered
in sacrifice. Paul does openly confirm this wryttyng to the Corynthia^s
the.x. chap. of y^ first epistle, saying Vnus panis and vnum corpus multi
sumus, oe^s quide^ de vno pane, and devno calice participamus. We be many one
bread (says Paul) and one body, sothely we take part all of one bread and
of one cup. The holy father and great clerk S. Austen thus writes, Huius
corporis To. 2. epist. 57. Dardano.
caput est Christus, huius corporis vnitas nostro sacrificio significat^. Q^
br^uit significauit apostolus dice^s. Vnus panis vnu^ corpus multisumus. 1.
Cor. 10.
That is. Christ is the head of this body, (the church) ye unity of this body
is signified by our sacrifice. The which thing ye apostle Paul has briefly
signified, saying. We are many one bread, one body. Also in another place thus
he says, after he has defined, and showed what a sacrifice is. Hoc est To. 5.
de ciui, dei lib. 10. Cap. ^.
sacrificiu^ christianoru^, multi vnu^ corpus sumus in christo. quod etia^
sacrame^to altares fide libus noto freque^tat ecclesia, vbi ei demonstratur,
quod in ea oblatione, quam offert, ipsa offeratur. The english is this. This
is the sacrifice of christen people, we many be one body in Christ, the which
also ye church accustomely uses with the sacrament of the altar, known to
the beleuynge people, where it is openly showed to the church, that in that
sacrifice, which she does offer she the same is offered. No man can desire more
plain words than these are, but yet I will proceed upon a further proof of
this matter. Paul the tenth chapter of the first epistle to the Corynthyans
1. Cor. 10.
this writes again. Non potestis calicem domini bibere, et calicem
daemoniorum. Non potestis mensae domini participes esse, and mensae
daemoniorum. ye can not drink of our lords cup, and the devils, or ill
spirits to. Paul putting difference betwixt the eaters and drynkers of our
lords table, and the^ that eat and drink things offered i^ sacrifice to the
deuyls, does mean that the body and blood of Christ is first offered in
sacrifice, as the meats and drinks were to the ydolles, and then afterward
received of us Chryste^ people.


Ye can not be partakers of our lords table, and the deuyls also, Here saint
Paul reasons with the Corynthians to persuade the^, that they would abstain
from the eating of meats offered in sacryfice to the ydolles, and that with
two very good reasons, of the which the first is grounded upon the words,
which are here next before rehearsed out of this same epistle, and chapter,
and it is this.

Like as they, which have mutual participatio^ in christ through the
sacrifice of his flesh and blood, do enter into a certain unite with him,
Se^blaly they have acertain unite with the idolles, by ye eatinge S. Paul
comparing the body and bloudde of Christ, to the meats of the gentyles
offered in sacrifice. does plainly no^bre the body and blood of Christ,
among things offered in sacrifice. The same is proved by that that he calls
the lords table the altar, for none other cause truly than he called the
Jews and gedtiles aultare a table
of those things, which are offered them in sacryfyce. Now for as much as
every Christen heart does or should abhor to have any unity with the deuyls
or ydolles, it is mete that ye, which are christened people, do forbear
eating of meats, offered in sacrifice to idolles. But that we are united, or
knytte to Christ, and have with him a certain mutual participation, thorough
the sacrifice of his flesh and blood, he shows by a similitude of the Jews
table used in the synagoge. For as the sacrifice, which the carnal Jews did
offer, made them partakers of the altar, likewise the sacrifice, which is
offered either in the table of our lord, or else of the deuyls, makes the
offerers partakers of christ, or of the devils. Though Paul does not call in
this reason the body and blood of christ a sacrifice, yet his words do show
that he so meant, because he sets the table, and cup of our lord christ,
against ye table and cup of the dyuels, saying. Non potestis calicem domini,
etc. Ye can not drink of the lords cup, and so forth as is above rehearsed.
Therefore seeing the apostle does call that, which is offered in sacrifice to
the deuyls, the table, and August T 6. lib. 1. Ca 19. contra adu^^sariu^ legis
and proph. Paulus 1. Cor. ^0. Dicendo Calix, etc. ostendit adque sadrificium
debeant pertiner^.
cup of the deuyls, it must thereof follow, that he mente by the cup, and
table of our lord, that thing which is offered in sacrifice upon our lords
altar, so yt this is y^ sense, ye ca^ not cate yt thing which is offered to god
in sacrifice, and y^ also which is offered in sacrifice to deuels, because ye
light has no fellowship with darkness (as he says in an other place) nor betwixt
christ and ye devil is any agreing. Wherefore it is manifest by saint Paul that
2. Cor. 6.
the body and blood of Christ is a sacrifice of the new Testament, or else, if
they be not offered in sacrifice This declares that s. Paul did gather of
Christ's words pronounced of him at his last supper, that he did offer his
body then in sacrifice.
at the mass, and then afterward received of us, how should Paul's comparison
stand and take place, when he teaches that the Corynthyans could not be
together partakers of things offered up in sacrifice to god, and also to
deuyls? Truly Chrysostom expoundynge this chapter does show that saint Paul
meant this, whose words are these, Itaque si cupis sanguinem, non imbue altar
idolorum caede irrationalium, sed altar meum meo imbue sanguine That is,
Therefore if you do desire to have blood, do not you spryncle the ydolles
altar with slaughter of unreasonable beasts, but lay upon my aultare my
blood, read the chapter of the doctors sentences. Add to this (good reader)
that which saint Paul writes the next chapter following with these words,
Quotienscu^que enim ederitis, panem istum, and calicem istum biberitis, mortem
domini annu^ciabitis, quoad vsque veniat. For as often as ye shall eat this
bread and drink of this cup, ye shall declare the lords death till he
come. These words do show that the mass is a sacrifice as saint Cyprian
does construe, Cyprianus li* 2. epist. 3.
and take them, which thus says upon them, Et quia passionis eius mentionem
in sacrificijs omnibus facimus (passio est enim domini sacrificium quod
offerimus) nihil aliud, qui quod ille fecit, facere debemus Scriptura enim
dicit Quotienscu^que panem istum, etc. And because we make mention, or we
remem^re christ's death in all sacrifices ^or that which we do offer is the
^rdes death) we are bond to do no other thing than that which he has done.
For the scripture says, as often as ye shall eat this bread. etc. Lo Cypryan
did understand these Paul's words spoken of making remembrance of christ's
death, so that he affyrmeth, that we do make sacrifice in the mass, and thereby
is that remembrance made of Christ's passion and death. And that this holy
martyr so did understand saint Paul's words, it does plainly appear by his
words streighte following, which are these, Quotie^scu^que ergo calice^ in
co^memoratione^ dn^i, and Cyprianus.
passionis eius offerimus, id quod co^star dn^m fecisse, faciamus. That is in
our english speech, thus much to say. Therefore as often as we do offer the
cup in remembrance of our lord, and of his passion, let us do that, which
it is euydent, that our lord did. Does not Cyprian here manifestlye affyrine
that by the offering in sacrifice of christ's blood contained at y^ mass in y^
chalice, a remembrance is made of Christ's death, according to his, and saint
Paul's commandment? but ye will say to me, An objection
that S. Paul in this chapter makes mention of eating, and drinkyng the body
and blood of christ and of the remembrynge of christ. and his passion thereby,
which thing is indifferent to lay men, and preistes, and therefore Cypryan does
not well gether of Paul's words here, that Christ's death is remembered by
doing sacrifice of ye priest at mass. To that I say, that the The solution.
death, and passion of Christ, is remembered by every lay man's, and woman's
housle or receyuyng of the blessed sacrament of thaulter, but more chiefly,
more lyuelye, and expressly, by offeringe of his very body, and blood, in
sacrifice, which is done of the priest at his mass, than by that eating,
like as the sacrificyng of the paschal, or passover lamb, did much more
expressly figure the death and sacrifice of our savior christ on the cross,
then to come, tha^ did the eating of him, as no learned man does, or can doubt,
and therefore although every man, and woman receauynge the blessed sacrament
of the altar (which is the very body, and blood of Christ, A book made of
the sacrament of thaulter.
and not only a figure thereof, as I have declared in my book made of that
matter) does by that declare Christ's death, and make a remembrance of it,
yet that notwithsta^dynge, the priest in his mass, does princypally make
remembrance of that christ's death, and so saint Paul's mind was, that the
priest in the mass, offeringe Christ's flesh and blood in sacrifice, does
thereby especially remember his death, though he does that secondarely in
receiving his body, and blood, and the lay people do also the same. But ye
will say unto me, that Christ's institution, when Math. ^^. Luc. 2^.
he bade his disciples to take, cate and drink, and to do that for his
remembrance, does plainly show that we do only remember christ's death in
eating, and drinkinge his flesh and blood, and not by An objection
offering it in sacrifice, and therefore saint Paul mente no such ^hynge.
Also saint Paul him ^^lfe says, when ye shall eat ^is bread, and drink
of this ^ppe, ye shall show the lords death, speaking not one word of making
sacrifice, and therefore he ought not to be wrested in this place to the
sacrifice of the mass. To that I answer, that Christ, and his scholar saint
Paul, did command, The answer.
that when we do eat his body, and drink his blood, we should have his
passion in remembrance, or take the^ to the remembrance of his death, but yet
no man ought, ne can if he would gether thereof, that to show the lords
death, is nothing else but to eat, and drink the Sacrament in remembrance of
christ's passion. For if a man do well and diligently considre, and pondre
Christ's words, when he says. Hoc facite Luc. 2^: 1. Cor. 11.
in meam commemorationem, Do ye this for my remembrance, he shall see, that it
is an other thing to do that, which Christ commanded the apostles to do,
than only to make remembrance of Christ's death. For Christ badde we should
do that, which he did, to remember his death. Now who knows not, that the
thing which is done, and that, wherefore it is done, are not both one thing?
But what neade so many words at this time, sith Paul says nothing against
the reme^brynge of christ's death, by offering his body and blood in sacrifice
in the mass, but with it rather, as I have declared by S. Cyprians judgment
and saying, and I have proved already by diverse autorities both of the
scripture, and the holy doctors, that Christ did offer his flesh and blood
at his maundy to god his father in sacryfyce? Therefore I will recyte more of
the scripture, to prove that the holy mass instituted by Christ our savior,
is a sacrifice, appeasynge gods displeasure, profitable both to the quick,
and also to the dead people. Whereby men may perceive how much Martin Luter,
Johan Fryth, with diverse other were deceived in this matter and namely a young
man of this P^raenesis
our country, in a book set forth in latin, in the which he says that the
holy mass is set up to the reproach or iniurye of Christ, and that Paul,
Peter, and Johan do teach us the same. The apostle Paul to the Hebrews the
fyfthe Chapter thus writes, Omnis po^tifex ex hominibus assumptus, pro
hominibus constituitur in ijs, quae sunt ad deum, vt offerat dona, and
sacrificia pro peccatis. That is. Every bishop or priest taken out of the
nombre of men is ordained for men in those things, which This text proves
that either i^ our time of the new testamente there is no preisthode, which no
good christen body will affirm or that there is a sacrifice propre to it
aduered to be offered for sin which none can of fre up but a preiste, and
sith there is nor can be any other such sacrifice but the mass, it must
needs follow that it is a sacrifice of the new testment.
do appertain to god, that he should offer gifts, and sacrifices for sin.
This text is manifest against Martin Luthers heresy, which is, that all
Christen people are preistes, and that among christen folk there is none
rather a preiste than all other. For here Paul affirms, that a priest is
elected, and chosen out of the multitude of the people, therefore some and
certain of the people are preistes, and not all the hole number of them. Also
he says that a priest is ordained, or instituted, for the multitude of
Christen people, to offer gifts, and sacrifices for their sins, and therefore
that is the preistes propre and chief office, so that it neither does belong
to the layte to use that office, nor the office of a priest is only to preach,
as some men untruly do say. Moreover this place declares plainly, that among
christen people there are preistes, whose office is to offer gifts, as prayer
and such other and also sacrifices, as ye sacrifice of teaching y^ holy word of
god to the people, and chiefly the sacrifice of thaulter, the very body and
blood of our savior Christ Jesus, which offering, and sacrifice does only
appertain to y^ office of a priest, and to every preiste indifferently, for
among christen people there are certain sacrifices belonging only to a
priest, as preaching and offering sacrifice at mass, not only of prayer,
praise, and thanks geuynge, but also, and principally of the body and blood of
christ This letter of Paul. omnis pontifex. etc. can not be understand only
of preist^ after the order of Aaron, according to the old law, for Paul
proves therewith, that christ which was no such priest has neade of a
sacryfice much more excellent than was ever any other before his time of the
law therefore if that place should be understand only of preistes of Aarons
order, it could make nothing for Paul's purpose
under form of bread and wine, wherein consysteth Christ's continual
priesthode after the order of Melchizedec (as it is already declared largely)
and also in which every preistes office does now stand chiefly. Wherefore
no man can well deny, but the mass is a sacrifice belonging to preistes of
christ's order, and of the new testament. This meant also s. Paul in the
seventh Chaptre of his epistle sent to the hebrews, saying yt y^ preisthode of
Aaron is abolished, and put clean away, and christ's preisthode set in his
romth, and place which is after yt order not of Aaron, for after yt order
Christ did ones for all offer him self a sacrifice to god his father, as Paul
says often to y^ Heb. but after ye order of Melch. whereby sacrifice is offered
under ye form of bread and wine, in the sacrament of thaulter. For in this
point as I have before proved, rests christ's propetual and continual
preisthode, and preistes office. Moreover that the mass is a sacrifice, it may
be proved by another text of saint Paul, in this same epistle to the Hebrews
the.xiii. chapter, where he thus writes. Habemus altar, de quo edere non
habent potestatem, qui tabernaculo deseruiunt. We christen people have an
altar, of the which they have no power, or authority to eat, that do serve
the tabernacle, that is, they Math 5: Cu^ offers. etc* sit mentio altaris. and.
1. Cor. 9.
which do put difference betwixt meat after Moses law (anulled utterly by
Christ's death) and keep the ceremonies of that law, have none authority, nor
power to eat of Christ's bread, his very body Hebraei^oca^t altar. Misp^ach,
and. 70. (...) ab oblatione.
consecrated, and offered in sacrifice on the altar, which we Christen folk
have set up in our temples For if he had not meant this, why should he have
made any mention of an altar, which is made for sacrifice to be offered
thereupon to god? The mass therefore is a sacrifice, exercised on the altar,
for the continual remembrance of christ's death, and blouddy sacrifice once
offered upon the cross. The name which the greakes do give thaulter, declares
that it is made for sacrifice, for they call it (...) thysiasterium a (...),
and (...) Thysia and Tireo hoc est, sacrificio, hostia, seu victima, and seruo,
vel animaduerto, and perpendo, So that they name that an altar where sacrifice
is offered or kept, as among Christen people now is kept always the very
body of our savior in the box or pyxe hanging upon or over the altar, and
therefore even the name of an altar given to it by the greakes, which Paul
does use often, may and does much prove that the mass 1. Cor. 9. Heb. 13.
wont to be said on the altar is a sacrifice, the which being ones
abolyshed, as Martyn Luther, and his scolers goes about to do but al in vain,
for it has continued since christ's mau^dy (never spoken against til Martyn
Luter came) and ever shall till the worlds end, according to our saviors
Matt. vlt. Luc. 23. 1. Cor. 11:
promise, though it shall cease almost wholly and amongst al nations, a few
excepted, when Antichrist shall reign the space of.iii. years and the half, as
saint Danyell Dan. 7. and 12
writes. This I say sacrifice done away (as it shall never be clean till the
worlds end) or if ye mass were no sacrifice in deed, (as Luther and his
adherentes falselye say it is none) why should than the altar bear that his
name in the greake tungue? But now let us se what the general councels, the
president, leader, and ruler wher^f was y^ holy ghost y^ spirit Math. 16.
Math. 18.
of truth, as I will anon prove by gods grace, and therefore they erred not in
their judgments, and sentences, therein establyshed, inacted, and published
by their authority. But to y^ matter, wherein I will be short. The general
counsayls.
Our savior christ promised to his apostles, as we read y^.xviii. chap. of
Matheus gospel, that he would be in the mids among the^, that being.ii.
or.iii. were gathered together in his name, how much rather has he ben
present, where two hundred has been assembled in his name, as has been in
the most part of all general councelles, and therefore they neither erred
in any weyghtye matter belonging to our faith, as this does of the sacrifice
of y^ mass nor yet could err, Christ the truth it self being their guide,
and leader. Also he promised to be with the church ever till the worlds end,
as Matthew does tell in the last chapter, and to send the holy Matt. 28
gooste, the spirit of truth, to teach the church all truth necessary for
christen people to know, Io. 16.
and that the same shall always, and for ever abide with it, the which he has
undoubtedly performed before Luthers birth, and especyally to the general
councels representynge the whole church, and congregation of christen people,
so that they being lawfullye gathered together, and assembled, did not err in
the faith of Christ, nor yet could err therein. Therefore if it may be proved
that any such counsel has approved this doctrine that the mass is a
sacrifice (as in deed many has done) it must neades be very true. Wherefore
I will breifely show what some councels has thought in this matter of the
mass. The counsel holden at the city Ancyra Ancyrane counsel.
above twelve hundred years passed, which was before the counsel of Nycene,
has these words following. Presbyteros immolantes videlicet idolis, and
iterum lucta men adeuntes. etc. placuit honore^ quidem sedis retinere, offerre
autem illis non liceat. That is, We ordeine that preistes, which do offer
sacrifice to ydols, and go again to wresteling, shall retain or keep still,
their dignity, or promotion, but it may not be lefull for them to offer. Lo
this great assemble of learned cou^saylers, did ordeine that preistes, which
did make sacrifice to ydolles, should not offer sacrifice to god, which must
neades be understand of the sacrifice of the mass, for as much as none other
sacrifice was than, nor now is, propre to preistes. Also the counsel kept at
Laodicea a city in ^ counsayl holden at Laodicea Cap. 58.
Assia about twelve hundred years before this our time, this did inacte. Non
oportet oblationes in domibus ab episcopis, vel presbyteris offerri. It
behooves not sacrifices to be offered of bishops or preistes in houses. Who
can deny, but this ordinance was made of the sacrificy of the mass? In like
manner the counsel holde^ Cap. 4. Affricane counsel.
in Africa, at the which S. Austen was, does declare by an ordinance made of
them therein assembled, that ye mass is a sacrifice, saying. In sacrame^tis
corporis and sa^guinis dn^i nihil amplius offerat^que quod ipse dn^s tradidit,
hoc est, panis, and vinu^ aqua mixtu^. That is to wit. let nothing more be
offered in the sacraments of our lords body and blood, the^ that, which the
lord him self did teach, that is bread and wine, meddled with water. Note Note
this reader.
well here, good reader, two things, which this act conteyneth, the first
that the mass is a sacrifice, because the body, and blood of christ is
offered therein under the form of breadde and wine myxed with water, the
second, that our lord Christ Jesus did teach that nothing else, but
bread and wine, meddled with water should be offered in sacrifyce in the
sacrament of our lords body and blood, which does well agree with Saint
Cypryans saying before rehearsed, so that this sacryfyce of the holy mass, and
also what things should be offered therein, was instituted and ordained by
christ. Furthermore mark, reader, that this counsel affirms, that wine is
mixed with water in the chalice at mass, by christ's teaching, as did Cypryan
before that time long, and yet there is no commandment in the scripture to
meddle wine with water at the mass, nor yet any one A truth not expressed in
scripture.
sentence to teach us that thing, and therefore they are far deceived (as I
said before) which defend that nothing pleases god, which is not
commanded in the scripture to be done (as Martyn Luther says) and that there
is no truth necessary to be believed of christen people, but that only, which
is expressly contained in scripture, the which how false it is, I will
declare in my book of traditions, which god willing, shall ^ book of
traditions.
be shortly put forth. But now to the counsel, which was holden at Nicea a
city in Bithinia the year of our lord. 327. which thus Canone. 18
says. Peruenit ad sanctum concilium, quod in locis quibusdam, and
ciuitatibus, ptesbyteris diaconi sacramenta porrigant. Hoc neque regula, neque
consuetudo tradidit, vt ij, qui offerendi sacrificij non habent potestatem,
ijs, qui offerunt, corpus Christi porrigant. It came to the holy counsel,
that in certain places and cities, the deaco^s do give to the preistes the
sacraments, which neither rule, nor custom, taught, that they which have
no power or authority to offer sacryfyce, should give Christ's body to them,
which do offer. Doeste thou not hear (good reader) that this holy general
counsel, which is one of the four, that saint Gregorye said he esteemed as
the four gospels, does affirm that the preistes do offer sacrifice, which
the deacons have none autoricie to do, because they are not preistes, and
therefore this was spoken of the sacrifice of the mass only, for all other
sacrifices the deacons may offer? Who will not rather give credence to this
counsel and so many learned men therein assembled, by the holy ghoost, as
saint Gregory Nazianzene Ieromes master says oratio^e.xviii, affirmynge thus
plainly the mass to be a sacrifice, rather then to Martyn Luther, with all
the rableme^t, of that sort, which having no ground to leave to, but
scripture wrested from the right meaning of it, into a wrong sense, do
affirm the contrary? Also the same counsel thus has again. Generaliter
autem cuilibet in exitu posito, and poscenti sibi communionis Cap. 13.
gratia^ tribui, episcopus probabiliter ex oblatione dare debebit. But y^
Bishop wisely ought to give to every man at his departing here hence, and
desiring the grace of co^munyon to be given him, the sacrifice. But now to
the first counsel of Ephesus, whereat saint Cyryll was, almost twelve
hundred years passed, with two hundred bishops assembled, which Iu epistola
ad Nestorium.
thus has. Nos annuntiantes morte^ fili dei, id est Jesus Christi, and
resurrectione^ eius, and in coelos ascensionem pariter confitentes incruenta^
celebramus in Ecclesiasticis sacrificijs seruitutem, sic etiam ad mysticas
benedictiones accedimus, and sanctificamur participes facti corporis, and
praeciosi sanguinis Christi, non vt communem carnem percipientes, quod absit,
nec vt viri sancti facti, and verbo coniu^cti, sicut dignitatis vnitatem, aut
sicut diuinam possidentes habitationem, sed vt vere viuificatricem, and ipsius
verbi propriam factam. That is. We declaringe the son of gods death, Jesus
Christ, and confessinge his resurrection, and also his assension, in to the
heavens, do celebrate a service, or an honouringe, vnblouddye, or without
blood sheddynge in the sacrifices of the church. Also we so come to the
mystical blessings (the consecration) and are hallowed, or made holy, or
clean, being made partakers of Christ's body, and preciouse blood, not
receauyng it as common flesh (which god forbydde) nor as of a man made holy,
and joined to the word, as a unity of dygnitie, or as possessyng a godly
habitation, but as flessh verelye geuyng life, and made propre to the word,
that is the son of god. Do thou not see here (good christen reader) that
this great counsel of two hundred bishops, among the which saint Cyrille
was head and chief, does call ye service done of the preistes at mass, a
service Observe this well reader.
vnbloudye in the sacrifices of the church? can that be otherwise taken, tha^
of the sacrifice of ye mass, wherein the preiste serves and honors god by
offering to him in sacryfice the very body and blood of his son Christ
Jesus without blood sheddynge, under the form of bread and wine? Heb. 9. and.
1^.
Christ on the cross ones offered him self a blouddye sacrifice to god for
our sins, and is not after that forte by his blood sheddyng offered in the
mass, because he can dye no moore, as Paul says to the Ramaynes the syxte
chapter, yet that notwythstandynge, Christ ones offered upon the cross is
daily offered at mass.
he is daily offered in the mass without blood sheddynge as this holy
counsel sayethe, and all the wrytters upon the scripture, both latins, and
greeks specially. This counsel moreover affyrmeth in their epistle sent to
Nestorius the heretic, that the worthy receauers of Christ's blessed The
mass is a sacryfyce propitiatorye.
body and blood are made holy, or clean thereby, and therefore the mass is
a sacryfyce not of praise only, but also of appeasynge gods wrath, and
purchasing to us cleannes, or holiness. Fynallye it is to be noted diligently,
that this great assemble of learned bishops calls Christ's flesh.
Viuificatricem, that is, the gyuer of life, and that which gives life to
them, which lefullye and purelye do receive it, the which declarethe, that
Christ saying, Caro non prodest quicquam, Io: 6.
the flesh profits nothing, did not mean that his flesh worthelye
received under form what christ meant saying the flesh profytethe nothing.
of bread in the holy Sacrament does profytte nothing, as the heretyques
do expound it, but that the Jews carnal understanding his words spoken of
the eating of his flessh, whereby they thought he mente they should eat it
raw, blouddy, or sodden, cut out in pieces, as meat is wont to be sold in
the shambelles, should profit nothing, as both Saint Austen and Cyryllus also
does expound that words of Christ in Johan, ye flesh profits nothing, or
else christ meant that his flesh of it self without the spirit joined to it,
and ye godhede, as the Jews believed it was not, but only the flesh of a
pure man, and not of him which was very god and man could profyt nothing, but A
book of the sacrament of the altar.
of this text I have spoken at large in my book of the sacrament of the altar,
therefore now I will passover it which I have touched by the way, taking an
occasion of this holy counsels words, affirmynge christ's blessed flesh,
being joined with the godhead, to give man life, when it is worthelye received
of him in the sacrament of the altar. Now to go forward, I will rehearse the
words of a counsel holden at Neoce^saria, Cano.vli.
which are these, Presbyteri ruris in ecclesia Ciuitatis episcopo praesente,
vel praesbyteris vrbis ipsius, offerre non possunt, nec panem sanctificatum
dare, calice^que porrigere. That is. Preistes of the country, or that dwell
out of the city, may not offer in ye church nor give the bread hallowed, and
the cup, the bishop being present, or the preistes of the same city.
Here is evident mention made of the preistes offering sacrifice under the
form of bread and also of wine contained in the chalice This has in few
words the counsel kept at Laodicea, a city The counsel kept at Laodice^.
in Asia, saying, Tunc Laici sibi tribuent, and ita sancta celebrabitur ob
latio. that is to wit. Than the lay men shall give to them self peace (by
kyssyng the paxe), and so the holy offeringe, or sacrifice shall be celebrate.
What man will, or can, if he would never so gladlye, deny that this was spoken
of the sacrifice of the mass? Seeing therefore, good reader, that not only
fygures of the old testament, the holy prophets, and diverse textes of the
new testamente with the expositions of the eldeste, and greateste learned
doctoures, but also these general counsayles, and diverse other, which were
led, and guided with CHRIST'S presence, and the holy ghostes alsoo, have
thus plainly, and strongelye set up, and establyshed the sacryfyce of the
mass, ageynste the which no man did speak, or write by the space of.xv.
hundred years, when Martyn Luther began to bark against it, as the dogs are
wont to bark at the light of the moon in the night, give thou rather
steadfast credence unto all those witnesses approuynge, yea proving the mass
to be a sacrifyce, than to Martyn Luther lutynge out of tewne. Now though
Luther Inteth out of tewne.
this which is already written in this book were enough, and sufficient,
too persuade every man, not wedded to his opinion, to believe that the mass is
a sacrifyce, appeasynge gods wrath toward man, yet to stop all bablers
mouths, I will goo further in this matter, and show what the holy apostelles
have done, touching this thing before whom CHRIST made his maundy, and to
whom he gave power, autoritye, and also commandment, to offer his body and
bloudde in sacryfyce, as he had done him self before, Luc. 2^: 1. Cor. 11.
saying to them. Hoc facite in meam co^memorationem. Do ye this in
remembrance of me. These disciples of Christ did make certain Canons, or
rules for the instruction of Christen people, the which saint Clement, the
apostle Paul's company on in preachinge the gospel, did gather together, and
put them in writing, as Damascene Lib. 4. ca. 18.
says, which did so greatly esteem, and regard the same rules, that he did
number, and rehearse them among the books of gods holy word, and therefore
their words ought to be without al dout believed. They thus write, Si quis
episcopusvel presbyter preter Canone. 3.
ordinatione^ domini, alia queda^ in sacrificio offerat super altar, id est,
aut mel, aut lac, aut pro vino siceram etc. contra co^stitutionem domini
facie^s, deponatur congruo tempore, If any bishop, or priest do offer upon
the altar in Note reader the holy apostles iudgemente^ in this matter
sacrifice certain other things beside over or above the lords ordinance,
that is to wit, either honey or milk, or instead of wine, drink made of corn
or fruits, doing against our lords ordinance, let him be deposed in a mete
time. Lo the holy apostles of Christ, which learned the gospel of him, and
reaceaued the holy ghost, the spirit of truth, teaching al troth The mass
is a sacryficeinstitute by Christ.
to them, do plainly affirm, that the mass said of the preiste, is a
sacrifice, of christ's own institution, and ordinance. Did not they know
the truth (supposest thou good reader) better the^ Martyn Luther or any of his
scoole? Hear what Tertulian wryt with in clxxx. years of christ saying
Tertul. de praescri.
Veritas illis adiudicanda est* qui in ea regula in cedunt, quam ecclesiae ab
apostolis, apostoli a Christo Christus a deo accepit. That is, the truth must
be adjudged to the^ which do walk in that rule, which the churches or
congregatio^s of the faithful, have received of the apostles, the apostles of
christ, Christ of God, but the churches did receive this doctrine,
concerning the sacrifice of the mass, of the apostelles, as Saint Ireneus
testyfyeth, whose words are Lib. 4. Ca. 32.
rehearsed before, and here the same does also appear playnelye by this canon,
or rule made of them, therefore the churches of Christ, have the truth on
their side, which do go in this the apostles cannon, or rule set forth for
that very same thing. But yet ones more let us se what the apostles have
said in this matter, which thus does speak. Si quis episcopus, Canone. 2.
aut presbyter, aut diaconus, aut quilibet ex sacer dotali catalogo, facta
oblatione non communicauerit, aut dicat causam, vt si fuerit rationabilis
ueniam consequatur, aut si non dixerit communione priuetur, tanquam quipopulo
causa laesionis extiterit, dans suspicionem de eo, qui sacrificanerit, quod non
recte obtulerit. That is in our englysh tongue. If any Bishop, or preiste,
or deacon, or who thou will of the number of preistes, or spirytuall men,
shall not receive his housle, when the sacryfyce is offered, either let him
tell the cause thereof, that if it be reasonable, he may get pardon, or if
he do not show the cause wherefore he did not receive his communion at mass,
let him not have his housell like as he, which gave an occasion of harm or
hurt to the people, geuyng to the^ a suspicion of him, which did offer
sacrifice yt he did not offer or make sacrifice well enough, or after a right
fasshyon. Hitherto the apostles of our savior christ in their book of canons,
or rules, whose words are so plain, and clear upon our side, against Marten
Luther, and his scholars, that nothing can be more plain. Therefore let Luther
go with his fond wicked, and dyuelly she heresye against the sacrifice of the
mass (good Christen reader) and follow christ's, and his holy apostles
Doctrine, so clearly making for this truth. Moreover. s. Audrew, one of the
apostels, did offer christ's Saint Andrewe at mass offered sacrifice.
body in sacrifice at his mass as he said him self to Aegeas the tyrant
Philaletus testifieng that wrytting the apostles lives, whose words are these.
Ego omnipotenti deo omni die sacrifico, non thuris fumum, nec hircorum, aut
tautorum sanguinem, sed immaculatum agnum quotidie in altari sacrifico. I do
(says he) make sacrifice every day to god almightye, not offering in sacrifice
smoke of Frankynsence, nor the blood of goats, or of bulls, but I offer in
sacrifice daily on the aultare the undefiled lamb. Be not these manifest
words, and enough to satisfye every man, being not over much given to the
blind error of Luther? Saint Clement, which S. Clement.
was a companion of Paul's in teaching the gospel of Christ used this form
(as Bassario testifies) when he did say mass Rogamus ut mittas domme
spiritum Basssario libri de sacramento altaris.
sanctum tuum super hoc sacrificiu^, qui efficiat hunc panem corpus Christi
tui, and quod in calice, est, sanguine^ filij tui. That is. We beseech the o
lord to send thy holy spirit upon this sacrifice, which may make this
bread the body Saint Clement Paul's companyon makes mention of the mass, as
we read in the.lxxiii. canon and therefore it is no new thing as Luther says
it is.
of thy christ, or anointed, and that thing which is in the cup or
chalyce, the blood of thy son. Here we se that saint Clement, which was
instructed by the apostels in Christ's faith, and religion, took the mass to
be a sacrifice. Whether is he more of credence or Martyn Luther? Now t^ make
ones an end of the proving the truth, I will rehearse the ancient doctors
sayenges in this matter and that done, I will answer to the scriptures
wrested from their true sense to the mayntenaunce of this heresy by Martyn
Luther and his scholars.

What the doctors have said in the matter of the sacrifice of the mass, here
it appears evidently, Interroga obsecro generationem pristinam and praeparate
ad inuestigatione^ yatrumtuoru^ Job. 8.
and also that we ought to believe them agremge together in any thing touching
our faith, for because than they err not.
THe scripture is very hard to be perceived, Ne transferas termin^s antiquos,
quos fecerunt patres. prou^. 23
as s. Peter says in his second epistle, though it seem or be judged never so
plain and easy to some men, which in very deed are not learned therein, and
therefore it is not conuement that every man do understand it, after his own
fancy, for that has been, and yet is, the cause of many errors, but we The
scripture is hard to be understand, and the true sense of it must be learned
of the holy doctors.
must leave, and cleave to the aunciente doctors expositions made, and
publisshed thereupon. For as god chose them to be doctors, and teachers of his
word, and gave to the^ his holy spirit (which now these days many do
arrogantly callenge but untruly) eue^ so they did spend their time whollye in
prayer, and studieng the scripture, that thereby they might atteyne the true
sense thereof. But ye will say to me, as many fond people are wont to say,
may not god now give to men the spirit of truth, as he did to the apostles, or
else to the doctors of the church? Is he not now both as strong, that he can
do it, and also as kind and liberal, that he will do it, as he was before our
time? To that blind reasons I answer that god can do it if he list, but he
can do many and sundry things, which he will never do. For he can make this
man a king, reysynge him (as Dauyd says) a poor man, from the donge hill,
and that man a bishop, which he will never do. The things which he does
are ever done in a semely order, as Paul affirms. Now an order Romans 13.
requires, that in Christ's church some should be teachers, and some learners,
some masters, and some scholars, as in man's body, to the which Paul
compared the 1. Cor. 12.
church, some members have one office, and workynge, and some an other, and
not all one office. The eyes do se, the ears hear, so the doctors seeing the
truth do teach, and the learners do hear their lessons. Therefore god made
not Saint James the third chapter exhorts men not to coue^te the office of a
teacher for the danger thereof, Math. 15.
all men indifferently doctors, as now men would be, foul deceauynge both
themselves, and also many other, while they being blind, do lead the blind,
and fall thereby both together in to the den of error, and damnacion, but
(as Paul says) he gave to the instructynge of his people some apostelles,
some prophettes, some euangelystes, some shepeherdes, and some doctors, and
therefore our savior said to his disciples: Vobis datu^ est nosse mysteriu^
regni dei. It is given, not to Luc. 8.
all men, but to you to know the mysteries or secrets of the scripture, the
knoweledge of the which is the keye of heaven gates. Did not god appoynte
Esdras to teach the law to the people, as we read in the scripture, which
says. Esdras interpretatus est eis verba legis. Esdras did expound to them
the words of the law. Paul wrotte his epystles to the bysshoppes, that they
should declare them to the people unlearned. All sorts of meats are not Vide
Gregoir Nazianze. in apologetico.
meet for all ages of folk. Milk is good for chylderne, stronger meats for
young lustye men, moyster meats are best for aged men, which are dry of
complexion, 1. Cor. 3.
in like manner all men are not apt and meet to seed on all the scripture
indyfferentlye, but Heb. 5.
those only, which have good wits and have spent their study therein by
gods calling. Now it is true, the moore pity, that Saint Hierome. writ in
an epistle to his friend Paulyne, complaining lamentably of the vnreuerent
handlynge of scripture. Hierom epistola. ^8: Saint Clement says the second
book to S. James, the law of god can not be understand without a teach^r. Note
good reader the vnreuerent handl^^g of scriptu^^,
Thus he says. The husband me^, mortar makers, smythes, cutters of wood,
woull men also, and fullers, and other diverse crafts me^, absque doctore esse
no^ possu^t, quod cupiunt, without a teacher can not be that which they
couette to be, that is, cunning in their crafts. Quod medicorum est,
promittu^^ medici, tractant fabrilia fabri. Sola scripturarum ar^ est, quam
omnes passim vendicant, hanc garrula anus, hanc del^rus senex, hanc sophista
verbosus, hanc vniuersi praesumunt, lacerant, docent, anteque discunt. In
english. The physicians do promise that, which does appertain to them, the
smythes or crafts men, which work with the hand, do handle, or exercise
things belonging to ha^dycraftes men or smythes. Only the crafts of
scripture is, which all men indifferently do claim, this the babbling old
wife, this the dotynge old man, this the sophister full of words, this all
men do arrogantlye take upon them to know, they rent it in pieces, or give to it
many wounds, they teach it before they learned it. This wrote saint Ierom
against men, and women of his time, which did arrogantly, and irreverently
handle gods holy word, but what would he now say (thinkeste thou good reader)
If he were living at this time, when men and women are in this matter so
fautye, as they never have been heretofore? would no^ he greatly lament, and
bewail this our wonderful blyndnes, and detestable presumption, whereby we
neither by shame, nor yet by fear do forbear to claim unto us the knowledge
of the scriptures, which we never studied, or else but very little, yea we
stycke not to callenge to us the holy ghost, the spirit of truth, co^paryng
our selves therein with the apostles of christ, which anon became teachers of
the gospel, being fyshers rude and unlearned a little before This Such
flattering preachers whom Saint Gragorye Nazianzene Ieroms master calls
euentriloquos that is speakers of the belie, beca^se in all their words may
provide for the b^lye.
is a strange fondnes, and a marvelous presumption, our lord amend it. Some
preachers have not ben ashamed in their sermons to bring the lay people into
this fools paradise, praysyng their cu^nyng in the scriptures, which they
never understood them selves, but they study to please their hearers and
saying their ears itche, they clawe them and with pleasant saienges they
deceive ye innoce^tes hearts. But I will recyte a little more of saint Ieroms
words out of the said epistle, which thus writes: Alij adducto supercilio
grandia verba trutinantes, inter mulier culas de sacris literis philosophantur.
Other wayenge, examinynge or iudgyng with a stately, or a lourynge countenance
great words, do reason like students of wisdom among women of the holy
scripture. Was this at any time truer (good reader) then it is even now in
our days? yet Jerome goth on saying. Alij discu^t (proh pudor) a faeminis quod
doce a^tviros, et ne paru^ hoc sit, qua da^ facilitate ^boru^ immo audacia
edisseru^t women do teach men, and men other that, which they understand not
them selves.
alijs, quod ipsi no^ intelligu^t. Other learn (alas for shame fastnes) of
women, yt which they should teach me^, and lest that might be a little, they
declare to other with a certain easynes, or lightenes of words, yea rather with
boldenes, or trusting well in them selves, that thing, which they them
selves understand not? Do not men even so now among us, whom women
arrogantelye do teach, and men also that thing which they do not perceive
them selves? Saint Gregory Ieroms master says, all such men are touched in
the common proverb, In dolio discere artem figuli, hoc est in periculo
animaru^ doctrinam discere pietatis. To learn a potters craft in a tun,
pype, butte, or a hogs head, that is, in the danger of souls to learn the
doctrine of the knowledge of god. Hitherto that saint, plainly reprouynge As I
of ke^t
many men of our time. Some women can say much of the scripture without the
book, but they understand almoost no word thereof. They are not ashamed (such
is their shameless pride, and impudent arroga^cy) to boast that they have
overcome, and confounded even the doctors of divinity by reasonynge in
scripture, when in deed they do but babble without lerning and all reason, if
they meet with any cunning man therein, which I my self have often times
proved true. Let the^ beware of gods curse, which he threteneth to all such
by his prophet. saying. Esa. 5.
Vae qui sapientes estis in oculis vestris, and cora^ vobismetipsis prudentes.
Cursed be you which are wise in your own sight, and polytike before your
own selves. Does not this gods curse touch them, which do think that their
wits. and learning does far excel As Lather ^oth, and his scholars.
the wits, and lerning of al y^ ancient writers, and do follow their own
fond fantasy, and leude dreams in construynge, and understanding gods
holy word rather the^ the old writers? Saint Basyle and saint Gregory Ieromes
master were not so proud, and arrogant as those now be. For they being very
excellently well learned in the tongues, in logic, thetorike, philosophy, and
diverse other sciences, sought the understanding of the scripture out of their
elders books, as the history Lib 1^. cap. 9*
of Eusebius does rehearse saying, They gave their study to holy scripture, not
following their own Scripture must be learned of the doctors.
presu^ptio^, but ye writings of their au^cetours, and their authority to
understand ye same, which it was evident to have reaceaued the rule to perceive
ye scripture of thapostels and their successors. Contrary to this men do in
these miserable days, of their own heads and wits, thinking to understand
gods word, as did the heretic Aetius, Triper. Histo. li. 5 Cap. 45.
saienge yt god had opened to him those things, which he hyd from his
apostels, as the story makes mention. Does not even so at this our time
Martin Luther, and his scholars, which deny the mass to be a sacrifice, when
the apostles taught the clean contrary, as I have before declared largely? S.
Dioni lib. de caelesti hierarchia. Ca. I,
Dionise Paul's scholar, teaches us an other lesson, how we should study
scripture, and whom we should follow in ye understanding of it, his words are
these. Ad sa^ctissimaru^ scripturaru^ intelligentias, prout illas a patribus
accepimus, contuendas pro viribus pergamus. Let us proceed to look on the
understanding of the most holy scriptures, according to our strength, or
power, as we have hard, or received of ye elders. Do we not here see, that
this father, which was a great philosopher, and very well learned in diverse
knowledges before he was converted by saint Paul, and was taught the faith by
him, would not presume to study the scripture without the doctors, and elders
books, which he studied to understand it? Therefore if thou will study ye
scripture to profyt therein read saint Austens books, saint Ieromes,
Chrisostoms, Ambroses Cyprians, and such other, which do sincerely, truly
and catholykely expownde the scriptures to the auauncinge of the truth, and the
thrustynge down of errors, and heresy. Preistes of Cesarea cappa docie
could not be persuaded to leave the faith, Q^ eis suffecerint ad vtilitatem
sui antiquae patrum narrationes, and velut quaedam turres murum fidei
indeclinabilem Triper. Histo. li. 7 Cap. ^6.
seruauerunt, Because the ancient expositions of the fathers sufficed them to
their proffitte, and did keep, like as certain towers, the wall of faith
upright. And where men say yt god is as lyberall now as he was in the apostles
time to them, and therefore he can give even now also the holy ghost to every
man, and woman, for the understanding of his word ye scripture. I grant
that god is now as lyberall in deed as he was tha^, but yet thereupon it
follows not that he does now give the spirit of knoweledge in the holy
scripture without all labor and why god did give to fysshers his holy spirit
to understand the scripture
study as he then did to his apostles, to confound the great clerks, and
learned men by the simple, and unlearned fysshers, and by there teaching to
convert to the faith the hole world, that thereby his almighty power might be
known, his blessed name glorified, and the virtue of his sons death christ
our savior esteemed y^ cause (as in deed it was) of that so great a miracle.
This, I say, was the cause why at the beginning of christ's religion and
faith, rude fysshers had given them such knoweledge in the scripture without
all labor, and study given to it of their parts. God the^ showed his great
lyberalytye, in feading five thousand men, beside women and children, with
five barley Io. 6.
loves, and two fysshes, as saint Johan testyfyeth, but shall we therefore look
for any like thing now in our days? Christ at that time did work diverse
miracles, which he works not at this time, nor never will hereafter. He is
therein like to one that plantethe young trees, or sets herbs, which while
they be tender, and young, not yet well rooted in the earth, he often
waters, but after they are grown up, and have taken well roots, than he
ceassethe waterynge them, so christ A similitude
our sauyoure, when he planted the faith at the first, did water it with
sundry, and diverse miracles, and when he saw it well, and surely rooted in
men's hearts, than he left waterynge it with miracles. Therefore let us not
look to receive the holy ghost to teach us the scryptures, and the
understanding of them without our study, and labor as the apostles ones
did by miracle, for the conversion of ye world to the faith, but let us
learn it of the holy doctors, and of the preistes, which are learned, and
whose office it is to teach the unlearned multitude, as witnesses the holy
prophet Malachias saying. Labia Malach. 2.
sacerdotis custodiunt scientiam, and legem requirent ex ore eius, quia angelus
domini exercituum est. That is. The preistes lyppes do keep cunning, and the
lay people shall often seek, or demand of his mouth the law, for as much as
he is the messanger of the lord of hosts, that is of angels, which are
called the hoostes of heaven. Aeto. 20. Heb. 13.
He is sent by gods assignement to teach the unlearned, and does take charge
of their souls, as the scripture in many places witnesses. Now I will show
the holy doctors minds in this our co^trouersye, sens we ought to follow
their judgment in the understanding of the scriptures, as I have now
declared, that by the^ we may perceive which doctrine is true, and catholic,
and which is false, and heretical. I will yet recite here but a certain of ye
most ancient, and eldest writers on the scripture, for the youngest almost The
old doctors sayeuges.
of the^ shall be about nine hundred years old, because men say that the
sacrifice of the mass was inverted of late, and set up by preistes
coueteousnes for lucre, that they may se their folly, and forsake it in time,
least it at the length (as it must neades) bring them to utter confusion, in
body, and soul. But to the rehearsal of the old writers in this matter,
among the which Theophilactus shall occupy the first place, saying: Quaere^
Theophilac. In Heb, 10
aliquis, number and ipsi sine sanguine immolamus? Ita quidem, sed Christi tunc
reminiscimur obitus, and vna nobis est immolatio, no^ multae, quandoquidem est
and ille semel oblatus, eundem enim semper offerimus, vnus est enim sanguis,
and semel effusus. Vnum est corpus no^ multa, quiuis fuerit pro multis oblatum,
and item vna est, quae offertur, hostia. Hanc namque semper ut praesentem
offerimus. That is. Some body will demand wether we do sacrifice without blood
or no? we do so surely, but then we remember Christ's death, and we have one
sacrifice, not many, for as much as Christ also has been ones offered in
sacryfyce, for we offer always the sam^, the blood is one, and shed ones.
The body is one, not many, though it bathe been offered up in sacryfyce for
many, and also the host is one, which is offered. For we always offer that
same as present, hitherto Theoph. No man can desire playner words than these
are, of this great clerk, to prove that the mass is a sacrifice. Rupert also
confirmethe this, saying. Quotidie in altari sancto Lib. 1. come^t. in Dani.
ca. 14.
oblationes eius, sacru^ celebramus mysteriu^. We do daiely celebrate in the
holy altar the holy mystery or sacrament, y^ sacrifices of christ, Fulgentius
which was above a M. years sense agrees with Fulgentius li. 2. ad Monimu^
this verity, saying. Dicis te a nonnullis i^terrogatu^ de sacrificio corporis
and sa^guinis chri, quod plerique soli patri existima^t immolari, cu^ ad patre^
lita^tis destinatur intentio, sacrificij munus omni trinitati, vno eode^que
offertur lita^tis officio. That is in our language. Thou sayeste, that you was
asked of some men of the sacrifice of the body and blood of christ, which
many do judge to be offered in sacrifice only to the father, when the intent
of him, which pleases god with sacrifice, is appointed to the father, the
gift of sacrifice is offered to the hole trinity, with one, and the same
office of him, which obtayneth his desire of god by sacrifice. Also he
aunsweringe to the third question proposed to him by his friend Monimus, says
thus. Thou do ask, if the sacrifice be offered to y^ whole trinity,
wherefore the sendynge only of the holy ghost is desired to sacrifice, or
consecrate y^ gift of our sacrifice? As verelye (that I so may say) god the
father him self, from whom the holy ghost proceeds, could not halow the
sacrifice offered to him, or the son himself could not make holy the
sacrifice of his body, the which he offered to raunsom us, or else that the
holy ghost should so be sent to consecrate the churches sacrifice, as the
father and ye son were not present, helpinge them, which do offer
sacrifice. At the length he concluding this matter thus writes. Quando au^t
congruentius ad consecrandum sacrificium corporis Christi sa^cta ecclesia (quae
est corpus eius) sancti spiritus deposcat aduentum? Aedificatio Mark this
reader.
spiritualis opportunius nunque petitur, qui cum ab ipso Christi corpore (quod
est ecclesia) in sacramento panis ac calicis ipsum Christi corpus and sanguis
offertur. Calix enim, quem bibimus, communicatio 1. Cor. 10.
sanguis Christi est, and panis, quem frangimns, participa^io corporis domini
est, vt ait apostolus. That is. But when may the holy church (which is
Christ's body) more conveniently ask the holy gostes coming to consecrate the
sacrifice of christ's body? A spiritual edifienge is never desired in duer
time, than when the same Christ's body and blood is offered in sacrifice, of
that his body (which is the church) in the sacrament of bread and wine. For
the cup of which we do drink, is 1. Cor. 10.
the communion of christ's blood and the bread, that we break, is the
partetakynge of our lords body. Hitherto this holy father Fulgentius, whole
words are as manyfeste for the sacryfice of the mass, as they can be,
therefore I will speak no more of them, but 1. Ambrose l0 1. offi. ca. 41:
rehearse saint Ambrose judgment, that was above eleven hundred years since,
which this has, rehersyng saint Laurences words spoken to Syxtus the
bishop, wha^ he was ladde to suffer martyrdom. Quo sacerdos sa^cte sine
diacono properas? Nu^que sacrificiu^ sine ministro offerre consueueras. Cui
co^misisti dn^ici corporis consecratione^, To. 2. li. 1. offi. cap. 41.
cui co^su^ma^doru^ co^sortiu^ sacrame^toru^, huic co^sortiu^ tui sa^gui nis
negas. Whither go you hastly o holy priest without a deaco^? Thou wast never
wont to offer sacrifice without a ministre. To whom thou have committed the
consecratynge of our lords body, and the fellowship of sacraments to be
acco^plisshed, to him thou deniest the fellowship of thy blood. Again in a
certain oration funeral of the death of valentynyane the emperor, thus he
speaks to Valentynyane, and To. 1:
Gratian. Nulla vos nox non donatos Prayers and the mass do avail the dead.
aliqua praecum mearum Co^textione transcurret, omnibus frequentabo
oblationibus. I will (says Ambrose) pray for you every night, I will
accustomelye offer sacryfyce for you. Also to one Faustine, over much
lamentyng his systers death, after many Lib. 2. epist. 8.
words spoken to comfort him, thus he writes, Itaque non tam deplorandam,
qui frequentandam orationibus reor. Nec maesticandam lachrymis tuis, sed magis
oblationibus animam eius deo commendandam arbitror. Therefore I think that she
ought not so much to be lamented as to be prayed for accustomedly. Neither I
think she should be made heuye with thy tears in wepinge, but rather her
soul to be commended to god with sacrifices. Are not these plain words to
testify the holy mass to be a sacrifice profitable for the Prayers and the
mass do avail the dead.
dead, and that also prayers of the^ which do live here, be auayleable for
them? beside this he says in an epistle to Theodosius the emperor, Lib. 5.
epist. 28
whom he had excommunicated for the murder done in Thessalia at his
commandment.

Ego causam co^tumaciae nulla^ in te habeo, sed habeo timoris, offerre no^
audeo sacrificiu^, si volueris assistere. I have no cause in ye of
disobedience, or froward will, but I have a cause of fear, for I dare not
offer sacrifice, if thou will be present: was not this meant of the
Excommunication once was regarded.
sacrifice of the mass, which saint Ambrose said he durst not offer if
Theodosius the emperor were in the temple, because he was excommunicate? The^
excommunication was feared of the highest estates, and the mass had in great
honor, as it ought in deed to be, though both of them now are little
regarded, the more is the pite. Ambros. Mar. lib. 5. epist. 5. Missam sacere
caepi, dumque offero, rapru^ cognouicastu lum. S. Austens sentences. lib, 2.
retract, Ca. 21,
But of saint Ambrose enough. Now saint Austen shall speak in this
controversy, whose learning far amou^teth and excels any man's, yt has been since y^ apostles time, especially in the holy scripture. He was above
eleven hundred years passed, which thus says. Hylarius quida^ laicus, nescio
unde aduersus dei ministros, vt fieri assolet, irritatus, morem, qui tu^e apud
carthaginem caeperat, vt hymni ad altar dicerentur de psalm morum libro, sieve
ante oblatione^, sieve cum distribueretur populo, quod fuisset oblatum, maledica
reprehensione lacerabat. That is. Hylarye a certain lay man, kendled wit
wrath, as it is wont to be, against gods mynysters, whereby I know not, did
break with cursed reprouynge the custom, which than began at the city
carthage, yt hymns should be said out of the book of psalms, at the altar,
either before the offering of sacrifice, or when that, which was offered,
should be dystributed to the people. Imprynte, good reader, these words
surely in thy mind, for they do plainly make for the defense of the sacrifice
of ye mass. But yet hear him again, affyrmynge that same thing more
plainly, with these few words. Augustinus. To. 2. epist, 23. Mark reader,
how Christ was ones ^ffred in sacrifice, and yet he is daily offered in the
mass
Nonne semel immolatus est christus in semeripso, and tamen in sacramento non
solum per omnes paschae solemnitates, sed omni die populis immolatur, nec
vtique mentitur, qui responderit eum immolari. Is not CHRIST ones offered up
a sacryfyce in him self, and that not wythstandynge he is offered in the
sacrament for the people, not only through all the feasts of easter, but also
every day, another truly he does lie, which aunswerethe, that he is offered in
sacrifice. Lo, good reader, this holy man, and excellent clerk, (with whom
Martyn Luther in learning and virtue can no better be compared, tha^ a snayle
with a hare in swiftnes) does plainly say, that christ is daily offered in
sacrifice, in the sacrament, though he was but ones offered in his own form
upon the cross, and therefore Luthers and his scolers argument, gathered out
of Paul to the Hebrews, the nynth and the tenth chapter making mention that
Christ was Note reder that christ is offered in sacrifice twyse, against
Luthers babli^g
ones offered, is clean wyppe away, and funde of no force, ne strength, as I
will hereafter more largely declare, god wylling. But saint Austen does this
again writ in this matter. Firmissime tene and nullatenus dubites vnigenitum
To, 3. de fide ad petrn^ca. 19
deum verbum carne^ factu^, se pro nobis obtulisse sacrificium and hostiam deo
in odorem suauitatis, cui cum patre, and spiritu sancto a patriarchis,
prophetis, and sacerdo tibus, tempore veteris testamenti animalia
sacrificaba^tur, and cui nu^c i. tempore noui testamenti, cum patre and spiritu
sancto, cu^ quibus illi est vna diuinitas, sacrificium panis and vini in fide
and charitate, sancta ecclesia catholica per vniuersum terrae orbem offerre no^
cessat. That is to wit. Hold thou most surely, and in no wise doubt, that
the only begotten son^e god, being made man offered him self for us a
sacrifice, and an host of sweet sauoure to god, to whom with y^ father, and
the holy ghost, beasts were offered in sacryfyce the time of the old
testamente, by the patriarchs, prophets, and preistes, and to whom now, that
is, in the time of the new testamente, with the father, and the holy ghost,
with the which he has one godheede, a sacrifice of bread, and wine the
holy church catholyqe ceasseth not to offer in faith and charity, through
the whole world. Also in another place he says. Huius sacrificij caro Lib.
20, ca: 21, Contra faustu^ Christ is daily offered i^ sacrifice, though he was
ones offered for all on the cross
and sanguis ante aduentum domini, per victimas similitudinum promittebatur, in
passione christi per ipsam veritatem reddebatur, post ascensionem Christi per
sacramentum celebratur. The flesh, and bloudde of this sacrifice was promised
before the lords coming, by beasts killed in sacryfyce of symylytudes, or
lykenesses, in y^ passion of christ it was given by y^ truth it self, after
christ's asce^sion it is celebrate by or in the sacrament. Does not saint
Austen here affirm that in the sacrament of the altar the Christ's very
flesh and blood are in the mass offered in sacrifice, and not a figure thereof.
flesh and blood of the sacrifice is even that self same, which was fygured
by the sacrifices of ye old testamente before the coming of Christ, and
offered upon the cross in the time of the passion, that like as in the time of
the old testamente, Christ's flesh and blood were offered in sacryfice by
symylytudes, so at the time of his death they were offered without figure, or
lykelenesse in his own form, and dayelye are in the Sacrament under the
form of bread and wine. Moreover the same Doctoure thus writes, Populus
christianus religiosa solemnitate memorias concelebrat martyrum, and ad
excitandam Lib. 20. ca. 21. Contra faustu^
imitationem, and vt meritis eorum consocietur, atque orationibus adiuuetur,
Ita tamen vt nulli martyrum, sed ipsi deo martyrum constituamus altaria, quiuis
in memorias martyrum. Quis enim antistitu^ in locis sanctorum corporum altari
assistens, aliquando dixit, offerimus tibi Petre, aut Paul, aut Cypriane? sed
quod offertur, deo, qui martyrs coronauit, offertur. This it is in englysh.
Christian people do celebrate the remembraunces of martyrs, with a godly, or a
devout solemniti, both to stir or The merit^s of martyrs and their prayers do
profytte the worshipers of them.
encourage men to follow them, and also ye by their merits they might be made
fellows with them in heaven, and helped with their prayers, yet so that we do
set up aulters to none of y^ martyrs, but Lege August: lib: 22. ca. 1^, De
Ciui dei
to god him self, although we do it for remembrance of the martyrs. For
which of the bishops being at the altar in the places of the saints
bodies, has said at any time. We do offer sacrifice to the O Peter, or
Paul, or Cypryane? But that which is offered in sacryfyce, is offered to GOD,
that has crowned the martyrs. No man could speak more playnelye against
three of Martyn Luthers heresies, then in these few words Saint Austen has
done, allowynge first that saints do pray Saints do pray for us Saints
merits do profytte us.
for us, and thereby we are helped Secondelye that their merytes do profytte
us, Thyrdely that the bishop at the altar does offer sacryfyce to god, the
which in an other place of his works he he affyrmeth to be done by good
authority, that is of the gospel which tells that Christ at his last supper
offered his body in sacrifice, for these are his words. Augustinus lib: ^,
ca. 20: De trinitate.
Infantes non nouerunt quod in altari ponitur, and peracta pietatis
celebratione, consumitur, vnde vel quo modo conficiatur, vnde in usu^ Consumed
therefore the bread after the consecration remains not as Frith would it should.
religionis assumitur. Children, which can not yet speak, know not what
thing is put upon the altar, and is consumed when the consecration is
perfetlye done, whense or how it is made or consecrated, of what it is taken
in to use of relygyon. It folowethe in that place of saint Augustyne. Et si
nunquam discant experimento suo, vel aliorum, and nunquam illam reru^ specie^
videant, nisi inter celebrationes sacramentorum, cum offertur, and datur,
dicaturque illis autoritate grauissima, cuius Math. 26,
corpus and sanguis sit, nihil aliud credent, nisi omnino in illa specie
dominum apparuisse oculis mortalium, and de latere tali percusso. liquorem
illum omnino fluxisse. Although they never learn by their own experience, or
other men's, and they never see that kind of things, except it be among
the celebratyons of Sacraments when the sacryfyce is made, and given, and
said to them with greateste autorytye, whose body and blood it should be,
they will believe nothing else, but that our lord has appeared in that
form to the eyes of men, and that lycoure to have run out of such a side
streken. This saint Augustyne. Again in an othere book this he writ. De
ciui dei. li. 10. cap. 20. Christ does offer him self at the mass, and he is
the sacrifice therein offered.
Per hoc and sacerdos est offerens, and ipse oblatio. Cuius rei sacramentu^
quotidianum esse voluit ecclesiae sacrificium, cu^ ipsius corporis sit ipse
caput, and ipsius ipsa sit. corpus, tam ipsa per ipsum, qui ipse per ipsa^
suetus offerri. That is thus much in english. By that both he is a priest
offering sacrifice, and he is the sacrifice. A sacrament of the which
thing, he would, should be the daily sacrifice of the church: For asmoche as
he is the head of that body the church, and the church is his body, as
well the church by Christ, as Christ by the church is wont to be offered: This
saint Austen: Now I beseech the, good reader, what do thou call the daily
sacrifice of y^ church, but ye sacrifice of christ's body and blood, accustomed
dayelye in the mass, to be offered of the priest? Wherein is Christ wont to be
offered in sacrifice by the church, except it be in the mass? What man,
except he be very affectionate, and blind will not rather give credence to
this great clerk sait Austen, tha^ to Luter, or any other taught in his
schole? But of this holy doctors sentences written in this matter, the
learned may read much more in his books, which I do pass over, lest my
book should be S. Hierome aduersus lucif^riano^. To. 2.
to long, and tedious, Therefore I will go to saint Jerome, which confirms
this truth, sainge, while he shows that a priest is the salt of the earth.
Sacerdos quippe prolaico offert oblatione^ sua^. For as much as the priest
offere the his offering or sacrifice for the lay man. Does not here saint
Ierom affirm that the preiste offers at the mass sacrifice for the lay man?
Estesones he says. Nec moses dedit vobis panem verum, sed dominus Quaest ^^,
ad ^^edibiam. Christ is eaten in the sacrament of the altar, and his bloudde
drunken.
Jesus, ipse conuiua and conniuium, ipse commedens and qui commeditur, illius
bibimus sanguinem, and sine eo potare non possumns, and quotidie in sacrificijs
eius de genimine vitis verae, and uineae sorec, quae interpretatur electa,
rubentia musta calcamus, and nouum ex his vinum bibimus de regno patris. Moses
has not given to you very bread, but our lord Jesus, he is the gueste, and
the feast, he is that eatethe, and which is eaten, we do drink his blood,
and without him we cannot drink, and we daily tread or press down in his
sacryfyces new red wine of the true vynes, and the choosen vyneyardes
generatyon, and we drink of these, new wine of the fathers kyngedome.

This sentence of Saint Hierome manyfestely makethe both for the presence of
CHRIST him self in the holy Sacrament of the altar, because it sayethe
that CHRIST him self is the feast, he that is eaten, and we drink his
bloudde, and also for the sacryfyce of the mass, wherein the same CHRIST is
offered in sacryfyce.

I let pass many other textes, of this holy Doctoure, and go to the
rehearsal of other men's sayenges, among the which Damascene thus
speakethe. Damas. l^b. 4. ca. 14.
Etsi quidam exemplaria corporis and sanguinis domini, panem and vinum
vocauerunt, vt deifer vocauit BASILIVS non tamen, post sanctificationem dixit,
sed pri usque sanctificaretur ipsa oblatio, ita vocabant. That is. Albeit
certain men have called the bread and wine samples of our lords body, and
blood, as the godly Basyll has called them, yet he called the^ not that
after the halowynge, or consecration, but before the sacrifice was hallowed, or
consecrated, so they did call them. This Damascene wrote above eleven hundred
years passed before this our time. In the which belefe was also Gregorius
Nazian. in apologetico.
saint Gregory Ieronis master, which wrote this, almost twelfe hundred years
since Sciens quonia^ nemo dignus est summi dei sacerdos esse, vel sacrificium
offerre, qui non prius exhibuit se hostiam viuam, deo placentem etc. Knowing
that no man is meet, or apt to be a preiste of god the highest, or to offer
sacrifice, which has not set abroad him self (by virtuous living, and
mortifieng his lusts) a quycke host, pleasynge god, and so forth as Paul
writes to the Romans. Furthermore writynge of preistes dignity Romans 12.
he thus says. O sacrificia mittentes incruenta sacerdotes. O anim arum
custodes magnifici. O magnum figmnetum dei manibus In uersibus:
in vestris ferentes. O preistes (says Gregory Nazianzene) sendynge, or
geuynge sacrifices vnblouddy. O the kepers of souls, which do great things.
O ye that bear in your hands the great workman ship of God. What is to
send or give sacrifices without blood sheddynge in this saying, good reader,
but to offer in sacrifice at the mass the very body, and blood of Christ,
discipulis suis offerendam, quamque modo conficiunt sacerdotes. Nihil habet
ista, quam illa minus, quia hanc non sanctificant homines, sed Christus, qui
illam sacrauerat. Vt enim verba, quae locutus est Christus, eadem sunt, quae
nuc quoque socerdos pronuntiat, ita eadem est, quae tune fuit, hostia. In
englisshe. This holy sacrifice whether Peter do offer it, or Paul, or else a
priest of what merit in living so ever he be, is ye same, that our lord gave
his dyscyples to be Luc. 22,
offered, and that now the preistes do make or consecrate. This has nothing
less than that, because men do not halow this but Christ, which had hallowed
that. For as the words, (which Christ spoke at his last supper) be ye same,
which now the priest also does pronounce, likewise the host or sacrifice is
the same, which was than. There was never man, that set out better and more
plainly the blessed sacrifice of the mass, than this holy man Chrysostom
has done above eleven hundred years passed. would god these his words were
learned and kept of al men, in a fast and sure remembrance, without all
doutyng in the veryte of them. Note, good reader well, what lessons here are
given to us of this ancient and excellent doctoure. First he says, that the
sacrifice, which Peter or Paul has offered, or now any preiste does
offer, what so ever he be, good or ill in his life, is none other but ye same,
which Christ gave his apostles to offer, undoubtedly at his last supper,
after he had turned bread and wine into his own very body and blood, and
offered them in sacrifice to his father For then he gave them autorite to do
that very same, which he had before done saying, Hoc facite in mei
commemorationem, Do ye this in remembrance of Luc. 22.
me. Secondly he says that the sacrifice, which now prestes do offer at mass,
is the same host (having nothing less than that had) which Christ gave his
apostels to offer because men do not halowe, or consecrate it, but Christ,
(that did consecrate that given to his discyples to offer) and that by reason
the words which a preiste says at mass, are the self same, which Christ
spoke at his maundy, consecratinge and offeringe his body and blood. Thus it
appears that the learning of the sacryfice of the mass is not new nor of
late invented, though one Vrbanus Regius in his ungodly book (called the
comparison between the old learning, and the new) does impudently without
learning (eytheir old or new, that good is) affirm, Vrbanu^ Regius book
translated out of Lati^ into english by wyllyam Turner is full of heresy
that it is, as herafter I will by gods grace declare. But now ones again to
saint Chrysostom, lettynge pass this heretical book of Regius (set forth
in latin by him, and translated into english by one wyllyam Turner) Papae
(inquit Chriso. homilia de enceniis
Chrisost) mensa mysterijs instructa est, agnus dei pro te immolatur, sacerdos
pro te angitur, seraphin asta^t, omnesque incorporeae virtutes pro te cum
sacerdote intercedunt, sanguis in cratere in tuam purificationem, ex immaculato
latere haustus est, and non crubescis neque propitium tibi facis de um? That is
to wit. The table is furnysshed with things secret, or hyd in words, or
ceremonies, The mass is a sacrifice propitiatorye, and profitable not only to
the sa^er of it, but to other also.
the lamb of god is offered in sacrifice for the, the priest is in an anguish
for the, the angels called Seraphim are present, and all powers having no
bodies, do pray, and make intercession for the with the priest, the blood in
the cup is drawn out of the immaculate side for thy purgynge, and art not
thou ashamed, nor doeste make god mercyful to the? O lord how manyfeste are
these words, both to prove the very presence of Christ in the sacrament of
thaulter, and also the mass to be a sacrifice, The mass is a sacrifice
propitiatorye.
not of laud, and thanks geuynge to god only, but also appeasinge gods
wrath and dyspleasure conceived against us for sin? The which he affirmethe
in sundry places of his works, of the which I will allege yet some, because
no man wrote so well and plainly in this matter, as he did? This he says ones
again. Cum astat pontifex, is preces diuturnas fundit, quo gratia in
sacrificium influat. When the bishop is present, he prays long
continuynge, that grace may run in Chrisostom in missasua.
to the sacrifice. To be short Chrysostom in his mass says, recytynge, the
prayer, which the priest than did use to say before he went in to the place,
where he should offer sacrifice, saying mass. Domine deus noster emitte manum
tua^ de sancto habitaculo tuo, and corrobora me ad propositum ministeriun tuum,
vt citra condemnation em assistam metuendo altari tuo and immaculatum peragam
sacrificium. Sacrifica domine agnum, Immolatur agnus dei, qui tol lit peccata
mundi, That is. Send o lord our god thy hand (that is thy power) from thy
holy mansio^, and make me strong to this service set forth, that I may be
present Mark reader.
at the dreadefull altar with out damnation, make perfyt this clean
sacryfyce. O lord sacryfice thou the lamb. The lamb of god Luc. 22.
which takes away the sins of the world, is offered in sacrifice. Also he
says. Domine sacrificiorum ritum instituisti, ac solemnis huius, and
immaculati sacrificij celebrationem nobis tradidisti, tanque, Christ did
ordeyne the accustomed mauer of sacrifice doi^g and not any preiste upon
covetousness
dominus omnium. Thou (o lord) have begone, taught, or ordained the approved
custom of sacrifices, and haste delivered to us the celebration of this
annual, or year ly, and undefiled sacrifice, as the lord of all things: does
not this doctoure affirm that Christ did institute, and ordeyne the usage
approved in making of sacrifices, and taught the apostles to offer him self a
sacrifice pure without spotte of sin? It is therefore a great blasphemye to
god, and a reproach to CHRIST our savior, to ascribe this his deed and
ordinance to any man, Cease therefore that leude saying, which turns to no
lyttel derogatio^ of god des honor. Believe this and other ancient writers,
which do with one assente confess that the sacryfyce of the mass is of our
saviors setting up and teaching. Which Eusebius thus Eusebius lib. ^. de
euangel. de monst. ca. 10.
confyrmethe, after many words. spooken of this matter. Christus post omnia
quasi mirabilem quandam victimam, sacrificiu^ qui eximiu^ deo patri operatus,
pro nostra omniu^ salute obtulit, eiusque rei memoriam, ut nos ipsi deo pro
sacrificio offerremus, instituit. Christ after all things, when he had wrought
a certain marvelous host, and a very great, or excellent sacrifice, he
offered it to god for all our helthes, and he has ordained, that we our
selves should offer to god for a sacrifice the remembrance of the samething
Gregorius Emissenus, which was G. Emissenus. Anno. d. ^00.
above twelfe hundred years before this time, after this sort, writes upon
this matter, Quia corpus assumptum erat ablaturus ab oculis nostris, and
syderibus illaturus, necessarium erat, ut nobis in hac die sacramentum corporis
and sanguinis co^secraret, ut coleretur iugitet per mysterium, quod semel
offerebatur in praecium, ut quia quotidiana currebat, and in defessa pro
hominu^ salute redemptio, perpetua etiam esset redemptionis oblatio, and
perennis illa victima viueret in memoria, and semper praesens esset in gratia.
That is to wit. Because Christ would take away the body, which he took to
him, from Christ ones offered in sacrifice, on the cross is d^yly offered in the
mass and worshipped.
our sight, and bring it in to heaven, it was necessary that he should this
time consecrate to us the sacrament of his body and blood that the thing,
which was ones offered for the price of our raunso^, should be always
worshypped by a mystery, or a sacrament, that because a daily, and a
continual redemption for man's health did run, a continual also sacrifice
of the raunsom should be, and that ever endurynge sacrifice should be had in
memory, and should be always present in grace and autorytie, What may be
said more plainly for our purpose? This saint Cyprian, of whom I have much
spoken already, (being within two hundred and, lix. years of Christ's birth)
manifestly does Cyprianus de caena do.
confirm saying. Perpes est hoc sacrificium, and semper permanens holo
caustum, nulla panem hunc multitudo consumit, nulla antiquitate veterascit,
This sacrifice is perpetual, and ever abydyng, no multitude of people consume
the this bread, it waxes old with no au^cientie. Origene also being.xxx
Origenes li.i. in Job.
years before him, (that is within two hundred, and, xxv. years of Christ's
birth) does openly affirm the mass, to be a sacrifice saying. Probet seipsum
Homo.i. munde^ seipsum, and ita de mundissimis domini sacrificijs frueatur, vt
apostolus ait. Let a man (says Origin) prove him self, that is to say, let
him make him self clean, and so let him use with delectation, and profytte
the most clean sacrifices of our lord, Lo this old doctoure says, that
the Sacrament of the altar is a sacryfyce, which Paul exhorted the people to
eat, after they had proved, and made clean them selves, through penance
from their sins, so that after his judgment, Saint Paul understood
Christ's words spooken at his maundye (which he there to the Corinthyans the
eleventh chapter of the first epistle, recytethe) to be spoken of his blessed
bodies sacrifice. Ireneus likewise writ thus upon the same matter before
Origin twenty years. Quomodo Ire. li. 4. ca. ^4.
autem dicu^t carne^ in corruptione^ deuenire, and no^ percipere vita^, quae a
corpore domini, and sanguine alitur? Ergo aut sententiam mutent, aut ab
offere^do abstinea^t, quae prae We eat and drink christ's flesh and blood
in the sacrament and they are offered at mass in, sacrifice.
dicta funt. Nostra autem conson a^s est sententia eucharistiae, and
eucharistia rursus confirmat sententiam nostram. Which is thus much in our
speech. But how say they that the flesh goes to corrupcion and receives
not life, which is fed with the body and blood of our lord? Therefore
let them either change their opinion, or forbear offering in sacrifice the
things, which are spoken of before, the very body and blood of our lord. Our
judgment, or opinion is agreinge, with the sacrament of the altar, and the
sacrament again does confyrme our opinion What man is he, except he be past
shame, yea very blind, or malicious against the truth, that will or can deny
this old and godly martyrs saienge, to be enough for the establyshynge of the
sacrifice of ye mass, for as much as he learned y^ scripture of them which
were the apostles scholars, as saint Polycarpe Ihon the euangelystes disciple,
and such other? He goethe forth and says thus. Offerimus ei quae sunt eius,
congruenter communicationem, and vnitatem praedicantes carnis and spiritus.
Quemadmodum enim qui est e terra panis, percipiens uocatione^ dei, iam non
co^munis panis est, sed eucharistia, ex duabus constans rebus, terrena and
caelesti: sic and corpora nostra percipientia eucharistiam, iam non sunt
corruptibilia, spem resurrectiouis habentia. We offer to him in sacrifice those
things, which are his, publysshynge, or openly declarynge accordynglye the
partakinge together, and unite of the flesh, and the spirit. For like as the
bread, which is of the earth, perceiving, or taking the calling of god, is
not now commune bread, but the sacrament or the body of Christ consistinge
in two things, the one erthly, and the other heavenly, so also our bodies
receyuinge the sacrament of the altar, are not now apt to corruption, having
hope of risinge again. Hitherto S. Ireneus. Tertuliane (which was about a C.
and.lxxx Tertulian li, de exhorta castitatis.
years after Christ's passion) writ in this matter, for my purpose saying.
Differentiam constituit, ecclesiae autoritas inter plebem and ordinem. Et
sacerdos offert and tingit. The authority (he says) of the church has
ordained a difference between the lay people, and them which has taken
ordres. And the preiste offers sacrifice, and baptiseth. Loo here two offices
of a preiste, to do sacrifice at mass, (for noone other sacrifice is propre to
a preiste) and to deep children in the founte. Anacletus, which was Anacletus
be epist. ecclesia*
with in.c. and.ii. years of christ's birth, does confirm this marter saying.
Diaconi co^stituti sunt, utessent ab oculis episcoporum, quibus hoc praecipuum
curae erat, ut sacris induti vestibus, episcopum ad altar ducerent, and
reducerent, eumque sacrificantem, velut ex cubitores ob seruarent, ne
maleuolorum in cursione sacra turbarentur. That is, Deacons are ordained, that
they should be to the bishops as spectacles, or to se for the^, the which had
this as chief charge, or whose labor was chiefly, that they having on ye holy
vestures should bring ye bishop to thaulter, and from it again, and alsoo as
watch men, take good head on him offering sacrifice, lest ye holy things
(which are in the mass) should be troubled by invasion of malycyous, or ill
wylled persons. With this accords Euaristus being within Euaristus ad
aphricanam ecclesiam.
ten years after him, saienge. Ea tantum matrimonia rata habeantur, quae test
populo solemni rituperacta fuerint, and sacerdotis oblatione firmata. Let
only those marriages be counted stablyshed, the which were finisshed with a
solemn, or an accustomed manner, ye people bearyng witness, and were also
assured with the preistes sacrifice. Is not this spoken of the sacrifice of the
mass? Are not they The mass is a sacrifice not newlye invented as heretics
say it is.
shameless, which do say that the mass was of late invented by preistes, for
their own lucre, and vau^tage, and set up by them for a sacrifice to get
pence with? But I will go forward to the martyr s. Alexanders sentence, which
is this (written above.xiiii. hundred years Alexander sanctissimus. Martyr
uixit. ^^no d. 119*
before our days) In sacramentoru^ oblationibus, quae inter missarum solemnia
domino offeruntur, passio domini misce^da est, vt eius, cuius corpus and
sanguis conficitur, celebretur passio. Crimina enim atque peccata, oblatis his
domino sacrificijs, delentur. Idcirco and passio eius in his commemora^da est,
qua redempti sumus, and saepius recitan da, atque domino offerenda. Talibus
hostijs delectabitur, atque placabitur dominus, and peccata dimittet inge^tia.
Nihil enim in sacrificijs maius esse potest, qui corpus and sanguis christi.
Neculla oblatio hac po^ior est, sed haec omnes praecellit, quae pura
conscientia domino offerenda est, and pura mente sumenda, atque ab omnibus
veneranda. Et sicut potior est caeteris, ita potius excoli, atque uenerari
debet. Hec ille. The english may be this. In the oblations of the sacraments,
which are offered to our lord among the solemnities of the masses, our
lords passion must be meddled, that his passion, (whose body, and blood is
made) may be celebrate or had in remembrance. And there fore it was not so
ones offered on the cross that it cannot ne ought to be offered in the mass
daily, albeit Luther is of that opion as his scholars be.
For crimes, and sins are put away, through these sacrifices offered to
our lord. Therefore his passion also in these must be remembered, with the
which we are ransomed, or redeemed, and it must be oftentimes rehearsed. The
mas is a sacrifice appeasinge gods wrath and purchasing to us remission of
our sins
and offered to our lord. For he will be delyted, and appeased, or pacified with
such sacrifices, and will forgive great sins by the^. For in sacrifices
nothing can be greatter then the body and blood of christ. Neither there is
any sacrifice better the this, but this excels all, which must be offered
to our lord with a clean The blessed sacrament ought to be worshipped and
honored of christen people though Luther and Frith denied it.
conscience, and received with a pure mind, and worshypped of all men and
women. And as it is better the^ other sacritices, so it ought to be rather had
in reverence, and worshipped. Hitherto that blessed martyr saint Alexander,
whose saying should the rather be believed, because he was within a hundred, and
twentye years of Christ, and a man of high perfection in his life, and
notably learned also. This saying of this blessed au^cie^t martyr, ought to be
believed of every christian man, without suspision of deceyt, and colouringe of
this doctrine for lucre or gains, Now, good reader, I have almost fully
declared by y^ rehersall of the eldeste doctors of christ's church, from
whense, and whom, this doctrine of the mass, and the sacrifice thereof, has
come to us, that is to wit, even from Christ him self at his last supper
institutinge and orderinge them both, and that ye church was taught the same
by his holy apostels and their successors, and observed it L^terluteth out of
tune against the mass
continually no man again saying it, till Martyn Luther began, upon mere
malice, to lute against it with his stringes far out of V^banus Regius
tune, and therefore Vrbanus Regius ought to be ashamed to call Ignatius saint
John the euangelystes disciple spoke of the mass and the sacrifice of it in
his epistle to the Smyrnenses, and there fore neither of the^ is lately invented
though Luther and his scholars say other wise.
this the new learning, being above.xv. hundred years old. But Ignatius
(saint John euangelystes scholar) does after this manner write of this
sacryfyce. Nemo preter episcopum aliquid agat eorum, quae ad ecclesiam
pertine^t. Firma eucharistia reputatur quae ab episcopo concessa fuerit,
Christus est dispensator totius intelligibilis naturae, propterea non licet
sine episcopo, neque offerre, neque sacrificium immolare, neque missas
celebrare. No man can do any of those things, which do perteyne to the
church; against the bishops mind, or otherwise then he will it should be
done. Let the sacrament of the altar be accounted of strength, or assured,
which shall be granted of the bishop, Christ is the steward, or dispenser,
of the hole nature, which may be understand. Therefore it is not lefull to
offer, nor to make sacrifice, nor to say masses without a bishop, that is,
without the consent, and authority of him. Loo good christian reader, this
holy martyr saint John's disciple does thus manifestelye speak, both of the
mass, and also of the sacrifice of it which he learned of his master Ihon ye
was taught, and instructed by our savior christ at his last supper both ye
mass, and the sacrifice of ye same. S. Clement saying mass S. Clement the
apostle Paul's co^panyon in preaching sp^a^ethe of the sacrifice of the mass
it is therefore no new thing invented for lucre of preistes.
(as Bassario cardinal of Nicea says writing upon the sacrament of y^ altar)
was wo^t to use this form of praieng. Rogamus dn^e vt mittas spu^m sa^ctu^
tuu^ super hoc sacrificiu^ qui efficiat hu^c pane^ corpus chri tui, and quoth in
calice est, sa^guine^ filij tui. That is to say in englysh. We beseech ye, o
lord, to send thy holy ghost upon this sacrifice, which should make this
bread the body of thy christ, and also yt, which is in ye cup, ye blood of
thy son^e. Again in the third epistle to s. James, thus he says. While we
live here we must know where is the place to offer sacrifice. Qm^ in alijs
locis sacrificare, and missas celebrare no^ licet, nisi in ijs, in quibus
episcopus proprius iusserit, aut ab episcopo regulariter ordinato, tene^te
videlicet ciuitate^, co^secratus fuerit. Aliter enim no^ su^t h^c age^da, nec
rite celebra^da doce^te nos nouo, and ueteri restame^to, Haec apostoli a dn^o
acceperu^t, and nobis tradideru^t, haec nos do cemus. That is, forasmuch as it
is not leful to offer sacrifice, and say masses in other places, but in those,
in which ye propre bishop has, or shall commau^d, or in that, which has been
or shall be hallowed of the bishop, ordered after ye rule, as who says
possessinge the city. For these things ought not to be done otherwise, nor
well (after the manner used) they are otherwise to be celebrate, ye new and the
old testament teachi^g us. Thapostles hard or received these things of our
lord, and taught the^ us, or left the^ to us by tradition, which we teach:
and command to be done of other men without reprofe, as it follows
immediately, Lo good christen reader, this holy doctoure S. Paul's companyon,
in preaching does plainly make mention both of the mass, and also of the
sacrifice of it, affirmyng that Christ taught his apostles, and they us, that
sacrifice should be offered only in places assigned by the bishop, or in a
place consecrated by him which is propre bishop of the city. This does
euidentlye prove that Christ also taught his apostles the mass, and the
sacrifice of it, and that they taught the church and congregation of the
faithful people the same lesson, which has ever since remained, and shall
always till the worlds end, among all true and catholyque nations, although
diverse men do babble, and bark against it never so much, for the truth of
our lord abides for ever, as Dauyd says, and Christ sent to the church the
spirit of truth to abide with it co^tinuallye, that it should not err in the
faith, beware therefore reader of Luthers pestilent doctrine which teaches
against the premysses. But to be short, s. Dionise Dionistus De ecclesibierar.
Ca, ^.
the holy apostle Paul's scholar converted by him, (which was before Christ's
passion, a famous philosopher) does call the sacrament of the altar, hostiam
hostiarum, the host of hosts, or the sacrifice of sacrifices, saienge
moreover Ferme non reperitur sacerdotalis muneris mysterium peragi, quod non
compleatur in consummatione diuinissimae, eucharistiae, ad vna^ perficiente
sacrificio collectione^. The mysterye, or secret of a preistes office is
welnygh not found to be made perfect or done thoroughly, which should not be
finisshed in the perfourmynge of the sacramant of the altar most divine, or
perteynyng to god, while the sacrifice does accomplysshe, or bring to a point,
men to one gatherynge together. Do thou not se, christian reader, that this
holy man, saint Paul's disciple, calls the blessed sacrament of the altar,
most divine, godly or pertaining unto god, and yet men of our days are not
ashamed to call it an ydol? Also this aunciente father calls the mass a
sacrifice, and that also which makes ye people, for whom it is offered, and
which do worthily receive it, one together in christ through perfect charity
and concord. Wherefore every good christian man ought rather to give credence to
this doctors judgment, and al ye other rehearsed before in this book than to
one Martyn Luther, and his sect, or folowers: But now I will show what the
same writers (or at the least some of them) say concerning that point,
which is now most among men in controversy, that is, whether ye mass be a
sacrifice propitiatory, or appeasynge gods wrath against sins, and
making him merciful to us, so that it be auayleable, and profitable, both
for the quick and the dead, or no. That it is so, this chapter next here
ensuynge shall prove sufficiently, to persuade all them (which are blinded
with affection, toward the contrary opinion) to believe no less undoubtedly,
and stedfastlye.

That the mass avails both the quyck and the dead, for the appeasynge of
gods dyspleasure taken for sin, and the purchasing of his mercy also.
Saint Austen makes mention of a August, de eiui. dei. lib. xx. cap. 8.
wonderful miracle, which was done by a preistes prayers, and mass. Wherebye
we may perceive, of what great force and strength ye mass is, and therefore I
will recite his words briefly, which are even these. Vir Tribunitius, qui
apud nos est, habet in territorio Fussale^si fundu^ cubedi appellatnm, vbi cum
afflictione animalium, and seruorum suorum, domum suam spirituum malignorum vim
noxiam perpeti co^perisset, rogauit nostros, me absente, presbyteros, vt
aliquis eorum illo pergeret, cuius orationibus cederent, perrexit vnus, obtulit
ibi sacrificium corporis christi, orans quantu^ potuit, vt cessaret illa
vexatio, deo protinus miserante cessauit. That is to say. A man bearing the
tribunes office at Rome (whereby he had chief jurisdiction amenge the commons)
which is with us, has in a territory, or a countreye of fussalence, a soyls
named cubedi, where, after he perceived by experience, through the tormentynge
of his beasts, and servants, that his house suffered violence hurtefull, of
the ill spirits, he beseched our preistes, wha^ I was absente, that some of
them A great miracle wrought of god by the mass.
would go thither, by whose prayers they should depart thence. One went, he
offered there the sacrifice of Christ's body, prayenge as much as he could,
that that vexation should cease, without taryenge it ceased god having
pity. Does not this place prove the mass to be a sacrifice propitiatorye,
sithe by the offering of Christ's body in sacryfyce at it, gods wrath
toward this man, To. Io. ser. 28 de uerbis d^ secundii Lucam
and his servants conceived for their sins (whereby the deuell had such
power on them) was pacified, and appeased? Again saint Austen thus writes,
after many words spoken of the sacrament of the altar. Tu audis, quod
quotienscumque offertur sacrificium, mors domini, resurrectio, and eleuatio 1.
Cor. 11.
eius significe^tur, and remissio peccatorum, and panem istum vitae nostrae
quotidianum non assumis? Qui vulnus habet, medicina^ Note this reader.
requirit. Vulnus est, quia sub peccato sumus. Medicina est, caeleste et
venerabile sacramentum. Hactenus ille. In english this it is. Thou do
hear, that as often as the sacryfyce is offered, our lords death,
ressurection, and lyftynge up of him on ye cross, are signified and
represented, and also forgyuenes of sins, and do not thou receive this
daily bread of our life? He, which has a wound, does seek often a
medicine. The wound is, for as much as we be under sin, the honorable and
Christ's body in the sacrament is honorable against Luther and Ihon Fryth.
heavenly sacrament is the medicine. Nothing can be moore euidentlye spooken
for the sacryfyce of the holy mass, that it is a sacrifice propytyatory
curyng man's wou^des, that is to say, his sins, and that also by the
ordinance of Christ, commaundynge it to be done for a remembrance of his
death, and rising again. It follows in the same sermon of saint Austens. Cum
tractarem de sacramentis, Sermon ^8. de verbis d. secun. Lucum
dixi vobis, quod ante verba Christi, quod offertur, panis dicatur, ubi Christi
verba fuerint deprompta, ia^ non panis dicitur, sed corpus Christi appellatur.
When I did entreat of the sacraments (says Austen) I telled you, that before
Christ's words pronounced of the preiste, that, the which is offered in
sacrifice, is called bread, after Christ's words be spoken, it is not now
named bread but it is called christ's body. This saint Austen does set forth
both the sacryfyce of the mass, and also that by ye strenght, and force of
christ's words, which he spoke at his last supper institutynge the masses
sacrifice, the bread is turned Transubstantition
into Christ's very body, and after loses the name of bread. Moreover saint
Austen thus writes De ciui. dei. li 20. cap. 25.
in an other place of this matter, Omnes, qui offerunt, profecto in peccatis
sunt, pro quibus dimit tendis offerunt, ut cum obtulerint, acceptumque deo
fuerit, tunc dimit tantur, That is to say in englysh All men which do offer
sacrifice, forsooth they are in sin, for the which to be forgiven they offer
Note this dilygently reader.
sacrifice, that when they have offered sacrifice, and that is accepted of god,
than their sins should be forgyuen them. These words are inoughe to stop
all men's mouths, that they may have nothing hereafter to speak against
this holy sacryfyce of the mass, but that it is a sacrifice obteyning of god
remyssion of sin. This meant saint Poule the fifte chapter to the Hebrews,
saying, that a bishop, or a preiste is chosen, and ordained to offer gifts
(as prayer and like things) and sacrifices for the lynnes of the people. With
the which saint Chrysostom agrees Chrisostom in missa sua.
saienge. Idoneos nos read domine ad inferenda tibi dona, and sacrificia
spiritualia, pro nostris peccatis and populi ignorantijs, and dignos nos fac,
ut inueniamus gratiam in co^spectu tuo, vt acceptabile fiat sacrificiu^
nostrum. That is. Make us, o lord, (says the priest at mass This is plainly
said of that noble doctoure and holy saint.
among the greakes) meet to bring into the, gifts and spiritual sacryfyces
for our sins, and the peoples sins, committed thorough lack of knoweledge,
and make us worthy to find grace in thy syghte, that our sacrifice may be
acceptable. Again in the same treatice of the mass he says. Fac panem hunc
praeciosum corpus filij tui, in calice vero hoc, sanguinem preciosum Christi
tui, tra^smutans ea spiritu tuo sancto. Vt fiat assumentibus in lotionem
animarum, in remissionem peccatoru^ in communionem sa^cti spiritus, in regni
coelorum impletio nem, in fiduciam apud te, non in iudicium, non in
condemnationem, haec ibi. Make o lord (says the greek priest at mass) this
bread the precious body of thy son, and that thing which is in this cup,
the precious blood of thy Christ The doctrine of Transubsta^tiation is no new
thing, of which Chrisostom wrote nigh twelve hundred years past.
chaungynge them from bread and wine in to flesh and blood by thy holy
spirit. That it may be to the receauers thereof, for a washing or a
clensynge of their souls, and remyssion of their sins, and a communion, or a
mutual participation together of the holy ghost, and to the fulfyllynge of
the heavenly kingdom, an affiau^ce in the, not to their judgment, not to
their condemnation. Epiphanius alsoo, a greake doctor (nygh twelfe hundred
years old) confirms this Epipha. in cpi. ad Joan hiero so uersa ab d.
Hieroni.
saying. Illud audiens admiratus sum, quod quidam te quoque turbauerunt, and
dixerunt, quod in oratione, quando offerimus deo sacrificia, soleamus pro te
dicere, Domine presta Ioanni, ut recte credat. That is I hearing that did
maruayle, that certain men had troubled the also, and said that we are wont
in our prayer, when we do offer sacrifices to god, to say for the. Lord
grant to Ihon, that he may believe truly. A like saying has saint Gregory
Ieroins master, entreatynge of Iuliane the Grego. Nazi. oration. 1. in Iulianum.
emperors wickedness. Mox incruenti sacrificij oblationem manus commaculat, per
quod nos christo unimur, nec non passionis, ac diuinitatis eius participes
reddimur, Anon the hands do defile the oblation of the sacrifice vnblouddye,
or offered without blood shedding by the which we are joined together with
Christ, and made part Mark reader.
takers also of his passion, and godhead. What sacrifice I beseech the good
reder, can join us together with Christ, and make us partenars of his death,
and godheade, which man's hands may defile, except it be the mass, and it
be also a sacrifice propitiatory, and pacyfieng gods wrath toward us for our
offenses? That sayethe saint Cyprian, thus writing, after Cyprianus de caena
domini.
he had said that Christ upon the cross did offer him self a sacrifice, and
that he the buttelar had given the same cup, Penitrat omnia tanti medicamenti
virtus, quicquid esset intus ibi, dum effugaret, and renouaret, sanaretque quic
quid morbi carni, vel spiritui, veteris uitae adlinierat corruptela. That is.
The virtue or strength of so great a medicine perceth al things, while it
dryueth away what so ever should be there within, and should renew, and
heal what so ever disease the defylynge of the old life had brought to the
flesh or the spirit. Hitherto Cypryan. Origin does also thus write of ye
force and strength of the mass. Origenes ho: 13. in leui.
Sirespicias ad illam commemorationem, de qua dicit dominus, Hoc facite in meam
commemoratione^, inuenies quod ista est commemoratio Lu. ^2:
sola, quae propitium facit hominibus deum. If a man look to that remembrance,
of the which our lord says, do ye this for my remembrance he shall find,
that this is the only memory, or remembrance (of Christ's death, and
sacrifice done on the cross) which causethe god to be contented or mercyful
to men. Of this part this is sufficent to prove that ye mass is a sacrifice
propitiatory, or appeasynge gods dyspleasure for sin. Now to the second
part, which is that the mass is auayleable and profitable to the^ which are
departed from this life.

That the mass is profitable to the dead, like as other good deeds done for
them are.
THegrekes good reder, did deny utterly yt there was any mean place between
heaven, and hell, wherein ma^s soul should be detained for a time till that it
might please god to deliver it from thence, to his glorious sight. The which
error among diverse other, Johan Wycleffe, Martin luther, and Ihon Frith, did
maynteyne, and defend. Also one Aerius (as saint Austen shows August. lib.
de here is. here is. 55
in his book of heresies) when he could not obtain a byshoprike, for ye
which he labored, he taught Epiphani: lib. 3
many heresies, among the which he said, that a christen man should not be
bound, to fast any certain day, but to be suffered to fast wha^ he list,
against the which I have made a book in englisshe, and also A book of fasting.
he said that it should nothing avail the dead, if the living should pray
for them. And thought it were now great need to write fully of this matter,
yet I will at this time only bring the ancient doctors sentences, to prove
that the mass is a sacrifice profitable to them, which are departed, if it be
song, or said for them, and shortly, god willing, I will set forth a hoole
book of that matter, against Frithes book compiled of the same. To begin
Innocen. li. de mist. miss.
therefore, Innocentius thus writes. Istos, qui nondum perfect prorsus purgati
sunt, commendat pia matter ecclesia intercessione sua in sacrosa^cto sacrificio,
certissime The same has s. Barnarden sermon. 66. Canti. ca.
credens, quod sanguis ille praeciosus, qui pro multis effusus est in
remissionem peccatorum, non solu^ valeat ad salutem viuentium, sed etiam ad
releuationem defunctoru^ The godly or piteous mother the church, does remember
them wtih her intercession in the hallowed sacrifice, beleuynge most assuredly
that ye precious blood, which was poured out for the remission of many men's
sins, is not only of force or strength for the health of the living, but also
for the easyng of ye dead. Isodorus agrees with this, Isodorus lib. ^ off.
saying. Sacrificium pro defunctorum requie offerre, quia per to tu^ orbe^
custoditur, credimus ab apostolis esse traditum. We do believe that the apostles
taught to offer sacrifice for the deades rest, because it is kept through
all the world. But I will pass over those S. Augu. lib. 9 confess. ca. 12. and.
1^.
later writers, and go to S. Austen which thus says, (after he had rehearsed
his mothers petition, which was that y^ preistes would pray for her in their
masses,) Cu^ ecce corpus elatu^ est, imus, and redimus, sine lachrymis. Na^
neque in eis praecibus, quas tibi fu^dimus, cu^ offerretur pro ea sacrificiu^
precij nostri, fleuimus Lo wha^ ye body of my mother was brought forth to
beburied, we go and come again without tears in wepi^g For we did not weep in
those prayers, Note that he says the sacrifice of our price or redemption.
which we poured out to the, wha^ the sacrifice of our price, or ransom, was
offered for her. Also s. Austen desired the preistes to remember his mother
Monica, and his ^^ther Patricke, in their masses. Ought I beseech the good
reder, bablers, and bunglers in divinity affirm, that the prayers of the
quick, and preistes masses can nothing avail the dead, sithe saint Austen
the greateste learned man, that has been sense the apostles time, did so
instantlye desire preistes at their masses to remember his father, and mother?
More over this he says. of the same matter. Neque negandu^ est defunctoru^
animas pietate suorum uiuentium releuari, cum pro illis sacrificium Angnst. q.
2. de octo questi. ad dulcitium.
mediatoris offertur, uel eleemosynae in ecclesia fiunt, sed eis haec profunt,
qui cum uiuerent, vt haec sibi postea prodesse possent, merueru^t. That is to
say i^ our tongue It may not be denied, that the dead men's souls are
releaued or eased with the pity of their friends, living when the sacrifice
of the medyatoure is offered, or alms ar done in ye church, but these
things profit the^, which deserved wha^ they lived, that these things
Augustine enchy. ca. 109 and 110
might afterward avail them. Cu^ ergo sacrificia sieve altaris, sieve
quaru^cu^que eleemosynaru^ pro baptisatis omnibus defu^ctis offerunt, pro valde
bonis gratiaru^ actiones su^t. Pro valde malis, etsi nulla sint adiumenta
mortuorum, qualescunque viuorum consolationes sunt. Quibus autem prosunt, aut
ad hoc prosunt, ut sit plena remissio, aut certe tollerabilior fiat ipsa
damnatio. Therefore when sacrifices either of the altar, or of any alms are
offered for all christened people dead, for those, which are very good, they
be geuynge of thanks. For those that are very much ill, though they be no
help to the dead, they are confortes (such as they are) of the living. But
whom they do profit, they profitte, to that, that the remyssion may be full,
or perfitte, or at the least the damnation should be more tolerable. lib. 20.
deciui. de^. cap. 9. et de cura pro mortuis habenda.
Hitherto saint Austen, which saienges he has alsoo in many other of his
books, which I now go over to ye rehearsal of other writers saienges, among ye
which Ambros. oratione funebride ^bitu fratris.
one is S. Ambrose which says, writing upon the death of his brother. Tibi
nunc omnipotens deus innoxia^ co^me^do aiam, tibi hostia^ mea^ offero, cape,
ppitius ac serenus, munus fraternu^, sacerdotis sacrificiu^. I commend to the
o (god almighty) a harmles soul, Ioffer to ye my host or sacrifice, take
co^te^ted, and pleased, and with a merry countenance, ye sacrifice of a priest,
ye duty S. Ambrose prayed and said mass for his brothers soul departed.
of a brother. Lo here Ambrose does pray at mass, and offer in it a sacrifice
the very body, and blood of Christ, for his brothers soul departed, and will thou not believe him, that it is profitable to the dead so to do, rather than
Martyn Luter, new scoryng an old heresye of the greakes, Aerius, Ihon
Wycleffe, And such other? Epiphanius which was somewhat elder then saint
Ierom, conde^nynge Aerius of herisie, because he denied ye prayers, and
Epiphani. li. ^
suffrages of ye quick should avail the dead, thus writes, Quae pro defu^ctis
fiunt prosu^t praeces illis, etia^si tota^ culpa^ no^ abscindu^t, Ecclesia hoc
necessario perficit, traditione a pr^ibus accepta. The prayers which are said
for ye dead do, profit the^, though they cut not away al ye fault. The church
does yt thing necessarely by a tradition received of ye fathers. Gre. Nazi. s.
Ieroms master does in diverse places confyrme this godly and catholyque
doctrine, of the which to be breife I will allege but only one, which is in a
certain oration made at the buryall of his brother Cesarius, where he thus
prays for him to Greg. Nazian. Oration. 7.
god. O domine nunc quidem caesariu suscipe, peregrinationis nostrae primitias,
Take to the now, o lord, Cesary, the first fruits of our pilgrymage.

Chrysostom also does write in Chrisost. ad popu antioch. homilia 69.
this controuersye so playnelye, as few other has done, either before his
time, or else sense, for these are his words. Non temere ab apostolis
Chrysostom also the 41. sermon upon the l. to the Corinthia^s says that the
holy ghost ordained that in the mass the dead should be prayed for.
haec sancita fuerunt, ut in tremendis mysterijs defunctorum agatur
co^memoratio. Sciunt enim illis inde multum contingere lucrum, utilitatem
multam. Cum eni constiterit populus extensis manibus and sacerdotalis
multitudo, and treme^dum proponatur sacrificiu^, quomodo deu^ no^ exorabimus
pro illis deprecantes? These things were ordained of the apostles for a law
not unadvisedly, nor with The sacrifice of the mass, and prayers said in it,
do profyt the dead, and the apostelles made that ordinance that mass should
be said for them.
out a cause, that in the dreadefull mysteries, or sacrament of thaulter, a
remembrance of the dead should be made. For they know, that much lucre, and
much profytte, does come to them thereof: For when the people shall stand
holding up their hands, and also the multitude of preistes, and ye fearful
sacrifice is set forth, how or by what reason, shall not we obtain (grace or
pardon) for them praienge? What is mente hear by that fearful sacrifice,
which is showed forth, when the lay people and the preistes are assembled
together holding up their hands? Is it not the very body of Christ, god
most dreadefull, which the priest offers at mass for ye dead, as this old
writer testifies, which writ almost twelfe hundred years passed? This law
to say mass for the dead (says this au^ciente doctor) was made by ye holy
apostles of our savior christ, and therefore it must needs be true, and godly,
and all doctrine against it false and ungodly. This holy father also in many
other places makes mention of this matter, the which I will pass over,
except one in his mass, which is this. Memoria^ dn^e agimus omniu^ sanctoru^
tuoru^, quoru^ supplication ibus respice nos deus, and meme^to omniu^ The
greeks used in their mass to pray to s^intes, and for the dead:.
qui dormierunt in spe resurrectionis, and vitae aeternae, and requiescere eos
facito, vbi videtur lume^ vultus tui. We do say a memory (o lord) of all thy
saints, for whose humble requests, or prayers sake, take pity on us, and
remember all them, which are dead in hope of rising again, and of everlasting
life, and cause them to rest, where the light of thy countenance is seen.
Hither to this holy, and great clerk Chrisostom, with who^e agrees s. Damascene
Damascenu^ connone pro mortuis.
saying. Apostoli discipuli saluatoris, in tremendis vitalibusque sacrame^tis,
memoria^ eoru^ qui fidelit obdormieru^t, habenda^ edixerunt. The apostles our
saviors disciples, has commanded, ordained or published, yt a remembrance
should be had of the^, in the fearful, and lively sacraments, which have died
faithfully. Lo here, good reder, another witness, ^ man of years, for he
was.xi. c. years before Luter and Ihon Frithe were borne, and much better
learned then any of them two, or any other of that fashyon. He affirms that
the apostles did inacte and establysshe this law, that preistes should pray
at mass for the dead, and art thou not ashamed to say that the mass, and
prayers of men living does nothing avail the dead? These two ancient, and
excellent clerks say, that in the mass by the ordinance of the apostles
(which were instructed in the gospel of Christ) a remembrance is made of the
dead, and thou being shame less, do say that covetous preistes have of
late brought it up for lucre. Cease for shame, and say no more so. Say with
these fathers that the apostles taught ye church this l^sson, let neither
malice toward preistes, nor saving of money, which you should give for the
dead (either by ye duty of charity, or else by his will, yt in his testament
wylled the so to do, for his souls health) cause the thus to say, Remember our
saviors saying, which is. Math. 16.
What shall it avail a man to win ye hole world, and loose his soul? But of
this enough. I will proceed on this matter, Athanasius, Athanasi. libr. quest.
34.
which writ about twelfe hundred years since, does set forth this thing
very manifestly, saying, Number sentiunt aliqua beneficia animae defu^ctorum, cum
super illis fiunt co^uentus, and peractiones bonorum operum, and oblationum?
Does the souls of the dead feel any benefits, or pleasures, when assembles
are made for them of the people, and good works, and sacrifices are also done
for them? To ye question he thus answers. Si non aliquo beneficio
participarent ex illo, non utique in caena and in exequijs fieret eorum
commemoratio, Intelligimus animas peccatorum participare aliqua beneficia ab
exangui immolatione, et gratificatione pro illis facta, sicut solus ordinat, et
praecipit deus, ^uiuoru^ and mortuoru^ potestate^ gerit, That is If the souls
of the dead should not take some benefitte thereof, truly a memory, or a
remembrance of them should not be made in the Note reder.
supper (the mass he means thereby) and in the dyryges, or funeralles done
at the buryall. We do perceive that sinners souls do take part of some
benefytes of the sacryfyce offered without blood shedynge, and of a good
turn done for them, as god only God (says the ancient doctor) has
ordained and commanded us to offer sacrifices, and to do other good deeds for
the dead.
ordeyneth and commands, which has power upon the quycke, and the dead.
These words are very plainly spoken for the defense of this catholyque, and
charitable doctrine, but Saint Cypryan, being nyghe wythyn two hundred years
of Christ's birth is even as plain therein, saying in his, iii. book of
epistles. Celebrantur hic a nobis oblatio^es Cyprianus lib. 3 epist. 9.
and sacrificia, ob co^memoratione^ eoru^ scilicet mortuorum in carcere We here
offer, and do sacryfyces for the remembrance of them, which are dead in
the prison. Again Sacrificia semper pro ijs, meministis, offerimus, quotiens
li. 4. epist. 5:
martyrum passiones, and dies aniuersaria commemoratione celebramus. We offer
sacryfyces always for them, as ye do remember, as often as we do keep the
feasts of the martyrs, with an yerelye remembrance. Moreover he says thus
in an other place. Quod episcopi antecessores nostri religiose considerantes
and salu li. ^. epist. 9.
briter prouidentes censuerunt, ne quis frater excedens ad tutelam vel curam
clericum nominaret, acsi quis hoc fecisset, non offerretur pro eo, nec
sacrificium pro dormitione eius celebraretur. Neque enim ad altaremeretur
nominari in sacerdotum prece, qui ab altari sacerdotes and ministros suos
leuitas auocare uoluit, For as much as the bysshoppes our predecessors
devoutly considering and holesomelye prouydyng have determined, that Mark
this reader.
no brother, or christen man departing should name a clerk to a wardeshyppe,
or custody of infantes, or to the charge of worldely business, and if any man
had so done, there should be no offeringe for him, another the sacrifice should
be offered for his death. For he deserves not to be named at the altar in
the preistes prayers, which would call away the preistes, and his ministers
the levites, from the altar. This Cyprian rehersynge the determination of the
bishops his predecessors, which forth with says. Et ideo Victor, cum contra
formam nuper in consilio a sacerdotibus datam, Geminium fastiuu^ presbyterum
ausus sit actorem co^stituere, non est quo pro dormitione eius apud uos fiat
oblatio aut deprecatio aliqua nomine eius in ecclesiam frequentetur, ut
sacerdotum decretum, religiose and necessary factum, seruetur a nobis.

And therefore for as much as victor against the form made of late by the
preistes in the counsel, has been so bold to ordeine one Gemyne faustine a
priest his factoure to take the charge of his business, there is not why ye
should do sacrifice for his departing, nor any prayer should be used for him
in the church, that the preistes decree godly, and necessarelye made, might
be kept of us. But of s. Cyprian this is enough. Tertulian Tertulia de corona
milit. ^
also does not dissent from this doctrine, but hold with it in diverse places,
of the which I will rehearse two or three. He faith making mention of certain
traditions, which came from the apostles to the church, without writing.
Thapostles ordained that sacrifice should be offered for ^he dead, and not any
covetous preiste as some say
Oblationes pro defu^ctis an nua die facimus. We do offer sacrifices yearelye
for the dead. Therefore y^ apostles (as I have recyted of Damascene, and
Chrysostom) did make this ordinance to pray, and say mass for the dead,
though those things be not expresselye set forth in scripture. But
Tertulian shall speak once again with these Tertulia li. de exhorta ad
castitatem
words. Et iam repete ad deum pro cuius spiritu postules, pro qua oblationes
annuas reddas. Stabis apud deum cum tot vxoribus, quo^ illas oratione
commemoras, and offeres pro duabus, and commemorabis illis duas per sacerdotem.
etc. And now remember, for whose soul thou may make petytyon to God, for
which wife thou mayeste render yearelye sacrifyces. Thou shalt stand before
god with so many wives, as thou doeste remember in thy prayer, and thou will
offer for them both, and thou shalt remember them two by the priest, Finally
in Tertulian, demonog.
an other book. Enim vero pro anima prioris vxoris orat, and refrigerium
interim postulat, and in prima resurrectione consortiu^, and offert a^ nuis
diebus dormitionis eius. For soth the husband does pray for the soul of his
first wife, and he desires a recreation, refresshynge or a coolynge for her in
the mean season, and fellowship in the first arising up, and he offreth
sacrifice Obites or years mi^des.
yearly at her obite, or the time of her dyenge and decesse, lo good reader,
the custom, to have dirige, and mass ones in the space of an year A book
called epi^ome cronicon falsely says that one Pelagius a bishop of Rome
did ordeine that mass should be said for the dead for he was ^52 years
after Christ's birth.
for the dead, is no new invention, nor of late set up by covetous preistes
(as many covetous, and envious persons say) but a thing observed always even
from the holy apostles time till our days, and therefore it must neades be a
good, and a godly custom, For as Tertulian says, We may prescribe against
all heretics holdyng the contrary, against whom judgment is given before, Id
esse uerum, qui cunque primum, id esse ad ulterum, quodcumque posterius, That
to be true, what so ever is first, that to be counterfeit, or forged, what so
ever is that comes Dionisius lib. de eccl. hierar ca. 7.
after. Saint Dionise Paul's scoler thus writes also of the prayenge at mass
for the dead. Sanctorum preces, etiam in ista vita, and no^ This came up in the
tradition of the apostles, as s. Dionise testifies.
tantum post mortem prosunt ijs so lis, qui digni sunt, vt pro eis sanctae
preces fiant (nempe fidelibus). That is, holy men's prayers, ye in this life,
and not only after death do profitte them only, which are worthy, that holy
prayers should be said for them, sothelye for the faithful, as Damascene
recytyng these words does expound them. Again this saint speaking of
Sermon de mortuis.
the bishops, or preistes prayenge for ye dead at dirige, and mass, says
after this manner. Inter praecandu^ igitur oratur diuina bonitas, ut cuncta
defuncti peccata dimittat per humanam infirmitatem admissa, Damas.
eumque in luce collocet, and regione viuorum, in sinibus Abrahae, Isaac, and
Jacob, in loco vnde aufugit dolor, tristicia, and gemitus. While the preiste
does pray for the dead, the goodness of god is prayed unto, ye he would forgive
the dead all his sins, committed by man's infirmity, and that he would set
him in light and in the region of the living persons, in the bosoms of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in a place from whense is fleed heaviness, That is in
heaven.
sadness, and waylynge. Thou do le (says s. Damascen reciting these words)
o adversary, by what mean Dionisius confirms prayers to be very profitable
for them, which are departed in a holy hope Damas. sermon pro defunctis.
This aunciente doctor Damas. reherseth s. Gre. (Ieroms masters) words,
written in a certain oration of the funeral exequies for his mother, which
are these. Diuitias igitur, quae in nostra potestate fueru^t, partim dedimus,
partim daturi sumus, anniuersarios illi honores, and memorias exhibituri.
Therefore (since by prayers and masses my mothers dolor may be eased, for that
he said before) we have partly given already, and partly will give these
goods, which were in our power, I will give to her yt me^ may behold yearly
honors and memories. Thou see (says Damas.) yt he confirms our opinion
allowi^g sacrifices and yearly reme^brau^ces to be made for the^, which are
departed in god, while he callethe them good, and holy. Moreover s. Dama. does
allege a very plain sentence of one Grego. Nyssene saint Basyls brother,
which is this, Nihil absque vtilitate a predicatoribus, and discipulis Christi
est traditum, and in omnibus ecclesijs predicatum. Res autem modis omnibus est
utilis, Gregorius Nyssenus says that the apostles did preach and teach i^
all churches that we should pray at mass for the dead, as Damascen, Chrisostom
Tertulian, and diverse other do say they did.
and deo in primisgrata, indiuinis praeclarisque operationibus eorum, qui in
recta fide discesserunt, manifestam facere memoriam. That is in english.
There is nothing taught, or delivered by tradition and preached in all
churches, of the preachers and disciples of Christ, without profitte, but it is
a thing by always profilable, and to god chiefly thankful, or acceptable,
to make a manifest memory of the^ (that have departed in a right faith) in the
divine, and very noble works. What else, good reader, I beseech ye, meant this
great clerk, and aunciente father, by these dyuyne and very noble works, than
dirige, masses, and other like prayers, offered to god for them which dyed in a
true faith? The apostles of Christ the truth, and to whom ye holy ghost, the
spirit of ye truth, It is a tradition of christ's apostels to pray for the
dead at mass as G. Nyssene says, and Damascene does affirm that they learned
it of Christ.
did teach all truth, according to christ's promysse taught this lesson, and
the same is preached in all churches. Thou do believe that infantes, or young
children ought to be baptized, and that baptism avails them thorough the
faith of the church, to the attainemente of remyssion of original sin, grace
and glory, and yet that can not be proved by any scripture sufficientlye, but
it is a tradytyon of christ's apostles, left to the church De eccle. hiera
Origene ii. 6. in epist. Romans
without writing, as saint Dionise Paul's scholar affirms, and Origin with
many other, Why therefore do thou not believe, that the mass is a sacrifice
propitiatory, and profitable both to the quick and the dead, for as much as
the holy apostles has taught the church, as well the one as the other? They
which deny that children should be baptized because there is no plain
scripture for it, are counted heretics of the sect of the anabaptists, only
because the holy apostels taught the church that All catholyke churches do
baptize infantes, though that be not commanded in scripture
doctrine, and it has been observed through al churches of the world ever
since, therefore by that authority, and reason they must needs run into
heresy, that deny the mass and prayers, with other good deades to be
available for the dead, because it is a tradition of the apostles to pray,
to give alms, and say masses for them, and it has been kept accustomedly in
all churches of Christ, from that time to this time, and shall be till ye
worlds end (as Damas. says) because it is a truth of our lord which Sermon
pro defunctis,
shall abide for ever as Dauyd ye prophet says. Moreover Damas. tells, that
one Palladius an old writer of histories writing of a holy man called Macarius
which had wrought many great miracles, thus says of him. Quia faciebat pro
consuetudine sua pro defu^ctis preces, scireque desiderabat nu^qpro illis
prodesset, et co^solatio illis inde proueniret, Deus amator animaru^, uolens
hoc suo seruo, pluribus et certis argume^tis pate facere, cranio, quod
exaruerat, verbu^ ueritatis inspirauit, prorupit enim cranium in hec verba.
Qua^do pro mortuis offers preces, co^solatiuncula^ sentimus. That is to wit.
Wha^ yt holy man Macarius A miracle done to show that prayers of the quycke
do profytte the dead.
did, after his custom, pray for the dead, and was desirous to know whether
yt he did any profit to them or no, and whether they had any comfort thereof.
God the lover of souls, wyllinge to disclose or declare this thing by many
and certain reasons maki^g a proof to his servant did inspire the foremoost
part of a skull (which was) dried with the word of truth, For the foremoost
part of the skull brast out, saying these words. When you do offer prayers
for the dead, we feel comfort in aduersite. Lo here a great miracle, to
prove this matter, as there are written in old books many mo, which I will
pass over, to be short and bring ones again Damas. contione de defunctis.
Ide^ hrbet D Hugo Aetherianorum lib. de regressu animarum ab inferis:
saint Damascenes saienge, which is this, Nisi hoc in oculis dei misericordis
rectum foret, nunque occasionem dedisset habendae memoriae defunctorum in
sacrificio illo incruento, and anniuersariorum, quae nunc inconcussa, and
certiora (quam de quibus iudicandum sit) apostolica, catholicaque ecclesia, ac
populus domino collectus, pietatique deditus, absque omni contradictione
custodit. This is in our speech. Except to pray, and to offer sacrifice at
the mass for the souls departed should be in gods merciful sight, right,
he would never have given an occasion of a memory to be had for the dead in
that vnblouddye sacrifice, nor of anniuersaries God gave an occasion of the
sacrifice of the mass to be offered and years minds to be kept for the
dead, as s. Damascene does affirm
retourninge every year ones at one time, Thus much I have said of the old
doctors judgments in this matter, touching the sacrifice of the holy mass,
and the offering of it to god, both for the quick and the dead also, upon
the which doctrine they are al and whollye agreed, and therefore no wise, and
godly christen man, or woman will rather believe Martyn Luther, Eucer,
Bullynger, Melancton, John Frith, Bale, or any of that ill hear, then all
these ancient fathers, of the which some were taught, and instructed by ye
apostles, and some by their disciples and scolers, and therefore no man yt wise
is or godly will doubt, but they did know the truth much better, than any man of
a later time, not lerning it of the^ and their books. All the doctors of
christ's church do affirm, yt the mass is a sacrifice available, both to ye
quick and the dead, Luther Ihon Frith, with a rablement of like rascalles deny
it, whether party wilt you good reader, believe al these holy fathers, or these
leude and unlearned later writers? very natural reason and wit, if nothing else
should persuade yt rather to believe these au^cie^tes, tha^ these other which now
write, like to the^ nether in years, nor lerning. Valerius Maximus An hystory
of Valerius Maximus.
shows that the Romans did in a matter, risen between two men, of the which
the one was of much honesty, and fidelity, and the other of very little
virtue and crede^ce give sentence upon the honest ma^s part, for his truth and
honesties sake when his adversary laid against him a certain crime. The story
is this. Cu^ Marcus aemelius Scaurus vir clarissimus, ac exploratae probitatis,
a vario Succrone^si, uiro paru^ syncero, apud populu^ accusaretur, atque
accusator long a oratio^e perorasset, ille maximo co^pendio vsus est, eo quod
sua and populi consce^tia^ fretus, non voluit oratione co^te^dere. Querites
(inquit) Varius Succrone^sis ait, Aemilius Scaurus negat. Vtri potius Crede^du^
ce^setis? quibus verbis applaude^te populo falsa^ s^bi inte^ta^a^lite^
co^sopiui^. That is. When Mark Aemyle Scaurus a man most honorable, or famous
and of goodness well known, was accused to the people of Varius Succrone^sis a
man of little pureness, or symplycytie, and ye accusar had reasoned to an end
with a long oration, Mark Aemile used a very short form, for because he
trusted upon his own conscience, and the peoples also, he would not strive
with reasonynge, but said only for his defense against his adversary. O
Romans, Varius Succrone^sis affirms (that I am gylty in this fault)
Aemelius Scaurus denies it. To which of these two do you judge credence
should be given? with the which words he ceased, or set at rest the action,
falsely entered against him, the people moving their hands, or feet for joy.
Lo good reader, among the Romans, which then were infidels, the famousenes,
and surely known goodness of the person, was a sufficient cause, to give
sentence with a sign of joy upon the famous, and good man's side saying
only for his defense that he was falselye accused, against his adversary being
ill and pleading his actio^ with many words. The honorable and good Mark said
to the people, mine aduersarye says that I am gyltye, I say nay, whether
think you ought to be believed. The people moving their hands or feet for
joy, ye good man Mark was discharged of that actio^ thorough those his few
words, for his goodness, and fames sake. So in this present controversy of
the sacrifice of ye mass, saint Dionise, saint Ignatius. S. Anaclet, saint
Alexander, saint Clemente s. Cyprian, with all other catholycke doctors of all
ages do say that the mass is a sacrifice appeasinge gods wrath, Martyn
Luther Suynglius, Oecolampius, Bucers should be prayed for to our lord. The
third council holden at Carthago has a like decre and other diverse, which I
will pass by at this time, and go to the soilyng of mine adversaries
arguments, grounded upon scripture, wrasted clean from the true, and right
understanding of it, as it shall anon openly be seen to them, that be not
holly blinded neither with malice, nor affection toward the contrary part, for
whom as persons nygh incurable, I have not taken this labor. But to my purpose.

An answer to all Martyn Luters, and his scolers reasons made against the
sacryfyce of the blessed mass, by the which it does playnelye appear upon
how weak, and sclender a ground they have builded their ungodly doctrine in
this controversy, so that no wise and cunning buylder, will hereafter build
with them on that foundation, lest ye hole house at the length fall down on
his head, and so utterly destroy him.
Now, good reder, after I have said enough for the defense, and setting forth
of the truth, I will by gods help take clean away mine adversaries weapons
from them with which they have warred, and yet do, but very unmanly, against the
truth, and no maruayle, sith they be so ill weaponed, and so sclenderly
harnessed, as we se that they are. The first argument of theirs good reader, is
gathered of ye holy prophet Osees words, which our savior Osee. 6.
recyted to the Jews, as we read in Mattheus gospel the nynthe Matt. 9.
chapter and they are these. The first reason against the sacrifice of the
mass.


Misericordia^ volo, and no^ sacrificiu^. I will have mercy, and not sacrifice.
Here we se (says the adversaries of ye holy mass) that god will have no
sacrifice done to him, and therefore the mass is not a sacrifice acceptable
unto god for the appeasinge of his wrath toward us for our sins.

Who is so ill learned, good reader, The solution.
among them, that have any knowledge in gods word, that he does not perceive
how weak this argument is? For god meant by his prophet Osee, and also our
savior recytyng the same words, that deeds, and works of mercy, such as are
to teach yt ignorant, to co^uerte the sinners to god, to forgive men their
offenses, and other like, were more acceptable to him, then any sacryfyce of
beasts sleane, after the manner of tholde testament, which makes nothing
against the sacrifice of the mass. That this was gods meaning, it does
euydently appear by the text following, which is this. Sacrificium S. Clement
in the first book to s. James understands the prophets words of Christ's
time when the sacryfyces of tho^d law should cease so that than god would
have no such sacryfice. Lib. 20. ca. 16
and scientiam dei magis qui holo causta. I will rather have sacrifice and ye
knowledge of god, tha^ sacrifices holly burned. Here we se that god did not
utterly deny, yt he would accept sacrifice, but that he would that we should
offer rather to him the sacrifice of pity, or mercy, and the knowledge of him,
then other carnal sacrifices. Saint Austen against one Faustus, and also
writynge of gods city, does approve this exposition saienge. Hoc dicto nihil
aliud, qui sacrificium sacrificio praelatum oportet intelligi. By this saienge
no other thing ought to be understand, than a sacrifice to be preferred
before a sacrifice, that is the sacrifice of alms, pity, compassion, with soch
other to be more esteemed of god, than the sacrifices offered to him after the
custom of the old law. He that will read the nynth, and the twelfte chapter
of Mathewe, shall find that our sauyoure thus understood the prophets words
now recyted. Moreover Christ meant by those the prophets words, that
sacryfices done without faith, and works of mercy were not pleasant, nor
acceptable to god, as it does appear by Esaye the prophet, in the first
chapter, and alsoo in diverse other places of the prophets, but yet the same
joined with faith love, and alms, were acceptable to him, or else why should
he have commanded them to be offered to him? wherefore this argument is clean
put away. Now to the second reason made against the sacryfyce of the mass,
which is this.

The holy apostle saint Paul The second argument.
(says Luther) writing to the Hebrews ye seventh chapter, shows that this
difference is between a preiste of the old testamente, and of the new, that a
priest of the old law, is not one, but diverse, because they were mortal, (and
so one ought to succeed an other) and the preiste of the new law, is but
one only, for as much as he is immortal (and neadeth none to succeed him,
for the supplyenge of his rome), and therefore it were a thing very
inconuenyente to affirm, that there is any sacryfyce in the new testamente,
for the offering, of the which Christ only should not be sufficyente, But
one priest must succeed an other from time to time, till the worlds end, as
it must neades follow, if the mass were a sacryfyce, Therefore it is none,
but a remembrance only of the sacryfyce once for all, offered to god by
Christ on the cross for our sins. Hitherto Luther and his scholars.

To the which thus I answer The solutio^
breiflye, that the very same host, and sacrifice is offered in ye mass,
which was ones offered upon the cross, but it was there offered with
bloudesheddynge, and here in the mass it is offered without bloudsheddyng, so
that the manner of offering is only diverse, and not the sacryfyce it self,
and therefore there is but one head, and chief preiste in the new
Testamente, Christ our sauyoure, which daily offers him self a sacryfice
in ye mass to his father for our sins and the preistes as ministers do offer
in his name and person, saying at their masses. Hoc est corpus meu^, and non,
hoc est corpus christi. This is my body, and not, this is Christ's body. Now
it is no inconuenyence, nor against Paul's mind, that one, and the same
host, or sacrifice should be offered of only Christ, a preiste after the
order of Melchisedech, and yet a multitude of preistes, as mynysters to be
required, according to Paul's say, enge. 1. Cor. 4.
Sic nos existimet homo ut ministros Christi and dispensatores mysteriorum dei.
That is to say. Let a man so esteem us as the mynysters of Christ, and the
dispensers, or stewardes of gods mysteries, or secrets hid in words or
ceremonies. Now thou seeste, good christen reader, that this reason is of no
strength, against the sacryfyce of the mass, and therefore I will recyte the
next, which is of like force, and it is this in form, as here follows,
collected and gathered of saint Paul's words writing to the Hebrews, which
thus says.

Sine sanguinis effusione no^ fit The third reason.
remissio. Remission of sin is not without poutynge out of blood, But at the
mass there is no pouring out, or sheding of blood, therefore the mass is no
sacryfyce propitiatorye, obtaining forgiveness The solution.
of sins, and the favor of god.

This reason is grounded upon the wrong understanding of s. Paul's saying.
For we may as well prove by this authority, that remyssion of our sins
comes not by baptism, penance, the hearing Expende haec lector and iudica.
of gods word, faith, hope, nor any other like thing, as that by the mass
forgyuenesse of sin happens not to us, because when these things are
received, there is no paurynge out of blood, as there is none in ye mass.
Therefore let us se what Paul meant by these his words, which is easily found
out by ye words next before in the letter pertainyng to the same sentence, and
they are these. Et oia pene in sanguine, secu^du^ lege^ mu^da^t And all sins
almost, after y^ law, are made clean in blood. Lo he says almost all, and
not all, and therefore the other part of his sentence, which is alleged above
against the sacrifice of the mass, ought to be thus taken, almost with out
pouryng out of blood remission Aduerte lect.
of sin is not, for else he had spoken plainly against the law, which makes
mention of an oblation Leui. 2. Heb. aliud Sabach, aliud Nuncha, aliud Misath.
vnblouddy, wont to be offered to god for remission of sin, that was made ex
simila, that is of fine meal of corn. Also by the water, called aqua
expiationis, that is the Number. 8. and 19 S. Paul says, that the blood of
goats, and of bulls and the ashes of a heffer spri^cled, did make holy or
pure the defiled, as touching the uncleanness of the flessh and in the tenthe
chapter he affyrmethe that it was impossyble that sins should have been taken
away by the blood of bulls and goats.
water of cleansing, or purging, of the which the book of numbers speaks,
sins were forgiven, and not only uncleanness of the body was purged, and yet
blood was not always shed when this was done, but ones before through sleynge
of a red heffar to make that water, Thou may say, good reader, that
although Paul meant that nothinges almooste, which were unclean, in the old
law, were made clean without blood sheddynge, either even than, ^ before,
yet that saying of his may be applied to the time of the new law, for as much as
in this time there is no remyssion of sins given with out blood shedding,
that is to wit, without the virtue of Christ's blood once shed on the
cross, and that the same is applied to us by the mass, as by the other
sacraments. Without faith in the strenghe merit and virtue of this blood
sheddynge than to come, no sacryfyce of the old testament did put away sin,
finallye it may appear by the letter of this chapter that Paul mente here by
remyssion, the purgynge of certain irregularites, and uncleanness of the body,
and flesh, rather than forgiveness of sin, the trial and judgment
whereof, I refer to the learned, and will go forward to the rehersall of the
next argument, which is this, taken out of Paul's epystles to the Hebrews,
thus writing.

Christus semel oblatus est ad multorum The fourth reason. ^^b. 9. semel.
peccata exhaurienda. Christ is ones offered in sacrifice to consume, or to
take away many men's sins, upon this that Paul affyrmeth, that Christ was
ones offered up in sacrifice for our sins, they argue, and reason that the
mass is no sacrifice, for then Christ must neades be offered, as often in
sacrifice, as mass is said, the which is plain against saint Paul, saying,
that he was ones, and not often times offered for men's sins, and therefore
it must neades follow that ye mass is not a sacrifice propitiatorye, or
purchasing to us grace, and forgyuenesse of sins.

This reason though it be judged The solution.
never so strong, yet it is but very weak, and of little force. For (as s.
Auste^ says) Christ was ones offered for us, and yet if we believe and remember
his coming to us he is daily offered for us, so that albeit he was ones
offered on the Christ was offered by the preistes of tholde law in figures and
heofiereth him self at his last supper when he of fered the paschall lamb
cross, where he shed his precious blood, and died for all the worlds
offenses, and that being a priest, and exercysynge also a preistes office
after the order of Aaron, yet he offered him self under the form of bread at
his last supper (as I have proved before sufficiently) and daily does offer in
the mass by ye ministry of the preiste, after thorder of Melchizedech, which
made sacrifice to god with bread and wine, as ye Genesis shows, where Gene.
14.
of I have entreated before at large S. Austen says the.xxiii, epistle which
he wrote to the bishop Boniface: was not Christ ones of fred in sacrifice in
him self, and yet he is offered in the sacrament not only on all the feasts
of easter but every day also for the people? That saint Paul meant only in
this place of the death of christ, and that his blouddye sacrifyce was ones
done for all on the cross, and nothing of the sacrifice under the form of
bread and wine, which was fygured by Melchizedeches sacrifice, it appearethe
plainly by certain words of that same chaptre, which are these. Neque ut
saepe offerat semetipsum, que^ admodu^ pontifex intrat in sanctaper sigulos
annos in sa^guine alieno, alioquin oportebat eu^ frequent pati ab origin
mu^di. Nu^c au^t semel in co^su^matione seculoru^, ad destitutionem peccatiper
hostia^ sua^ apparuit. Not yt he should offer him self oftentimes, like as ye
bishop enters into the holy places, every year with the blood of an other,
or else he must neades have suffered death often from the beginning of ye world.
But now he has ones appeared by his host, or sacrifice in the end of the
world, to the putting away of syn^e. Nothing ca^ be spoken more plainly, tha^
this is to declare that Paul meant of yt sacrifice, which is joined with suffering
of passion, and death, that ones is done, and offered for ever, and shall be
never offered again, because Christ dyed ones for our sins (as Paul says
to the Romans) and shall never suffer death again Romans 6.
that notwithstanding, he is offered daily in the mass without passion, or
pain, that we may the better, and the souer be partakers of the grace, which
he purchased for us by his death. But of this enough, now to the next reason
of Martyn Luther.

Saint Paul says the nynth The fyfthe reason.
to the Hebrews, that if Christ should oftentimes offer him self in
sacrifice, that than he must neades suffer death often, but he can not dye, nor
suffer death oftentimes, therefore he does not offer him self often in the
mass, as he neades must, if the mass were a sacrifice, wherefore the mass is
no sacrifice. The solutio^


This reason is soyled already in the aunswerynge to the last argument, when I
said that Vrbanus Regius and his folowers say vntruelye that we defendyng the
mass to be a sacrifice, do crucyfye christ again as much as lies in us.
Paul would that, if Christ should sundry times offer him self in sacrifice in
his own form, by pourynge out his blood, as he did ones on ye cross,
that than he must needs oftentimes suffer death, but so he does not offer him
self at the mass but only under the form of bread and wine, without all
pain, and sufferinge. Saint Ihon says in the Apocalypse. Agnus occisus est
ab origin mundi. The lamb, (christ Ioh. i) was sleane from the beginning of
the world, not that christ tha^ suffered death (but many years after, when
Gala. 4.
ye time appointed (as Paul says) was come) but yt tha^ it was appointed by
gods prouydence yt he should dye for man's offenses, and that his death was
fygured by the death of Abel, and other like, being at the beginning of the
world, so christ is offered in sacrifice at the mass, not that he suffers
there again, but that there he is offered for the remembrance of his death
ones suffered on ye cross, wherefore this reason is clean wiped away, and the
next anon shall be, which is this, co^piled also of s. Paul's words, y^ x. to
the Heb. where he thus says.

Lex per singulos annos eisde^ The syxte reason.
ipsis hostijs, quas offeru^t indesine^ter, nunque potest accedentes perfectos
facere, alioquin cessassent offerri. etc. The law (says Paul) never could
make them perfytte, which came to it, by the same hosts, or sacrifices,
which the preistes every year do offer without ceassyng, or else they should
have ceased to be offered, for as much as the haunters, or kepers of it,
should not have any longer grudge, or conscience of sin, upon these words
thus they reason. The sacrifices of tholde law were for yt cause oftentimes
(as Paul says) offered, because they were weak, and not of strength to put
away sin, and to deliver me^fro^ grudge of sin in their consciences, for
if they could have done this, they should have cessed to be offered, wha^ they
had done it, but ye sacrifice of christ's flesh, and blood, ones offered upon y^
cross, was strong, and sufficient inoughe to take away the sins of all
the 1. Pet. 2. 1. Io. 2. Apo. 2.
world, as the scripture witnesses in sundry places, therefore by S. Paul's
reason, Christ ought no more, after his death to be offered in sacrifice, as
he should necessarely if the mass were a sacrifice, wherefore it is no sacrifice.

This reason has some apparaunce The solution.
of truth, though it be very false in deed. For saint Paul me^t yt the
sacrifices of ye old law were of them selves imperfect, weak, and not able to
put away man's sin, and therefore it was needful that many, and diverse
hoostes, and sacrifices should one succeed an other from time to time, during
that law, now christ is not oftentimes offered in sacrifice at mass, because
his sacrifice done ones on ye cross, was not able, and sufficient to take away
al men's sins, but because men do daily sin, and they have neade to have the
virtue of that sacrifice done on the cross, ones for all, applied to them,
which is done by the mass. Again in the old law, there was not always one,
and the same sacrifice offered, but many, and diverse, for their feebleness, and
insufficie^cy, but so it is not in the new law, for there is continually one
hooste, and the very same, is offered in the mass by the priest which Christ
on good friday offered upon the cross for our sins although in the mass it
is offered under the form of bread and wine, and was upon the cross under
the form of flesh and blood, so that the sacrifice is one, albeit the manner
of offering it be not one, but diverse, as the flesh raw, and roasted is one
thing, though it be altered in his qualities. This is S. Chrisostoms mind, as
it shall appear in the soylinge of ye next reason, which is this, gathered
also ho. 17. in. He.
out of Paul's epistle to ye Hebre. Vrbanus Regius abuses this authority
against the sacrifice of the mass, as Luther his master does.
the.x. chapter, where he thus says Vna oblatione consummauit in se^piternu^
sanctificatos. Christ has made perfect for ever with one oblation the^ that
are hallowed, or made holy, Upon these words Luther and his scholars, make this
argument.

S. Paul does affirm, that The seventh reason
christ has made perfect for ever with one sacrifice upon the cross, those
which are sanctified, therefore we need none other sacrifice beside that to make
us perfect, before god, and thereupon it folowethe yt the mass is no sacrifice.

To this I say, that it is great The solution.
marvel, that Martyn Luther will take out of this epistle of Saint Poule,
any witness against the sacryfyce of the blessed mass, For as much as he
denies the authority of it, and says that Mark Luthers, unshame fullness,
it is not saint Paul's letter, But such is his manner, and others like to him,
that they are not ashamed to deny the authority of some books of scripture,
the authority of the church, and the holy doctors, and yet when they seem
any thing to make for the setting forth of their heresies, than they will use
the^, but let this go. Saint Paul this mente by his words above rehearsed,
that Christ our savior, offering him self to his father a sacrifice of sweet
sauoure, (as Paul says in an other place) did make men beleuynge in him, and
doing penance for their sins, perfect, and did take away their sins
according to saint John baptistes saying. Ecce agnus dei, ecce qui tollit
peccata mu^di. Lo the lamb of god, se him that takes away the sins Io. 1.
of the world. This I say Christ has done for us, ones offering him self
on the cross, the which Moses law, and all the sacrifices of it, could
never do (as s. Paul says in this tenth chaptre) though they were never so
oftentimes offered, and for this cause Christ's sacrifice done ones on the
cross is perfect, and sufficient to do away all the worlds offenses,
which is not offered again at mass, under the form of bread and wine, for
the vnperfectenes, and in sufficiency of it (as I have before often said) but
for the applyenge thereof to us, for the remembrance of Christ's death, and
the great, and tender love, which he showed toward us in the tune of his
passion, that therbye we excited, and moved, should love him tenderlye again,
and finally, for the attainement of that grace, which Christ did merit, and
purchase for us, offering him self on the cross to appease his fathers
wrath. Many Note how many men are deceued in valuinge of the virtue of christ's
death.
men are shamefullye deceived in this matter, putting no difference between
the merit of remission of sin, and the applyeng of such merit. The church
of Christ never taught otherwise, than that Christ only was a sacrifice
deseruynge, or meritinge grace, and for giuenesse of sin for us, the only 1.
Cor. 6. 7 Ti. 2 1. P^. 2. Apo. 1. 5, 14
price for the raunsom of the hole world, and the only redemption, which
boughte us with the price of his precious blood, and yet the mass is a
sacrifice representynge and aduertisinge us of Christ's blouddy sacrifice, and
death, by the which, the grace (as I have already said) and remission of sin,
that christ through that his sacrifice did merit for us, is applied to us, If
thou wylt say that christ (as Paul's mind was) did so take away al sin with
that his one oblatio^, or sacrice done on ye cross, that we neade now no
sacrifices for the purgynge of sin, than what need we the sacrifice of
confession made to god, of laud, thanks gyuynge, of a contryte heart, of
mortifienge our affections and lusts, of alines, and semblable other which
god commands in scripture to be done? wherefore think not, good reader,
that saint Paul mente, that christ had so satisfied for our sins, with
that his one oblation done on the cross, that thereby all other sacrifices
are annulled, abrogated, and abolyshed clean, as unfruitful, and
vnnecessarye, but only to declare of what, and how greatte efficacy, force,
and strength that sacrifice was and is, for the taking away of sin, and
making a man (beleuynge, and repenting for his vices committed) perfect before
god, which all the sacrifices of the old law, a thousand times and oftener
offered, could never bring to pass, and therefore they ought to be forsaken,
and left of, Christ's only sacrifice received, embraced and observed. This
was saint Paul's only mind, as the letter it self euydentelye shewethe.
But yet ye will percase say to me, CHRIST did sufficiently, An objection
and perfectly satisfye for our sins with this one oblation, and made the
sanctyfyed, perfect for ever (as saint Paul here affirmethe) therefore there
is no neade at all of the sacrifice of the mass, to satisfy for our sins, or
to make us perfect before god. This is a great blyndnes of men. Did not christ
also sufficiently fast, weep, and pray for us, and yet we must fast, weep, and
pray for our sins forgiveness? did not he also pray, being in this world,
sufficiently for our trespaces, Heb. 5
and that notwithstanding he cesseth not to pray for us? Therefore, To. 8.
Heb. 9. Gene. ^.
like as god did make al things perfect within the space of.vi. days, and yet
he works even now (as christ said) in conseruing the same his creatures: so
christ with one oblation did sufficiently, and perfectly work our salvation, me
rytynge for us grace, remyssion of sins, and glory, and yet he ceasseth not,
nor will till the worlds end, to work our health, and salvation, by the
holy sacraments, and diverse other means, whereby we are made partakers of
that his most sufficient and perfect oblation, and sacrifice, or else we
should be damned for ever. Read Chrysostom the.xvii. homily on this
epistle, in whom thou shall find that the preiste, at mass does offer christ
in sacrifice, notwithsta^dinge that Paul says that Christ did make us
perfect with one oblatio^. Of this sufficient, now to the next reason; fet
likewise out of the same Paul's epistle, where he thus says.

Vbi peccatorum remissio, iam The eyghte reason
non est oblatio pro peccato. That is. Where or after there is remyssion of
sin, forth with there is no oblation for sin, to these words they add.
But christ has through his death, and oblation done upon the cross, taken
away the sins of all the world (as many textes of the scripture do
witness) therefore there remains no sacrifice, or oblation necessary for ye
doing away of sin, and so the mass is no sacrifice for sin.

Saint Hilarye, good christen reader, said well, that he is a good Lib. 4. de
trinitate:
and a mete reader of the scripture which brings not with him in his fansy or
head the understanding of it, laboring to make it seem to signify that
thing, which he has before conceived, and fantisied, but takes the
understanding of it of the causes, why it was written, and the circumstaunce
of the text. As Martyn Luther, and his scholars do not, but clean contrary.
These words of Saint Paul make as much against the sacrifice of laud,
thankesgyuyng to god for his benefits, of penance and such other, as against
the sacrifice of the holy mass, as it is euydente, and therefore let us see,
what Paul meant by them. Truly his The solutio^
mind was to show unto the Jews, which would that the old law and the
sacrifices of it should be kept with christ's gospel, and that his death was
not a sacrifice sufficient to put away man's sin but it was needful that
the old sacrifices should help thereunto, that Christ by offering him self
ones upon the cross did so perfectely, and sufficiently take away sin,
that afterward there neaded none other sacrifice of Moses law (than abolyshed)
no nor it was not necessary that Christ should dye again to offer eftesones
sacrifice for sin, as though that one sacrifice done on the cross were not
sufficient. This is nothing against the sacrifice of the mass, for as much
as that is not a sacrifice of Moses law, nor yet distinct from the sacrifice
of the cross, but the self same, though the manner of offrynge be Chrisosto.
ho. 17. im. Heb.
diverse. For on the cross Christ was offered under the form of flesh and
blood vysyblye, with shedynge of his precious blood, but in the sacrament at
mass he is offered under the form of bread and wine inuisibly, and yet this
dyuersitie of offering does not make the sacrifice diverse, but it remainethe
ever one, like as the flesh raw and roasted, is one, and a man clothed, and
naked. But yet some peradventure will say, if our sins be forgyuen, and done
clane away by christ's death, and sacrifice, An objection commonly moved of
foles unlearned.
why should we neade to have the mass said, and christ therein offered in
sacrifice for them? I say to that fond question, that as well they may ask why
should baptism penance, fasting, alms, prayer, The solutio^
faith, hope, fear, charity, and such other be neadfull, sith our sins are
forgyue^ by christ's passion? May it not be said to these men Matt. 22.
as christ said to the jews Erratis nescientes scripturas, ye do err or go
out of the way knowing not the scriptures, because they think that christ
has by his death so taken away sin, that there ^ gross error of many men.
is none remaining among us. For than wherefore should christ teach us to
pray for remission of our sins? Why should penance Matt. 6. Luc. 24.
be preached for remyssion of sin as christ said it ought? for what cause
did christ give to his apostels, after his death, and resurrection, authority,
and power to remit the penitent persons sin, if they Joan, 20: ^eto, 2.
did confess them? Why did Peter command the people to do penance, that
they might be baptized for to receive remyssion of their sins, if Christ
had in deed and in effect, so done away sin by his death, that noone
should afterward remain? They which would gladlye live after the flesh, and
the leude lusts thereof, do lay all on Christ's back, saying that he has
done suffycyent for us, we neade to do nothing, but Saint Paul even in
this epistle the.v. chapter, teaches us an other lesson saying. Christus
factus est omnibus obte^pera^tibus sibi, causa salutis aeternae. Christ is
made the cause of everlasting salvation, to all them which do obey him. Loo
we must obey Christ, commaundyng us to believe, to hope, to love to fear god,
to pray, and to keep his commandments, or else Christ shall not be to us a
cause of everlasting salvation, although he has dyed for us, that we should be
saved, but rather an occasion of our damnation, as Symeon said to our Lady.
Ecce hic positus est in ruinam multorum, Lo this thy son Christ is put to
make many fall, or extremely to decay. To. 8. Haeredes dei sumus, si tame^
co^pati mur, ut co^glorificemur. 2. Tim. 2. si co^mortui fuerimus, et
co^uiuemus, si sustinebimus, and co^regnabimus. We are gods heirs (saiethe
Paul) if we suffer with Christ, that we may be gloryfyed with him.

If we dye with Christ, we shall live with him, if we suffer, we shall reign
with Christ. These conditions, and many other, are required by the scripture
as necessary for to attain life everlasting, though George Joy calls
the^ the honorable fathers Steven lord bishop of Winchester, as things of
his muention. To be short, if only christ's passion were sufficient to save
us, without any thing done of our part, than all men should needs be saved
(for christ dyed for all the hole world, as John testifies) the which is 1.
Io. 2.
manifestly against the scriptures. Again, If this were true take hell away
clean, as touching men at the least, do thou not see reader, that
Lactantius said well. Argume^ta ex falso petita, ineptos, De. orig, (...). li.
2. ca. 6.
et absurdos exitus semper habent. That is, arguments fet, or gathered of a
false pri^ciple, have always tryflynge ends, unapt to the purpose, and
folysshe. But I have tarried over long in the handlynge of this argument, and
therefore I will say therein no more. They yet reason farther, after this sort,
upon these saint Paul's words, shame fully wrasted from their true sense
Volu^tarie peccantibus nobis, post The nynth reason.
acceptam noticiam ueritatis, iam no^ relinquitur pro peccatis hostia To us,
which do sin voluntarilye, after we have received the knowledge of the
truth, now there is left no hooste, or sacrifice for sin, if there be left
no sacrifice (says these men) for sin, it follows, that the mass is not a
sacrifice propitiatorye.

To this I answer, that the The solution.
autours, and setters forth of this argument, do not understand Saint
Paul's words, or else they reason upon them against their own conscience,
seeing that they make nothing for any such purpose, as in deed they do not.
For Saint Paul meant, that men offendynge after they had ones received the
faith, and the truth of the gospel, being Christened, should not trust to be
again raunsomed, and reconcyled to god, by an other cross, or by the death
of Christ again to be crucified, and offered to god in sacrifice, as in the
old law, the sacryfyces were oftentimes offered for sin, for if they had
that hope, they should be deceived, because Christ died ones for our sins
(as Peter sayethe) and shall never dye again, as Paul 1. Petrt. 3. Romans 6.
witnesses, for he lives a life immortal, and ever shall. Thus saint
Chrysostom does expound Paul in this place, saying. Hostia ultra non est, hoc
est secunda. Crux ultra no^ est, hostiam quippe hanc uocat. An host is no
more, that is ye second cross is no more, for he calls this a cross. Vna
namque hostia perficit in perpetuum eos, qui sanctificantur, non sicut iudaica.
Cautos nos uult efficere, ne speremus ultra, secundu^ iudaica^ lege^ aliam
hostiam. That is to wit, For one hooste makes them perfytte for ever which
are hallowed, not as the Jews hooste. He would make us The jews hosts often
times offered could never make men perfect in their consciences, as Paul says
Heb. 9.
ware, ye we should not trust to have offered for us an other host, after the
Jews law. Hitherto saint Chrisostom. Some expound this text, that saint
Paul should mean that they, which do sin after they be baptized, and have
received ye faith, and continue in sin, doing no penance therefore, should
take no profitte by christ's death, but harm rather, because they shall be more
grievously punysshed (not living after their profession, and faith) than if
they had never been christened, as Christ and Peter do say. This touches
them, which Matt. 11. 2. Petrt. 2.
following mad Martyn Luther do believe that only faith, without good works
should be sufficient to save them. Finallye this text may be understand of
them, that sin of malice, and do rejoice in their ill deeds, of whom Solomon
speaks, saying. Laetantur Proverb. 2.
cu^ malefeceru^t, and exulta^t in rebus pessimis. They rejoice in their minds
(which they show also outwardely by signs) when they have done ill, and do
brag, or leap out with excedyng gladness, in warst things. The sacrifice of
christ done on the cross, can profytte these men nothing except they amend
and repent. For as much as the meaning of these words, do depend upon
them, which went a little before, whereby Paul did exhort the Heb. to
stir, and provoke one another to love, and good works, that no man in time
of persecution should forsake the church, or congregation of ye faithful, I
think Paul mente, that neither christ's sacrifice ones done on the cross
could save them, that did leave the company of the christened, and forsake
their faith in christ, nor any other which they should look for. But yet I do
not prefer this mine exposition before saint Chrisostoms which seems to me
very right, and true. The nynth reason made against the sacrifice of the
mass, is this.

Saint Paul says, deus erat in christo mundum sibi reconcilians, The tenthe
reason.
non reputans illis delicta ipsorum. God was in Christ, reconcylynge to him
the world, that is al people of the world, not imputing their sins to them.
Upon these, and such other textes of scripture, which do testify that god is
pleased through christ's death, and we set in his favor, they reason, and
argue, that there is no need utterly of any sacrifice, to appease gods
wrath, and displeasure, toward us conceived for our sins, for as much as he
is alredye pleased by christ's death, and blouddy sacrifice, and therefore the
mass is no sacrifice propitiatory.

The answer to this argument The solutio^
is sone made, for they take wrong the scripture, which says that god Matt. 3.
is pacified, and appeased by christ's sacrifice ones done on the cross,
thinking that he is pacified indifferently to all men, and that christ took
away in deed, and in effect al ye worlds sin^es, so that straight with,
after his death none did remain, which is plain false (as I have declared
before) for than the Turks, the Jews, the Sarasons, with all other not
beleuynge in Christ, and those that believing in him, dyeng yet impenite^t,
should al come to heaven, and should none be damned. Therefore the truth is,
that albeit Christ dyed for all indifferently, yet those only shall be saved by
his death, which do or shall believe i^ him perfitly, ame^di^g their lives through
penance, hopi^g in gods mercy promised for his sake to us, love god and their
neighbors as the^ selfs, fear god, give alms to neadye, do pray and
observe gods commandments. These only shall be saved by christ's death (I
speak not of infantes) and none other, the which christ meant, saying. Hic
est sanguis noui testame^ti, qui pro multis effunderur in remissionem
peccatorum. This is Matt. 26.
the blood of the new testamente, which shall be poured out for the remission
of many men's sins, he says of many, not of al, because all men should not
fulfill the above rehearsed things, necessary for the attainemente of grace,
and salvation purchased by his death, in the which, and such other is
contained the co^ditio^, that George Joy G. Joy.
mockyngly, and ungodly, callethe Wynchesters condition, in his unlearned
raylynge book made against that honorable prelate, but to his own great
shame, if he be not shameless, as it should appear by that his book, that he
is. The confutation of whose tryflynge The honorable lord bishop of
wichesters book.
and deuyllysh book, he that lysteth to se well set forth in his colors, let
him read my lord of Wynchesters answer made to him, which is full, on
every side, both of high wit, and also of deep learning. But my lord neadeth
no more my commendation, than the sea water, or the son^e the light of a
candell, therefore I will speak no more of his praise, but go forth on my
purpose, to the confutation of the next argument, which thus they make.

That which is a sign, and a Th^^ ^^th reason.
representation of a sacrifice is no sacrifice, But the mass is a sign, and a
representation of christ's sacrifice, ones offered by him on the cross for our
sins, Therefore it is no sacrifice. This argument has Vrbanus Regius
without any prouf of it as though it were inoughe for him to say it only.


They prove the second part of this argument (which needs no proof) by
christ's words saying, do ye this for my remembrance, which Paul also
recyteth to the Corinthians, but they prove not the first part thereof, which
is very false, following therein certain In proaemio de opificiodei
philosophers, which (as Lactantius testifies) so did reason of all
things, that were dark, and obscure, Vt ea, quae asserunt, probata, and
cognita videri velint. That they would those things to seem proved, and known
which they do affirm, or approve. Where they say that one thing can not be
a sign, a remembrance, or a representation of a sacrifice, and a sacrifice
also, that is false. For wherefore I beseech the good reader, may not the
mass be a sacrifice, and yet a memory, sign, and representation of Christ's
sacrifice offered ones upon the cross, as well as the paschall lamb, was a
very sacryfyce in deed, as the scripture witnesses, and that
notwythstandynge, a sign and representation Exo. 12.
of Christ's sacryfice to come. Chrysostom the seuententh sermon upon the
epistle of Saint Paul to the Hebrews plainelye says that the mass is both a
remembrance of Christ's death and sacrifice offered ones on the cross, and
also a sacryfyce not dystynete from that, but the very self same, as wherein
is offered the same body, which christ did offer on the cross for us.
Truly we may prove by that, that the mass is commanded of CHRIST to be
said for a remembrance of his death, that it is a sacrifice rather than the
contrary, after this sort. That which is done in remembrance of a thing
passed, ought to represente it perfytlye, and especially the chief part
thereof, but the mass was ordained of christ to be a memorial of his death,
whereat he did offer him self a sacrifice, and that was the chief thing he
than did, therefore the mass ought to represente and to put us in remembrance
of that sacrifice, which it can not do, except it be a sacrifice, wherefore
it is a sacrifice. Finally christ said not, do ye this only for the
remembrance of me, for than that text should make much more for mine
adversaries purpose, than now it does, The next reason is this.

Christ's oblation, and sacrifice The twelfe reason
offered on the cross was most sufficient, and puisaunt to take away clean
all the sins of the world, for as much as it was offered by him which was
both god and man also, defiled with no spotte of sin, therefore we have no
neade of the sacrifice of the mass to purge us of sin, and they which do
join this sacrifice with christ's sacrifice ones offered upon the cross, do
seem to diminishe the might, virtue, efficacy, and strength of Christ's
sacrifice, showing there by that it is not of it self sufficient to deliver us
from sins danger, but that it wants help of ye sacrifice of the mass.

Many me^ think this a strong The solutio^
reason, when in deed it is very feeble, and weak. For as no learned man that
is catholic, does deny that Christ's sacrifice offered upon the cross is
sufficient, and of virtue inoughe to do away all sin of the whole world,
even so no good Christen man, nor woman will say nay, but that this christ's
death, and sacryfyce must neades be (as I have oftentimes said before) applied
to us by the sacraments, and other means provided of god there unto, among
the which the sacrifice of the mass is one not of lest necessity, as it
appears before in this book sufficientlye declared, and therefore I will let
that pass, and go forward in this matter to the disprouynge of the next
reason, which is this set forth by one Vrbanus Regius in latin, and translated
into englysh by wyllyam Turner. wyllyam Turner The.xiii: reason.


If they work (says he wiselye like him self) with their daily sacrifice (as
they call it) remyssyon of Vrbanus Reginus reason
sin, I pray you the^, what sins did the blood of the new and
everlasting testament take away?

Did ever man hear, or read, The solutio^
so fond, and folly she a question, as this is? who says that the mass, or
the sacrifice thereof, does take away sins without the virtue of the blood,
which Christ shed for the establyshemente of the new testamente? Who does
not ascribe the forgyuenesse of all sins unto Christ's death, and sacryfyce
offered to god on the cross, as the only merit or merytoryous cause
thereof? Again what man, except he want faith, wit, or learning, will
deny, but that the merit, virtue and strength, of that CHRIST'S blood
shedynge, must neades be applied to us by the sacraments, and other
necessary means, that we may thereby be made partakers thereof, for the
remyssion of our sins obtaininge of grace, and salvation everlasting? Now the
mass (as I have declared already sufficiently) is an application of that
Christ's merit, consystynge in the offering of him self, a sweet sacrifice to
his father, for the pleasinge and pacifienge of his wrath toward us for our
sins, and puts away no sin, but through the virtue of christ's death,
and blood, as al defe^ders of it do affirm, though Vrbanus Regius, and his
scolers maliciouslye do lay the contrary to their charge. Further yet these
men reason, saying.

Christ by his death has satisfied The xiiii. reason.
sufficiently for our sins, and with his blood washed the^ away, according
to the prophecye of Esaye the.liii. chapter, he did bear our sins, and was
corn for our wickedness, of ye which it follows and is a good argument, that
all the oblations, which are beside this, are vain, and void, the which
they pretend.

Hitherto Vrbanus Regius, The solution. Naughtye books
whose leude, and ungodly book of the comparison between the new and the old
learning, is among the people in english, to the poysoni^g of their souls, as
many other The kings majesty like a most Christen prince has by his
proclamarion redressed this matter
naughty books be, the more is the pity yt it is so suffered. God would that
men, and women, now had no less zele to the truth, nor love to their own
souls, tha^ the Ephesians (which were idolaters) had when saint Paul
preached to the^, that they would bring forth their books of heresye and burn
them, as they did their ill books, but to the argument of Regius, which
has as little learning in it, as godlynes. For what learned, or godly man
would reason after this sort, Christ has by his oblation satisfied
sufficiently for our sins Therefore all other sacrifices and oblations be
vain and void? Does not the scripture command us to offer diverse kinds of
oblatio^s and sacrifices, notwithstanding the sufficiencye of Christ's
oblation, and sacrifice? Read ye.vii. the.xiiii. the.xxxiiii. and xlv. chapter
of the book called Ecclesiasticus in latin, and in english, the book of ye
son of Sirach, where mention is made of certain oblations, which Christ's
death made not void, as y^ oblatio^ of alms, and other diverse. Does not christ
him self speak of offeringe sacrifice, in the fyfte of Matthew? does not
saint Paul Romans 12:
command us to offer up our bodies a sacrifice to god? does not saint Peter
make mention of offering 1. Petri. 2.
to god spiritual hoostes, and sacrifices? does not s. Paul call the
conversion of the people Romans 15.
to the faith an oblation? does not Dauyd say, Tunc acceptabis sacrificium
iusticiae, Than o lord you Psalm. 50.
shalt accept the sacrifice of righteousness? Does not he also commanude us to
do sacrifice saienge Sacrificate sacrificium iusticie, and Psalm. 4.
sperate in domino. Offer ye sacrifice of righteousness, or verteous liui^g, and
trust ye i^our lord, as though he had said, except ye live well, if ye had all
faith (as Paul says) your trust in god is but vain, and rather
presumption, than very hope, or trust, as theirs undoubtedly Iacobi. 2.
is, which say ye only faith do justify man, or is sufficient to save him
without good works, as s. Paul, and James both, do plainly Romans 2.
witness. Moreover Dauyd speaks of the sacrifice of laud, the, c and syxte,
and the hundred and.xv Gala. 5.
psalm. Item, in the fyfty psalm mention is made of the sacrifice of a
contrite heart. To be short, does not saint Paul say, that god is pleased,
or appeased with the hosts of liberality, and alms Heb. 12.
geuynge? Who is therefore so mad to say, that christ's death, and satisfieng
for sin, has made al these oblatio^s vain, void, and of none effect?
How with christ's sufficient satisfaction it does agree, and stand, that the
mass is a sacrifice (whereby we are made partakers of the passion of christ) I
have oftentimes showed already, and therefore I will now pass over that
thing, and rehearse mo of their reasons. Vrbanus Regius again thus says
(wyselye.)

To raise up a new oblation is The.xv. reason.
to set little by the first. But they that defend the mass to be a
sacrifice, do eayse up a new oblation. Therefore they set little by christ's
oblation, made on the cross.

He proves not the second part of this argument, because he saw that it was
plain false, and that it far passed his wit, and learning to prove it.
For no man sets up the mass, but Christ only him self (as I have before in
sundry places of this book declared) and it is not a new sacrifice, nor yet
any other than that very self same, which christ did ones offer on the
cross, (as saint Chrisostom Homili^. 17. in hebre:
truly says) though the manner in offering, which Christ used in the time
of his death, and now is used at mass is not one but diverse, like as I have
opened before so that this reason is plain void and of no strength. Moreover
the same Regius thus bableth very fondly. When they say, that sins be
releassed, and forgiven in the sacrifice An objection
of the mass, it follows after their opinion, that that only sacrifice on the
cross did not satisfye for all sins. This he says with out all proof of
his saienge, which The solutio^
is very false. For it is true that sins are releassed, and forgiven by the
sacrifice of the mass, and yet Christ did sufficiently satisfye by his
sacrifice offered ones on the cross for all sins, as Ihon says 1. Io^. 2.
in his first epistle the.ii. chapter. The mass, as a mean, and an
application of christ's bloody sacrifice offered on the cross, does put away
sin, through the virtue of that sacrifice, so yt the releassing of sin by
it, is and ought to be ascribed to christ's death. We say by baptism, sin
is forgiven, by penance, faith, hope, prayer, alms deeds, with such other, and
yet it were great folly, and blyndnes to argue thereupon that christ's only
sacrifice did not satisfy for all sin. Now to Luther again who thus
reasons ungodly.

It is not lefull to set up any sacrifice The xvi. reason
to be a worshypping of god without express commandment of god or without
manifest scripture therefore, but there is neither express commandment, nor
plain scripture, that the mass is a sacrifice, or yt the priest in it should
offer any sacrifice. Therefore it is no sacrifice The first part of this reason
is false The solutio^
for Abel offered sacrifice which pleased god, without commandment or scripture,
as the fourth of the Genesis does testify, and Job also for his chylderne.
Furthermore all the Job. 1:
catholyke doctors are clean in this opinion, that Christ at his last
supper did institute the sacrifice of the mass, and commanded his apostles
to offer there at his blessed body, and blood in sacrifice, saienge, Hoc
facite in mea^ commemorationem, Do ye this for my remembrance. Luke.xxii.
Finally we believe many things not expressed, nor commanded in Verities not
written expressly in scripture.
the scripture, as the continual virginity of the most blessed, and
honorable virgin marye Christ's mother, for the denial of the which Saint
Jerome called Eluidius an heretic. Also the baptism of infantes or babes, can
not be proved by express scripture, but only by tradition of the apostelles,
as Origin, Saint Austen, and Dionise Li: 6. co^. i^ To. Aduer. faustu^ lib.
de. ecclesi. hierarch.
Paul's disciple do say. I pass by, diverse other things necessary to be
believed, although scripture neither commands them to be done, nor speaks
any thing of them, of the which I will put forth shortly a book, god
willing. They yet reason thus against the mass. The.xvii. reason.


That can not be a sacrifice, which the preiste does eat, because a sacrifice
is wholly offered to god, and no part of it is turned to ma^s use, but the
priest does wholly eat the sacrament. Therefore it is not a sacrifice.

O blyndnes of Luther, did The solutio^
not the Jews eat the paschal, or passover lamb, and yet that was a
sacrifice, as it appearethe in the scripture plainly? And where he says, that
a sacrifice is wholly offered to god, and no piece of it turned to man's use,
that is true only of one kind of sacrifice, called in greek holocaustum, that
is al burned. For in the old laue the jews did ^leye beestes, which having
their bowelles taken out were laid hole on the altar, and burned, so that of
these only no part was turned to man's use, the which Martin Luther applies
falsely to all other sacrifices, therefore this his reason is not worth two
peason, as this is not made by him

The sacrament of thaulter is a The xviii. reason.
gage, or a pledge of gods promise made of the remission of sin, and
obtaininge of life everlasting, by the eating of it, as it appear the in
Iohans gospel, saying, he that eats of this bread, shall live for Ioa^ 6
ever, therefore that thing, which is consecrate in the mass, can not be a
sacrifice, for as much as one thing can not be a gage, and also a sacrifice.
Hitherto leude Luther without all learning.

To this I answer breifely, The solution.
that the mass is both a pledge, assuring us of the perfourmynge of gods
promysse touching remission of sin, and the life everlasting, and also a
sacrifice, in diverse respects. For it is a sacrifice, for as much as it is
offered of ye priest to god, after ye churches ordinance and a gage, or
pledge, in as much as it is given to us of god, as a certificate, and an
assurance of forgiveness of sin, and glory celestial, at the length to be
of us received, through the worthy eating of Christ's body. Wherefore this
reason is soyled clean. Now when Luther thus argues.

The sacrament is a gift, given The.xx. reason.
to us of god, as christ says Accipite, take ye, this is my body but one
thing can not be a sacrifice, and a gift, because the nature of a sacrifice is
to be offered to god, and of a gift to be given of god, which are contrary,
and can not agree together in any one thing.

What ignorance is this of The solutio^
this great doctor, whom his scholars are not ashamed to call Daniel, and
the lantern of the world, which brought the light into it? If (good christen
reader) one thing could not be both a gift of god given to man, and also a
sacrifice, than Abell did offer no sacrifice, for those things which he
offered, were the gifts of god, as the text shows, nor Abraham, nor Job, nor
the Jews offering of beasts, corn, and other things by the commandment
of god had been any sacrifice, because al those things were gods gifts, as
al creatures be, according to the prophet David's saying. Domini est terra, and
plenitudo eius Psalm. 23.
The earth is our lords, and the fulness of it, are not the praysynge of god,
geuynge thanks to him, the confession of his name, giving of alms, with many
other things sacrifices, and yet they are al gods gifts, as Paul says. Quid
habes 1. Cor. 4.
quod non accepisti? What have you (that good is) which thou haste not
received? Therefore the prophet 1 paral. 29.
Dauyd said. Tua sunt omnia domine, and quae de tua manu accepimus, dedimus
tibi. Lord all things are thine, and we have given to the, those things,
which we have received of thy hand. This ye church confesses in the canon
Nihil deo preter ^ sua damus. we give no thing to god beside his own. G.
Nazianze. oratione. 16.
of the mass, saying. Offerimus praeclarae tuae maiestati de tuis donis, ac
datis, hostiam puram, hostiam sanctam, hostiam immaculalatam, panem sanctum
vitae aeternae and calicem salutis perpetuae. We do offer to thy very excellent
majesty of thy lyberal or fre gifts, and things given to us, a pure host a
holy hooste, an undefiled host, holy bread, of everlasting life, and the
cup of salvation perpetual.

Lo here thou seeste, reader, that the church, christ's spouse (the foundation
and pyllar of the truth, to whom christ promised the holy ghost the spirit
of truth, which should abide with it for ever, that it should not holly err in
the faith) does confess one, and the same thing Tua ex tuis tibi offerimus we
offer to the says Chrisostom i^ his mass* thine own things, of thine own
to be a gift of God, and a sacryfyce offered to him. Ought not we rather to
believe this, than Martyn Luthers folysh bablyng, grounded upon no learning?
but of this sufficient. An other argument of his framynge is this, which I do
rehearse, that men may se his great and exceadynge ignorance in scripture, and
not for any learning, or strength it has. The xx. reason
The sacrament of the altar was called of Christ, when he did institute
it, the new testamente in his blood, as it appears the.xxii Lu. 22. 1. Cor.
11.
of Luke, But nothing can be both a sacrifice, and a testament, because a
testament is received by the executour of the maker of it, and a sacrifice is
offered to god.

This reason is easelye soyled, partly for as much, as only the blood of
Christ is called the new testamente and not the flesh, and that
improperlye, because the new testamente is confirmed, and establyshed, by
sheddynge Heb. 9. Gro. 24.
of it, as the old was by the blood of beasts. Also the sacrament is called
the new testamente because it is a gift of the new testament, or a thing
bequeathed of Christ therein, as peace is, which Christ bequethed to his
disciples when he should depart from them by death, as John testifies ye.xiiii
Joan. 14:
chaptre. This notwithstanding, it is a sacrifice, for as much as it is
Testamentum est institutio percipiendae baereditatis morte testatoris obsignata
Heb. 9.
offered to god at mass, for ye quick and dead. A testament properlye, is an
ordinance of a man's last will, concerning the distribution of his goods,
ratified and assured with his death, as Paul says, and so the sacrament of the
altar is not called a testament, as it is evident. Finally the new testament
Testamentum dequo christus l*quitur, est ordinatio uitae aeternae ^ gi^am
indiscendae, christi morte obsignataquod ide^ dicitur aeternum quod uitae
aeterna est ab aeterno preparata electis. and quod illa est aeterna. Matt. 25.
in an other signification, contains the law of faith, hope, charity, the
commandments, counsaylles, and the promises of Christ, after the which
sort the sacrament cannot be called a testament, as every learned man
perceaueth, and therefore it is called the new testament for two the first
causes above mentioned, with the which it stands very well, that it is also a
sacrifice, but of this reason I have spoken inoughe, wherefore let us here the
next, thus fashyoned out of fasshyon.

The communyon or housle, of one lay man profyteth nothing another, Therefore
the preistes mass does nothing avail the people, but only him self.

Did ever man hear, or read ^he.xxi. reason.
before Martyn Luther came, any so fond and folysh an argument? The apostels
of christ, receiving their housell of him, did therewyth profytte us
nothing, therefore Christ's consecration of the sacrament did profytte us
nothing, Is this a good reason? Is it like of the lay man's receauynge his
housle, and of the preistes saying mass? who, but Martyn Luther is so
ignoraunte, and blind to affirm that? But the blind leads the blind, till
both fall into the den of heresye, and eternal damnation. Beware, good
reader, of such blind leaders, lest thou repent, when it is to late.
Again, thus Luther reasons, saienge.

One man can not be baptized, or christened for an other, nor marry a wife, for
an other, therefore one can not offer sacrifice for an other,

This is a reason mete for such a teacher: Why did not he as well argue thus,
one man can not be christened, nor marry a wife for an other, therefore one can
not pray for an other, nor give alms for an other? Does not that follow as well
as the other upon his first proposition? Did not Job offer sacrifices Job. 1.
for his children? Did not the preistes of the old law offer Leui, 9,
sacrifices for the peoples sins? Does not saint Paul say that Heb: 5.
every priest, or bishop, is chosen to offer gifts, and sacrifices, for men's
sins? believe not therefore good reader, this doiynge ignorant techer, which
erreth so plainly against gods holy word, as ye see in these arguments
alredye recited, that Luther did, and as thou shalt se in the reasons now
following, of which this is one.

The lay people do not offer The xxii reason
sacrifice, when they receive the sacrament, Therefore ye preistes likewise do
not offer sacrifice, when they do eat it, and so the mass is no sacrifice.

This reason is so sclender, and The solutio^
weak, that it is not worthy to be rehearsed, much less to be confuted. The
Jews eatinge the paschall lamb, did not offer sacrifice, neither the layte,
nor the preistes, and yet the preistes did offer him in sacryfyce, before
they did eat him, as the scripture shows manifestlye, after like sort,
the preistes of the new law, though in receauynge the most blessed
sacrament, they do not offer sacrifice yet they do offer the body and blood of
our savior Christ to god, before they take it, as the canon both of the
greake, and also the latyne mass, playnelye declares, wherefore this
argument is of no pith, ne strength, as ye next is, fourmed after this manner.

If the mass were a sacrifice, or The xxiiii. reason.
deyned by Christ, (as ye say it is) than it should follow, that the apostles
at their masses, had offered sacrifice, ensuinge therein Christ their masters
sample, and commandment, byddinge them do that which he had done him self.
But they did not offer sacrifice in their mass. Therefore the mass is not a
sacrifice.

Martyn Luther thus trauaileth The solution.
to prove the second part of this reason, which is that the apostles at
their mass did not offer sacrifice, we read (says he) in thactes of the
apostels, that they did break bread about the howses, and so they received it
(which is understand of the sacrament) and made no sacrifice, because
sacrifice was and is now ever offered in the temple, and not in any pryuate
house. The solution.


To this I say that that breaking of bread was but a distribution, or a giving
of ye holy body of christ to the people which was before consecrated, and
offered unto god a sacrifice: For that is oftentimes in scripture, the
signification of this word frangere, to break, as in the prophet Esaie the
eight and fyfty chaptre, where we read these words frange panem tuum
esurienti, break thy bread to ye hungry that is, give it to him Moreover there
were (belyke) some hallowed places about those howses, in the which the apostles
said mass, and made sacrifice to god, before the temples were builded.
Finally a temple is not utterly necessary to offer sacrifice in, as now
experience of the church declares, and so by this answer, another of Luthers
reasons is soyled, which is: that Another reason of Luthers is soyled by the
way.
Christ at his maundye did not offer sacrifice, institutynge the mass,
because he was not then in the temple, where sacrifyce should have been offered,
but in the geste chaumber or a parler, where men did use to souppe, for if a
temple had been so necessary to offer sacrifyce, that none could have been
offered, except in it only, than CHRIST had not offered him self in
sacrifice at his death. which is against the scripture for than he was not in
any temple, but on the mount of caluary, as the gospels do playnelye tell.
This reason therefore is clean, and clerelye done away. yet Luther goes
forth thus reasonyng.

If the mass were a sacrifice The.xxv. reason.
we might therewith worship, and honor god. But we can not so do.
Therefore it is no sacrifice.

That we can not worship god with the mass, he goth about this to prove, by
the words of Christ, written yt fourth of John's gospel. Io. 4.
Oportet eos qui adora^t deu^, in spiritu, and veritate adorare, They that do
worship god, must worship in spirit and truth, therefore the mass, which
is an outward thing can not serve any thing for the worshyppynge of god, as
it should do, if it were a sacrifice, and for that cause it is none.

This reason is grounded upon The solutio^
the ill taking of christ's words which do not exclude al outward things
from the honouringe of god (as Martyn Luther and his scholars suppose) but they
show that in the time of the new law, ye figures, and ceremonies of tholde
law should cease, and be anulled clerelye, so that it should be lefull for
men to worship god not only in the temple of Jerusalem, as it was duringe
the old law, but they should honor him in every place in spirit, and
truth. Also christ meant by those words yt the error of the^, which did
worship god in ye hill, or mountain called Seir, as the Samaritanes did,
should likewise be taken away, as the text it self plainly declares, that
christ meant, and therefore this letter makes utterly nothing against the
sacrifice of the mass, which is no ceremony of the Jews law, nor error of
the gentiles, but a sacrifice instituted by christ at his last supper, the
which he that does offer devoutly to god, does honor and worship him in
spirit and truth, wherefore this argument is answered unto sufficiently.
Martyn Luther would have in the new law, no outward sacrifice, such as the
mass is, but only inward and spiritual, as to offer to god our bodies in
sacrifice through mortifyenge out affections, and carnal lusts, Rom, 12,
to offer lauds, and thanks to god for his benefits bestowed on us, with
such other sacrifices, which every christen man, and woman offreth to god, and
is thereby a priest, as Peter and Ihon in the Apocalips 1. ^^, 2, Apo, 1, ^, 5,
do witness, and there is none other priest no sacrifice, nor preisthoode, but
this only. Hitherto Luter, which did not se, he was so blinded, or else he would
not se, such was his myscheuous malice, that in the law of nature, men offered
to god outward sacrifices, as Abel, Noe, Melch. and other diverse, and were not
content to honor god with in ward sacrifices only. Also in the time of Moses
law the Jews did likewise by gods own commandment, why therefore should
not christen people after, semblable and like manner worship god in the time
of the new law, sithe every law has a sacrifice, or a sort of sacrifices
propre to it, as a kind of preisthode also? Nor it is not to be marueiled at,
why The. (...). reason.
saint Paul so largely entreating of christ's preisthode, and of the
comparison between him, and Melch, made no mentyon of the sacryfice of the
mass, which is after the order of Melchizedech. For saint Paul speaks there
only of those Heb. 7. The solution.
things, which might make any thing for the auauncynge, and settinge forth
of the excellency of Christ's preisthoode, before the preisthood of Moses
law, to the intent, he might cause the Jews to leave, and forsake that
sacrifice of Moses, and clean only to christ's, being far more excellent,
and of greater strength to save man, than the other, to the which purpose, it
should nothing have helped, if he had entreated of christ's sacrifice under
form of bread and wine, as it is euydente to all learned men, and therefore
in that whole epistle to the Hebrews, Paul never spoke of that sacrifice, but
only of that, which Christ offered ones upon the cross, whereby he made man
perfitte in soul, which thing, al Moses sacrifices could never bring to
pass, and for that cause christ, which offered that noble sacrifice, was and
is a priest much more excellent, than Moses preistes were. Now we se how
little it makes against the sacrifice of the holy mass, that Paul spoke not
thereof in his epistle sent to the Hebreus. Moreover it follows not that the
mass is no sacrifice because Paul to ye Hebrews spoke not of it, for many
things are true, not ones touched there. Thirdely it was a matter to hard for
the capacity of the Jews, to perceive how the mass should be a sacrifice
available for the quick and the dead, for they neded easy doctrine rather
tha^ hard, as Paul says to them the fyfte chapter, and therefore he made no
mention of that matter to them. Now where Luther allegeth the twelfe of the
Romans, the second of saint Peter's first epistle, and the Apocalipse, to
prove al christen people prestes, he is deceived shamefully, because those
textes do prove as well yt all christian folk be kings as preistes, and so
they are i^ deed spiritually, and in wardly, for as much as they do rule their
affections, and carnal desires with the bridel of reason, which is a kings
office, and they offer spiritual sacrifices to god, as prayer, tha^kesgiui^g.
etc. being thereby spiritual preistes, but not as we be yt have taken preisthode
of yt bishop. Hytherto^ I have rehearsed M. Luthers reasons against the mass,
and the disprouing of the^ also, now let us se, what one of his scolers, called
Philip Mela^ethon has said against the same, first this he says, beside and
above y^ which I have already confuted, of Luters his masters forgyng.

The scripture says yt we are justified, or made righteous by faith, The.
^xvii. reason.
when we do believe yt our sins be forgiven for christ's sake, now if ye
mass do take away the sins of ye quick, and the dead, through ye work done,
our justification should happen by the work of the mass, and not of faith,
which ye scripture suffers not, it follows thereupon that the mass is no
sacrifice, putting away the sins of the quick, and dead.

As touching ye first part of this The solutio^
reason, which is yt we be justified through faith, when we do believe yt our
sins are forgiven us for christ's sake, I say yt it is not sufficient for
the attainemente of rightousnes, and remission of our sins to believe that
they be remitted for Christ's deaths sake, except we forsake also our sins,
and do diverse things there unto necessary by the assignement of god in
scripture, as I mind to declare in my book of justification, which god willing
I will shortly put forth, therefore now I let that pass, and touch the second
piece of this argument, which is, that if by the work of ye mass we should
obtain remission of our sins, tha^ it should not come by faith. This
proposition declares ye autours ignorance, or else his malice, conceived
against the truth and the clergy, of whom he does falselye report, that they
say, that the mass of it self, without faith in christ's death, should bring
to us remyssion of our sins, where they affirm with saint Romans 3. Heb. 11.
Paul, that our righteousness, does come by faith, and that without faith no
man can please god. These are all very true, remission of sin comes by the
passion of Christ, by the mass, by baptism, by faith by penance, by hope,
by fear, prayer, fasting, alms deeds, and such other, as the scripture
shows, but only christ's death is the merit of grace and remyssion of
sins, Therefore this argument is of no force ne pith, as in deed this is not
The. ^xvii. reason.
which he makes after this sort.

It is an horrible thing to attribute, or ascribe, as much, and as great
virtue to the priests work which he does saienge mass, as to christ's death.
But they ye affirm the mass to be a sacrifice, abolysshinge the sins of the
quick, and the dead, do no less give, and ascribe to the priests work, then
to christ's death, Therefore the mass is no such sacrifice.

He proves not the second part The solutio^
of this argument, which is very false, but only says it, as though his
saying should be sufficient with out all proof, to verefy his deuellysshe
purpose. All catholyke people do believe that by the mass the sins of the
quick, and dead, are forgiven, as by an applyeng of christ's death to us, and
by ye virtue there of, and that not by the priests work chiefly, but by
christ's own work, offering him self in sacryfice to his father, by the
ministry of the priest, saying mass, and this is not to ascribe as to ye
preistes ded^ or work, which he does in ye mass, as to christ's death, which
Mela^cthon falsely says we do, yt defend the blessed mass to be a sacrifice,
pacifieng gods wrath. Moreover he says, that sin can not be vanquysshed, and
overcome but by The.xxix. reason.
faith in Christ, as Paul says the fifth to the Romans.

We justified through faith have peace, wherefore the pain, which the souls
departed in grace (and are not yet in heaven) do suffer cannot be overcome by
the applyenge of an other man's work, soch as the mass is, said by a
preiste, and therefore the mass is no sacrifice profitable for the dead, to
deliver them from the pain, which they do suffer, to make them clean, that
they may enter into heaven.

O wonderful blyndnes of this The solutio^
man, which saw not, that justification brings remission of mortal, and
deadlye sins, which they obtained, while they were here living, whom being
dead the mass does avail, for the remission of venial sins, and the
releasing of their temporal pains, which they suffer, because, when they
lived in this world, they did deserve and merit that not only masses, (as
saint Austen affirms) but also Ad dulcitiu^ questi. ^ ineucha. 109
prayers, and alms of the quick should profit the^, if they were applied to
the^, therefore this Melancththons reason is clerly of no value ne force.
Vrbanus Regius does Vrbanus Regius false ly reports of preistes as many
other do, that they make marchaundyse of the mass
falselye, and spitefully say, that the preistes, ydell fellows, do make
marchaundise of the mass, left to be a memorial, and remembrance of ye
death which brought life. For they do take money for saying mass as a
stipende, and wages of their labors to live by according to their vocation,
and manner of living. Is it not lefull for them to take somewhat for that their
service, for as much as every man may live by the sweet of his face, as god
said to Adam, that he should? does not Christ say Gene. 3. Mat 10. Romans 1. 1.
Cor. 9.
that the workman is worthy to have his wages for his labor? Does not also
saint Paul say that they ought of duty to give Romans 1^.
temporal sustinaunce, and goods to them, of whom they had received spiritual
things? May not a priest take money for his sustynaunce, when he prays, and
says mass for the people, as well as the preacher for his sermons, which
may lefully live by that his labor, as Paul declarethe the ninth chapter of
the first epistle to the Corinthians? Therefore we preistes make no
marchaundise of the mass, like as the preacher does not of his preachinge,
Now good peroratio.
Christen reader, thou have not only the truth of this matter set forth at
large in this book, but also a co^futation of al, that Martin Luter (which of
al men first began to babble against ye blessed mass), could write for the
maintenance of his heresye, to the which I have added some other of his
scholars arguments, with a reprouynge also of them, so that no man can
hereafter excuse him self, through want of knowledge of the truth, which will
read over this book without all affection diligently, more considering what
is therein said, than who said it, and set it forth to be read of all men:

Accept in good worth, gentil reader, this my endeavor, and labor, taken to
profyt them, which either be clean rude, and unlearned, or else have but little
knoweledge, and understanding in scripture, for learned men have no need of
this my labor, whereby the truth is declared after a gross, and a rude
fasshion, for the easier understanding of the unlearned, for whom it is done.
The grace of god be with the good reader, and keep the from all heresye, or
sone deliver the from it, if thou be alredye therewith infected, and poisoned,
that thou stedfastely and undoubtedly beleuinge all things pertaining to a
christen man's belief, and obseruinge gods commandments, may, at the end
of thy life, come to that joy which god has prepared for his true lovers, and
christ our savior most dearly has boughte for the same, with sheddyng of his
precious blood, to whom be glory, honor, and imperye for ever. Amen.

Faults escaped in the printynge,
Fol. pa. li. faut correction 2 12 perfecto: perlecto 39 1 12. after this word
(name) lacks these words in every place. 42 2 21 ipsaru^: ipsoru^ 43 1 1
read That is. 43 2 7 quod: quodda^ 44 1 8 read Against whose fond. etc. 46
2 17 judea: iudeae 48 2 2 the tribe: ye tribe 50 1 20 ecclesia^: ecclesia 58 8
18 ecclesia^: ecclesia 60 2 against ye first line in the margin, read, (...),
for (...). 70 2 in the margyn read (...), 76. 1 9. read of the sacri^fice
(thereby understanding the body of Christ offered at mass in sacrifice to god,
which the counsel commands to be given to the sick before he depart, if
he ask it) 76 2 17 for the consecration read the sacrament of the altar. 77
2 4 Ramanes: romans 78 1 21 porfyt: profyt 82 1 13 sacrificanerit:
sacrificauerit. 83 1 22 Audrew: Andrewe 87 1 3 craftis: craft 92 2 19 heaven:
heuon 95 2 19 sanguis: sanguinis 97 2 19 wit: with 99 2 2 lacks. (in) before
the first word. 103 2 5 conniuiu^: conuiuiu^ 105 1 11 figmnetu^: figmentu^ 106
2 8 socerdos: sacerdos 1011 2 4 funt: sunt 1042 1 1^ co^scientia^: co^scie^tia

Prynted at London in Aldersgate street by John^ Herforde. 1546.


