TWO SERMONS, OF Ionahs punishment, Preached by Master Henry Smith.

And published by a more perfect Copy then heretofore.

printer's device of Thomas Dawson (McKerrow 241), of three cranes and a vine
with bunches of grapes

LONDON Printed by T. D. for Cuthbert Burby. 1607.

decorative border

THE FIRST SERMON OF the punishment of Jonah.
Jonah. 1. 4. 5. 6 4 But the Lord sent out a great wind into the Sea, and there
was a mighty tempest in the Sea, so that the ship was like to be broken.

5 Then the Mariners were afraid, and cried every man unto his God, and cast
the wares that were in the ship into the sea, to lighten it of them, but Jonah
was gone down into the sides of the ship, and laid down, and was a sleep.

6 So the ship-maistr came to him, and said unto him, what meanest thou, O
sleeper? Arise, and call upon thy God, if so be that God will think upon us,
that we perish not.


THE sin is past, but punishment is to come: for after disobedience follows
wrath, the heavy companion of wickedness. For although she love not sin
yet she will be always where wicked nesse is? yea, also full of strength like
a Lion which will not be tamed.

He that made the winds, commanded them, and they obey his voice, the winds
and the waters obey him, but man will not obey him. He says not that a wind
arose, but says, The Lord sent great wind. Therefore we see the cause of this
tempest, and so of Ionahs punishment. The just Judge of the whole world may not
suffer sin unpunished, therefore he sends, the Lord sent out a mighty
wind. Then it was not by chance, nor yet by witchcraft: for the Mariners
(notwithstanding they were infidels) were not so gross as to ascribe it to any
such cause, but rather thought it to be sent from some revenging power, being
provoked to indignation by some particular person among Psalm. 107. 25 to 31
them, that had committed some heinous fact: else why did they cast lots to
know him and find him out that had sinned, and whose sins did procure this
tempest to be sent: Though this wind had almost drowned Jonah, yet he said,
The Lord sent it: so the Lord sends wind to bring ships to land in safety,
and the same Lord sends wind to drown, and break, and sink other ships,
Therefore Job said when he was bereft of all his substance at Job. 1. 21.
once, and left as poor as might be, that the Lord had taken them from him,
who had first given all to him, adding also thanksgiving even for the
persecuting hand of God, which did so molest him. If some had so much loss by
tempest as Job, and such dangers as Jonah, they would surely say with Job,
blessed be the name of the Lord for it: But Job. 2. 9.
more (it is to be feared) would say with Jobs wife, Curle God and die.

And there was a great tempest in the Sea. First, God spoke gently to him,
Arise, Jonah, go to Niniuie, then he would not go: but seeing words would
not serve, the Lord would take another way, and try whether that could make him
obedient to his voice. So the Lord caused a mighty tempest to arise in the
Sea, like the messengers that were sent to compel folks to come to the
banquet, that seeing the commandment could not, the tempest might bear rule.
For unless it be an imperious cross we will not yield: so headstrong is
sin.

Therefore it is said, that God sent out a great wind, so that there was a
mighty tempest, that sin might have the foil, and God the victory.

He that sails to Tharshish, or whether he is forbidden to go, would have
as good wind as he that sails to Niniuie, or whither he is commanded to go.
But he that does one thing for another, shall receive one thing for another, as
Achab did, who hoped according to the saying of four hundred false Prophets,
to go up and prosper but he went up and perished. As surely as Jonah thought
to arrive at Tarshish, so surely the Spaniards thought to arrive in England:
but as Ionahs company wondered at this tempest, so at these Spainards
destruction, their fellows at home wondered, yea were astonished, how their
invincible power could be destroyed. But God is strong enough for them that
kick against him, and disdaineth to be crossed of dust and ashes.

And there was a great tempest in the sea. The ship went on roundly for a time,
the Prophet sleeping, the Mariners sporting, their sails flaunting, the waters
calming, the winds guiding, so merrily sin goes on before the tempest comes.
The wind blows not yet, therefore go on yet a little, and yet a little more,
but suddenly the tempest rushes upon them before they are aware of it, and
tumbles them up and down, and suddenly all is like to be undone. He came to
the haven, and paid the fare, and entered the ship, and hoist up sails, and
went on forward, and all to fly from God, but now it appears he fled not
from him, but to him, Therefore David says, If I take the mornings wings and
fly aloft, lo, thou art there. If I go into the neithermost depth, thy hand
will find me out: therefore whither shall I fly from thee? So that when we
think that we fly from God, in running out of one place into another, we do
but run from one hand to the other, for there is no place where Gods hand is
not, and whither soever a rebellious sinner does run, the hand of God will
meet with him to cross him, and hinder his hoped for success, although he
securely prophecieth never so much good unto himself in his journey. What had
he offended the winds, or the waters, that they bare him such enmity? The
winds and the waters, and all Gods creatures are to take Gods part against
Jonah, or any rebellious sinner: for though God in the beginning gave power to
man over all his creatures to rule them, yet when man sins, God gives power
and strength to his creatures to rule and bridle man. Therefore he that even
now was Lord over the waters, now the waters are Lords over him.

But if Jonah had thought that God would have brought things to pass, he durst
not have been so bold in this enterprise. Therefore we may see that sin
has no eyes while it is on doing, Tush (says the soole) it is fair weather
yet, while he goes to the stocks.

So that the ship was like to be broken. We have heard of the cause and
greatness of this tempest, the effects follow, whereby the greatness of it is
the better expressed. First in the ship, then in the Mariners.

The ship was like to be broken. The ship was fair and goodly, so strong that
it might have encountered with instruments of war, and so sure made that it
might have endured great tempests, and made many voyages. Yet now with one
tempest, and at one voyage, it was so deformed, so weakened, in such a taking,
that it was like to be shiuered in pieces: and all because Jonah was in it.
Such strife is always betwixt Gods wrath, and man's disobedience. When Gods
word will not turn us, Gods winds, and other instruments of his wrath Pro 7.
22.
must threaten to ouerturne us.

Then the Mariners were afraid, and cried every man to his God, and cast the
wares out that were in the Ship, to lighten it thereof. The effects of this
tempest in the Mariners were two.

First, they were afraid, then used means to appease the tempest, and save
themselves.

Then the Mariners were afraid. Mariners living in the Sea, almost as fishes,
having the waters as their necessariest element, are commonly men void of
fear, venturous, and contemners of danger. Yet now seeing the tempest so
vehement on a sudden, that their goodly and tall ship was tossed almost to a
cock boat, and cracked so, that it was like to be torn all to pieces, and
thereby were fully persuaded it was no common nor ordinary storm, but a
revenging tempest, for some extraordinary cause, sent out upon them by some
great power provoked: now they are afraid, they tremble for fear, like women
that shrink at every stir in the Whirrie, and like little children when they
are frighted, least their ship break or leake, and so sink, and they loose
their goods their ship, their lives and all.

Now these nought-fearing fellows, these high stomaked men, which desire
danger are brought down by danger, fear and quake like a young soldier which
starteth at the sound of a Gun.

And cried every man unto his God, and cast forth their wares into the Sea,
etc. The means which the Mariners use to save themselves, are diverse. First,
they cry to their gods, then when that appeased not the tempest, they cast out
then wares, They prayed. This is then a manifest sign, that the Heathen
acknowledge there is a divine power, seeing and governing the whole world: for
they would not have prayed at all, but that they were convinced, there was a
God, who beheld the affairs of men, and could in extremest danger deliver
whom he would. Nature convinced them, the works of God made them to
acknowledge it. For in man, though the Lamps be wasted since Adam consulted
with the devil to be a God, yet there is some little light left which
dwells in darkness like a spark hid in the ashes, whereby the stately and
most glorious frame of the world, with all the wonderful variety of the
singular effects of all the excellent creatures therein considered, man cannot
but acknowledge there is a God. Yea his mighty power the blinded Gentiles saw
so expressly in all the creatures, that they imagined it to be impossible for
one God to work them all: therefore they thought that there were diverse Gods,
as there were diverse seasons, diverse nations, diverse trades, diverse languages,
diverse and sundry kinds of all things: and so diverse nations worshipped
diverse Gods, When the wicked see that all their inventions will not bring their
enterprises to pass according to their mind, but they are in extremity and
like to be cast away for want of succor, then they fly unto God, being
driven by compulsion as a bear unto a stake, and they crouch and kneel, and
make great shows outwardly, of humiliation and piety, all in hope of help
from God, and as it were thinking to deceive him by their hypocrisy,

Every one unto his God. This shows, that they were of diverse nations, for
among the Gentiles every nation had a several God to worship, Chamos was the
God of the Moabites, and Beelzebub the God of the Ekronites, Dagon the God of
the Philistines, and the Ephesians worshipped Diana. In our necessity 1. Sam.
5 5. Act. 19. 35.
we fly every one unto his God: that is, in the time of necessity every one
does fly for* help and ease unto that which most feeds his own humor, or
best pleases him, that wherein he reposeth most confidence, persuading
themselves of sufficient relief from that: some run to their coffers,
thinking that there it is that is able to procure ease from any troubles: other
some run to their delights and wanton sports, supposing that there is no
trouble so great, but they will cause them to forget it: some to their glorious
attires and costly jewels, imagining they will now as well rejoice their
hearts, remedying their grief, as at other times they have delighted others
eyes, pleasing their sight: some to th dainty meats and some to their soft
beds, and easy standing, hoping by those to feel relief. In sickness we
cry, Come, Physic help me: in heaviness we call, Come, music, cheer
me: in war, we sound, Come, soldiers, succor me: in quarrels we say,
Come, Law, defend me: evermore leaving the Creator, which is all goodness, and
powerful in him self running to the creatures, which have no goodness nor
power,, save that they receive from him: neither by their goodness, can do us
good, but by his blessings.

And cried every man unto his God. They did well in that they prayed, but they
prayed not well? for they prayed every man unto his God: that is, unto fained
Gods, gods in name, but not in nature, and gods they were that could not help
so much as themselves.

Every one to his God, Every of these mariners did now in their extremity
call upon his God, every one upon that God, which he thought most highly of,
and whom he had in his prosperity reposed most confidence in. Now while none
could help but one, they cried to many, and by this means while they sought
to lay the tempest, they stirred it more: for their prayers being idolatrous,
were so wicked, that the Lord had utterly destroyed them, if his mercy had not
been wonderful over all his works. They prayed Psalm 14 4 15.
much like the Papists, which in extremity cry out, some to one Saint, some
to another, some to saints of this place others to Saints of that place,
thinking as these Mariners did, if one will not help, another will.

They cried. etc. They prayed, and their prayers did beat the sky, though
they could not lay the tempest. They were not as many of us be when we pray
unto God, without a sense of their danger, or without great desire to obtain
their requests. What an hypocrisy is this that is common among us, to have
vehement speeches, and loud cries, and long prayers, without lively affection
within?

They cried. Here is a distinction of crying to be observed: The righteous
cry, and as well when they are in prosperity, as when they be in calamity,
though many nothing so fervently: but the ungodly then only, when the hand of
God is upon them, and then also like bears without their prey, always much
doubting, sometimes disparing of help although they cry for it. And therefore
blessed is he that has the Lord for his God: and let them know that cry
without faith, without confidence in God, they do but cry in vain. Let not
the wavering minded man, think to receive any good of the Lord. Iam. 2. 7


And cast the wares that were in the ship into the sea Here is the second
means which they used to help themselves. Now the Mariners are content to
cast their wares into the Sea, in hope of some furtherance to save their lives
thereby: for though many will venture their lives for riches, yet they rather
part withal their riches, then with their lives. But they cast them out to
appease the tempest, or lighten their ship: but it was sin that procured
danger, and being cast away, would have saved all: which being retained, the
tempest abating not, the ship is not the safer, though it be the lighter. If
I regard wickedness Psalm. 66. 18. 1. Co. 13. 3. Cast away sin, or thou castest
away all.
in my heart, says David, the Lord will not hear me. And Paul says, Though
I cast my life into the fire, if I have no charity, if I retain malice in my
heart, it profits me nothing: if I cast not away sin, I cast away all Some
will give to the poor, and yet use extortion and usury to get money by: but
God says to such, that if they regard wickedness in their hearts, it
profits nothing, though they part with all that they have, and bestow it
upon never so good actions, they do but as the Mariners did, cast all away,
their desire nothing satisfied: for though they think themselves beneficial
to the poor thereby, and hope for reward therefore, yet God will accept of
them but as hypocrites, he will no^^ of their oblations, he abhors their
very prayers. Pro. 15. 8, until they have humbled themselves, and reformed
their own hearts before him from such uncleanness.

They cast out the wares into the sea. They would feign have laid the tempest,
that thus readily loose the wares, and cast out their very tackling into the
sea: but the sea will not be satisfied, the waters must wash Jonah 1. 11. 15.
the sinner, or there is no safety, nay the danger is greater, the sea
continually more and more troublesome, vexing them. But Jonah was no sooner
cast into the Sea, but all was quiet, the winds are calm, and the sea cease
from her raging. O that justice were executed, and he that troubles the ship
were in the sea! He that troubles, not he that against all reason is thought
to trouble: then should all be safe, yea peradventure Jonah too.

And they cast the wares that were in the ship into the sea. Observe here, that
oftentimes many are punished for one man's sin, as all the host of Israel
were punished for the sin of Achan, and here all the Mariners and owners of
Ios. 7. 5. 12. Many punished for ones sin, therefore suffer sin in none.
ship or wares for Ionahs sin, etc. to the end that men may learn thereby to
admonish one an other when they see them do amiss, with love, and not to say
with Caine, Am I the keeper of my brother? for he that is not careful to
keep his brother from sin, is not careful to keep himself either from
sin or from sorrow: therefore let us take heed, that a wicked one be not
found amongst us vnadmonished. I would there were not many worse then Jonah
among us. Will you know what I think of you? I think you are worse then
Infidels, Turks or Pagans, that in this wonderful year of wonderful mercies
are not thankful believe not in God, trust not in him, glorify not his name:
but like Pharaohs sorcerers, who seeing the great works of God which Moses
wrought passing their skill, confessed, saying, Surely, this is the finger of
God: for you confess it is the great work of God (as must needs) but where
are the fruits it Exo. 8. 19
has brought sorth in you? The captain says, I have done nothing: the
soldier says, I stirred not: but the Lord sent out a mighty tempest upon
them, and after that they escaped our hands, the Lord stretched out his
mighty arm against them, and Pharap is drowned in the sea, so that he never
attained the land of promise which he gaped for, and made full account to
possess. Further, herein we may note, Man's extremity Gods opportunity
that extremity is Gods opportunite: for when the wind had almost ouerturned
all, and the waters had almost drowned all and destruction had almost devoured
all, then, and notafore, was Gods opportunity to set forth his glory. First,
they used prayer unto the divine powers for assistance: then they used such
ordinary means as they knew best in such a time, by casting out their wares to
lighten the ship of them, which order is necessary to be used of all Christians
in their necessity: First, to seek for aid and assistance at the hands of
God and then to use all such good means to Innecessity first pray then
vselawfull means
help themselves, as God shall enable them to, trusting that of his goodness he
will bless their endeavors, or else may they go over all the earth to seek
help and have none, for there is no other way. God indeed is the last refuge,
but he is also the first refuge which is to be sought unto: for he will have
us to acknowledge that man lives not by bread only, and a horse is but a
vain thing to save a man, and except the Lord keep the city, the watchman
waketh but in vain, no means can help without his blessing, But then he will
not have us careless and negligent to use lawful means: for he never or very
seldom works without means, when the means may be used by us. Danger the^
we have seen made them to fear, but fear astonished them not, but gathered
their wits together, for they used means with wisdom to save themselves. But
when the Lord sends calamity upon many of the ungodly, they have so guilty
a conscience, that whilst they feel the great hand of God, they are even
distraught of their wits, and madeas it were senseless, that they know not
what they do: yea when troubles come, it makes them like a headless Be,
which buzzeth about she knows not whither, or like the Swallow, which by
co^pulsion of the wind, flies backward and forward till it fall into the Sea:
or like Came, whose head was fraught with fears, so that he knew not whither
Gene. 4.
to go, doubting to be slain of every one whom he saw But whatsoever
befalls the child of God, he has ever matter of consolation, and some
moderation of mind to bear it withal, expecting a joyful issue of all,
Therefore blessed is he that has the Lord for his God.

But Jonah was gone down into the sides of the ship, and laid down, and was
fast a sleep. They prayed unto their gods, and their gods were now deaf while
they were tossed, and Jonah is gone to sleep when he should have been better
occupied. We come hither to hear the word, and here we fall asleep but it
were far better we were away: for we sleep when we should hear, and so
sleeping sin, and sleep in sin: therefore let them now give ear that are
asleep, for we are come to Ionahs sleeping: not that we should sleep with
him, but by his sleeping to be warned of our security, and we shall see him
waked, that we may learn to wake with him. Ionahs fast sleeping is noted, to
declare the occasion of the ship-maisters speech to Jonah: but chiefly to note
the dead security of Jonah in his sin, for as much as though the mariners
cried for fear, and cast out their goods, nay the very senseless ship seemed
to feel the anger of God, and to cry to Jonah by rolling and cracking, yet
Jonah was not once moved thereat, but lay still fast a sleep. So by Jonah his
sleeping, we see the nature of all the sons of Adam. when they listen to the
Serpent, they are like changelings, they are cast into a dead sleep: for when
they forget God and his word, and bid conscience adiewe, they sleep in sin,
and that to death, like one sick of the Lethargy.

Jonah signifies a Dove: Jonah therefore was now indeed Jonah: I mean, like
the Dove which Noah sent forth of the Arc: for as the Dove being gone out of
the Arkecould find no rest for the sole of her foot, till she returned into
the Arc again: so when Jonah rose up from the presence of the Lord, he could
find no rest for his mind, neither by Sea nor land, until he returned again
unto the Lord. For the cause of Ionahs going down to sleep was, it seems,
to ease his mind, for it was disquieted he felt it grievously troubled, the
conscience of his sin tormented it: Therefore now, O that Jonah could sleep
till the tempest were past: but it will not be, for the tempest is sent
purposely to wake him.

And he was fast a sleep. See how little Jonah is ashamed of his sin: all
the world smarted for it, and yet he sleeps: as if he should say, Neither
the winds blowing, nor the waters roaring Jonah sleeps while al else stir.
nor the ship reeling, nor the wares casting, nor the Mariners crying, with all
the stir, could move him, waken him from his sleep, or rail him from his
sin. Now Jonah might say, I was a sleep, and all might have perished for me,
if one God had not helped more then all the rest: for Jonah slept, but God
waked, and called to the winds and the waters, saying, Toss him, but you
shall not drown him: fear him, but you shall not kill him: whip him, and when
you have whipped him, send him to me, that I may send him to Niniuie. Jonah was
fast a sleep, when the winds over him were blowing, the waters under him
tossing the ship about him reeling, the Mariners by him crying, the wares in
ouer-boord casting, In all the stir Jonah felt nothing, but slept, as if
there were no stirring Yet we go far beyond Jonah in security, for the
Lord causes the tempest to blow down houses beside us, the heavens to thunder
over us, the earth quake under us, the water to ouer-flow the land about us the
fire to consume all that we have before us, the air with cold ready to kill
us, and all things in an vproare round about against us thereby, always
crossing us one way or another, and all to put us in mind of our duty, the
neglect whereof is the cause of all these troubles which the Lord does send
us: but we sleep more deadly then Jonah in our negligence, void of feeling,
because we consider not what we have done, we look not back on our sin
yet every cross should cause us to examine our selves thoroughly, and leave no
sin vnviewed, that we might lively feel our wickedness, and so duly
repent it, and soon find release of our miseries: therefore if we sleep
still, and will not be wakened, God will deal more roughly with us then he
did with Jonah, for the Lord caused a Whale to swallow him, and afterward to
cast him up again, but we shall be swallowed of that serpent which never
restores again.

He should have been their teacher, if he had not bin asleep, he should
have taught them to pray aright, if he had had any good feeling in him. But all
this while we read not that Jonah once condemned his thoughts, nor so much as
once said to himself, Jonah, take heed what thou do, thou know how God
may handle thee upon the waters? though thou fly, he can overtake thee:
though thou hide thy self, he will find thee out: though thou give thy self
to sleep, he shall give thee no rest, and awake thee to thy greater woe. How
should we be strong, if a Prophet, and such a Prophet ^s was the figure of
Christ, In Ionahs sleep two things. 1. Most secure in greatest things. Acts.
12. 21. 22. Dan. 4. 27. 30. Dan. 5. 4. 5. Luke 12 19. 20.
could not withstand this one temptation, but suffer himself to be led away
so far, that when he should run, he lay still, and when he should cry, he
held his peace, and when he should zealously bestirre himself, he is fast
asleep?

In Jonah his sleeping, we observe two things: the first is, that when we
think ourselfe most at rest, then we are in greatest danger: when ship-wracke
is most likely* then Jonah is a sleep, when Herod is vaunting, then he is
stricken: when Nabuchadnezzar is in his greatest pride, then he is turned out:
when Balthazar is banqueting, the hand writ his condemnation: when the rich
man says unto his soul, Thou have enough, then his soul is taken from him:
when the Philistines are sporting, then the roof is falling: so destruction
ouertaketh sinners when they least Judge. 16 25. 30. Suddenly destroyed.
think of it, like a Leopard which is taken while he sleeps, or a bird when
she sings: therefore suspect thy pleasures like a bait.

The second note, is the nature of sin, which is here expressed (while it is
a doing) to be not bitter, but sweet, not 1. Sin pleasant whiles it is in
doing. 2. Kings 5. 27. 30. Gehezies briberie. Genesis 9. 21 Noah's wine. David's
adultery. 2. Sam. 11 (...). 4. Pro. 10. 24. 33.
painful, but pleasant, like a harlot which shows nothing but her bravery
and beauty. Adam swallowed the forbidden fruit with pleasure, Gehezie lied
for gold with gladness, Noah drank his wine with mirth, David committed
whoredom with delight: so sinners go on merrily till wrath ouer-takes them at
unawares, like the fool, I will sit a little longer, and fold my hands together
a little, yet a little and a little longer, till poverty come as an armed man
and Gods just judgments as the whirle-winde suddenly, irresistably: then
though thou have gotten gold with Gehezie, or honors with Haman. or Naboths
vineyard with Ahab, or all the delights of the world, if thou have not an
assurance of thine own salvation, if sin be still pleasant, if it be not
bitter in thy belly, though it be sweet in thy mouth, deceive not thy self,
believe God, thy hope is but doubting, thy strongest confidence but a vain
trust.

Then the Ship-maister came unto him and said, what meanest thou, O sleeper?
arise and call upon thy God. Here Jonah is taken napping: sin has brought
him asleep, and now the ship-maister wakens him. The Mariners may do him more
good then the tempest. Whom sin should waken, peril can not waken: the
winds are not loud enough, nor the waters rough enough, therefore A Prophet
wakened by a Pagan
the ship-maister must waken him: else all shall be endangered. If the winds
will not waken him, let the waves waken him: if the waves will not waken him,
let the Manners waken him: if he will not be wakened, let him perish in his
sleep, and die in his sin.

Now mark who is a sleep, and who wakens him. Jonah is a sleep, and the
Mariners waken him, an Israelite, So God often shames his servants
an Infidel: what a thing is this, that he which is the son of Abraham, who
is wiser then a thousand Mariners, is now wakened and told his duty by a
Mariner? This is a shame for Jonah, that he which had taught Princes, should
now be told his duty by Mariners: he that long has and should still wake
others, needs oftentimes to be wakened by others: and he that should reprove
sinners, is often reproved of sinners. And thus the Lord sometimes shameth his
servants, and does vex them with a foolish nation, as he reproved Abraham by
Amalech, and Balaam Genesis 20. 9 Number. 22. 28.
by an Ass.

Now we might ask Jonah, saying, Why did thou write that thou fledst from
God, or that when thou had most need to pray, thou did sleep? If thou
had not thus laid open thine own shame, thou might have been reckoned
as one of the best Prophets: therefore why did thou so? Jonah did it to this
end, that in him we may see the reward of disobedience: for as Paul says,
Whatsoever is written, is written for our instruction: and Jonah would never
have written it had it not been for our sakes. If he have done thus much for
us, which way shall we requite him? That which he would have us to do for
him, is this, to be warned by him, to suppress all evil motions not suffering
them to take effect as he did.

What meanest thou, O sleeper? Arise. As if they should say, O retchlesse,
altogether careless, quite senseless man, art thou dead, that thou wakest
not, or benumd, that thou feel not, or deaf, that thou hear nothing, or
carest thou not whether thou live or die? Have not the winds nor waters
raging, nor our loud cries so long thundering wakened thee? Can thou sleep
in all this stir? Do not our troubles, nor labors, nor losses, nor the
common danger move thee? What meanest thou? Why do thou not come and
labor with us in this dangerous time? Is this a time to sleep in, when we
are all in peril of our lives? Shall we cry and thou hold thy peace? Shall
we labor, and thou rest? Shall we cast away all our goods, and thou lie
sleeping, caring for nothing? This is no time to sleep, it is a time to pray
unto thy God for his assistance, and to use the means that may save our lives:
up, arise, help what thou can, Jonah hearing this, did not snap like some
currish Dogs, and bite him that wakened him: neither did he as in public
dangers most are wont, sit still, devising with himself, to shift for
himself, neglecting others, but he arises, he thanked him that waked him.

Many of you come to hear the Word, and here you fall a sleep when you have
most need to be waking, but I am glad, I have now gotten a text to waken you,
for Against sleepers.
now. I cannot read my text but I must say, What meanest thou, O sleeper?
Arise. But I pray you, have I not wakened you, and yet you sleep again; If
you mark not what is said unto you, you are a sleep, though your eyes be
open: but if you wereas wise as Jonah, you would not sleep here in the sight
of all the people, but would rather get you to sleep in some corner, for Jonah
went under the hatches to sleep, and would not sleep in the sight of the Pro.
28 23. Luke 12. 37. 45. 46. Mark. 14 37.
Mariners. If you were as wise as Jonah, you would thank him that wakened
you, as no doubt Jonah did. Solomon says, that he which reprooueth, shall
have more favor of a wise man then he which flattereth. The Lord Jesus says,
Woe be unto that servant, that when his master comes he shall find sleeping:
can thou not watch one hour, says he to Peter? Can you not wake while I
speak to you? You would all be found in the Church when the Lord comes,
but you would not be found sleeping in the church. You are watched (I see you
not below) and none of you can steal a nap and not be espied, but when your
eyes be most shut, and see least, then most eyes be upon you: and I can as
well stand in the pulpit unseen, as you can sit and sleep there and not be
espied. I marvel how you can sleep, having so many eyes looking on you, so
many clamours in your ears, and God himself speaking unto you. Shall I
continue iogging till you be wakened? How long shall I preach a fore I can
convert the usurer, the extortioner, the drunkard, or the blasphemer, seeing I
speak thus long, and cannot convert you from your sleeping? What would you do
if I read some Homilies unto you, whereas you cannot wake while I preach unto
you, and speak against you? if you should see a traitor sleep on the hurdle,
or if you should see men sleep with meat in their mouths, would ye not
marvel? Yet even so do you, while I denounce the great judgments of God
against you, and while I am feeding some of you, you fall asleep, and so I
preach in vain. There is a Country whereof it is said, that it is night with
them, when it is day with us. I think that Country be here, for how many are
here that have lost their eyes and their ears since they came hither? If all
of you were, as many of you be (I mean a sleep) the strangers which come
hither to hear, would think that you were all dead, and that I preached your
funeral Sermon: therefore for shame leave your sleeping. What meanest thou O
sleeper? Arise sleep no more, and I will waken you no more.

Arise and call upon thy God, if so be he will think upon us etc. This is
another means which they use, Jonah being wakened, to appease the tempest, now
that they see they cannot themselves allay the winds, nor assuage the waters,
they desire, they exhort Jonah, to try what he can do by calling upon his
God, Arise call upon thy God. etc.

After that the ship-master had wakened Jonah he bids him call upon his God,
as if he had said, Watch and pray: he speaks like a Saint, yet he is an
Infidel he said not, Call upon our gods: but call upon thy God. The
shipmaister would not call upon his God: but (says he) Call up on thy God and
it may be he will help us if he had said Call upon our God, when he said,
call upon thy God: and if he had said, He will help us, when he said, if so
he will help us then he had showed some spark of faith. Because he wanted
help and comfort, he bids him arise, and because he was fearful, he bids
him pray. It may be (says he) he will think upon us, that we perish not. As if
he had said, Jonah, we know that thou have a God as well as we, and therefore
we say, Call upon thy God, for now every God is to be tried, therefore if
ever thou did pray in thy life fall to it now. Thus Satan leads men a blind
way with zeal, in hope of some relief being in trouble. They called upon them
for help, which were neither willing to assist them, nor able to hear them,
and when they perceived by woeful experience, that there was no kind of
succor to be had that way, they fly to God, and then Satan labors to
undermine that confidence and expectation of help, and to place in stead
thereof doubtfulnesse and infidelity. Thus Satan will be sure to lose nothing
by this bargain any way. Jonah (say they) call upon thy God, for if he cannot
help us, we are all undone and lost for we have called upon all our gods, we
have labored hard to amend our state, we have cast away our goods to lighten
the ship, but all in vain, for we are now! it the better, like the woman
which had spent all her substance Luke. 8. 43.
about Physic, yet all could not help her till Christ came. So the Papists
while they are well, they pray not every Saint and Angel for succor against
the troublesome times, but in extremity, or at the point of death none of them
can help, so that then they are feign to fly unto God or be destitute, as
like Idolaters, as one fly is like another: they are like the heathen, which
worship Juno, Venus, Neptune, Pallas, Jupiter, and the rest: some hold on the
one, and some on the other. Some say, If John be with me, I care not for all
the petty gods because I hold him chief: so another says, If Saint Gabriel
be with me, I care not for the rest: and some raise great disputations,
whether this Saint or that Saint, this Angel or that Angel be better: whether
our Lady of Bullen, or our Lady of Rome be surest: whether Saint James of
Callis, or Saint James of Compostella be strongest: and so like beggars which
run from door to door, they run from one Saint to another. If one God will
not help, another will, think these, as though the Gods were contrary one to
another, and where the one bids the other forbids. So some thought that Venus
was a friend to the Troianes, and Pallas was not their friend; as fools think
of Witches, one strikes, another heales.

Call upon thy God. They bid him call upon his God, before they knew him
Infidels desire the faith full to pray for them.
but the faithful would not worship a false God, though they may be helped by
him. By the example of these mariners, if they thought that their God was the
true God (and why else did they worship him:) we may learn the substance of
every temptation that does undermine us, namely, that it will bid us do this
evil, that good may come Sin always promises, good.
of it: Mark whenever thou art motioned to evil, if it do not promise thee
some goodness to come of it. But the servants of God ought not to do that
which is evil, though they were sure to gain all things that can be wished
by so doing: for they have learned their lesson, and how to answer Satan at
such times: Why temptest thou me, Satan? for it is written, Thou must not do
evil that good may come of it: and this is the armor called Romans 3. 8
Scriptum est, wherewith the Lord overcame the devil in the wilderness.

Here also we may see the difference between the faithful and Infidels:
for, Call upon thy God, says the shipmaster and the rest.

The Mariners bid Jonah pray to his God in their behalf: but Jonah says not
to the mariners, Pray to your gods in my behalf. And this is also manifest,
that a Papist will say unto a Protestant, and one that lives well, Pray for me:
but a Protestant if he be any thing zealous, will not The truly faithful
desire not infidels to pray for them.
say unto a Papist, Pray thou for me: knowing that when a Papist does pray, he
does it to Idols, Saints, or Angels, or at least without faith, and therefore
their prayers are abominable in the sight of God, and therefore they will not
bid them do it, because they will not do evil, to the intent that good may
come of it: whereby it is manifest, that our religion is the true religion, our
adversaries themselves being judges And so Pharao said to Moses, Pray for me:
but Moses said not to Pharao, pray for me, Saul said to Samuel, pray thou for
me: but Samuel said not to Saul, Exodus 18, 27 etc. Pharao desires Moses,
Moses not Pharao 1. Sam. 15. 25.
Pray thou for me: therefore the Mariners had need of Jonah to pray for them:
but Jonah had no need of ignorant Idolaters to pray for him. And why should
not all pray to Ionahs God, and Pharao pray to Moses God, seeing God has said,
call upon me in trouble, and I will hear thee: Call upon thy God (say they.)
When they had cried and saw no help, they distrusted their Gods, they thought
they would not help: indeed they could not: therefore they ran to another
whom they knew not, hoping to be helped by him, because they thought some God
there was that could do it. So the Papists run from one God to another, from
S. Dominick to S. Francis: and why should they run from S. Dominick to S.
Francis, but that they mistrusted Dominick? they think he will not hear them,
and so they go forward: but in the end the unknown God is thought to be the
best: yet the Lord taught not Peter one prayer and John another, but taught
them al one prayer unto one only God, and to wait still upon him, praying
still, with assurance he will be a help in due time.

If peradventure he will think upon us that we perish not. This if, perhaps,
and peradventure, cost Adam Paradise. God said to Adam, If thou do eat of
this tree, thou shall surely die. Then Euah reported these words, thus: least
peradventure we die. The serpent seeing her in such a mind so careless or
forgetful of the commandment, he came and quite changed the matter, and
said, You shall not dye. Thus sin creepes upon us, while doubt fullness
remains in us: so God says, You shall be saved: the trembling flesh says,
Peradventure I shall, etc then comes Satan, and he says, Thou shall die: so
that if you will ask what is the faith of sinners, or if you would have it
defined, it is this: peradventure yea, peradventure The sinners faith.
no: if you will ask me whereupon this faith is grounded: it is upon ifs and
ands: this is the faith of the ungodly, to say, If so be God will help us:
for they can not assure themselves of any help. But we may not doubt of our
God, and say, It may be, or, If peradventure: for we may freely pray to our
God with confidence, and may say, Our God, and the God of Jonah will surely
help us and has helped us. But yet let us know that we have sinned like
Infidels, and do deserve to be punished like the Egyptians.

If so be he will, etc. Thus if comes in like a little leaven, which sowreth
the whole lump of dow, and like the moth, which eats the whole wedding
garment, and this same littletheef has stolen away all the Papists faith.
Therefore with them wickedness lies sick in bed, and calls to every one
that comes by, Call upon thy God, and pray for me if so be he will look
upon us and help us: and so their hope when the tempest comes, is either an
easelesse horror, or a comfortless doubting

If so he will think upon us. Our God thought upon us in the time of trouble:
he thought upon us, and laid the tempest when our enemies called upon their
Gods, Saints and Angels But what do we mean, beloved, when mercy is come,
to send for judgment? for though we be saved with Israel, we deserve to be
plagued with Pharao, because we are not thankful for this, namely, that the
Lord has thought upon us in our distress; for he trauelleth with mercy,
and labors till he be delivered, he goes laden like a Be, but wants a
hiue. There are two hands, a hand to give, and a hand to receive: Gods hand to
give, and man's hand to receive: the hand of God is a bountiful and a merciful
hand, a hand laden with liberality, full of gracious gifts: therefore let us
stretch forth the good hand to receive it thankefully to embrace it,
chearefully to entertain it, and carefully to keep it, let us receive it by
the hand of faith, the hand of love, and the hand of prayer for who so comes
with his hand, shall be filled, and who so comes without it, shall go empty
away, because they have despised the ways of God: for when I instructed them,
they would not hear, and what I taught them, they would Pro 1. 24 25.
not learn, says the Lord. Jonah wakened thus, and thus exhorted to call upon
his God, soon no doubt perceived his danger, and partly with the horror for
his sin, partly for fear of the deserved, and thus threatened drowning and
other punishments, without question was grievously vexed. For he could not but
see, that the very dumb creatures were bent against him for his disobedience:
the wind blows, as though it would ouerturne, all the waters roar as though
they would drown all, the ship tumbles as though she were weary of all, and
albeit the Mariners had cried, and cast out the wares, as though they would
loose all, yet the tempest rages still, their danger is greater then ever.

Wherefore now one might have said to Satan, Satan, thou perswadedst him to
fly from his defense for his safety, and made him believe that he would
come safe to Tarshish, and there live at liberty and ease, enjoying all
temporal benefits at his pleasure, but now thou have brought him into the
prison of the ship, and it is tossed thus by this tempest likely to destroy him
thou leauest him in the greatest danger, and reioycest that Jonah quaketh at
the tempest, and has his heart a king for fear of the danger thus threatened
due to rebellion: yea, seek also to drown him, and that also in hell,
howsoever thou pretendest a desire to preserve him from troubles, and procure
him many pleasures, with much security: O most wretched and deceitful liar,
he that trusts his enemy, and he that believes thee, shall ever be
deceived. And now might Jonah say, Beware by me, for thus has the tempter
deceived me, he has allured me with flattring fantasies, and persuaded me,
that it was but an easy thing to fly from the presence of the Lord, that
sees always all things, and from whom no man, no nor secret lurking in any
man's heart can be hid, but all are always in his presence. He made me believe
that light could be brought out of darkness, that good may come of evil? for
he assures me, that if I would set forth toward Tharshish: I should not only
shun the presence of the Lord, but should live at ease like one unknown, both
for my vocation, and also for my behavior in the execution thereof, and so I
might creep into a familiarity with these people, and enjoy the benefit of
thy society. Otherwise if I went to Niniuie as the Lord commanded, they would
hate and persecute me, yea, and so I should end my life in misery, both
because they being Gentiles, and I a Jew, they cannot abide me, for the one
holds the other in contempt: and also because of my message, namely, a
prophecy of destruction, grounded upon a reproof of their vile and sinful
pleasures, Which message, Satan persuaded me, would be so hainously taken,
that no death nor torment that they could devise for me, would be thought
sufficient, and so I should be sure never to escape their hands alive if I
went: as though the eternal and most glorious God, which sent me thither, were
not able to defend me from all evil when I came thither, as well as he did
Daniel in the Den of Lions, and Christ in the wilderness among the savage
beasts. And when Satan had thus persuaded me. I believed him, and so took
my journey to fly from the presence of the Lord if I could have performed my
intention. But the Lord has beheld the stubbournnesse and disobedience of my
heart, and therefore follows me with great displeasure: he has sent out
this tempest upon the sea, whereby we are like to be over whelmed, and so
near as we are to the water, so near we are to death by all likelihood.

THE SECOND SERMON OF the punishment of Jonah.
Jonah. 1. 7. Afterward they said every one to his fellow, Come, and let us
cast lots, that we may know for whose cause this evil is come upon us, So they
cast lots, and the lot fell upon Jonah.
NOw follows another mean which the Mariners use to appease the tempest.

They cast lots. But first, they consult and consent to cast lots. The tempest
was so strong that they concluded with themselves, it was the revenging power
of some angry God, for the sin of somenotorious wretch that was amongst
them.

Seeing therefore neither they, nor Jonah praying had appeased the tempest, but
it was rather increased, and no man confessed he was that sinner, they take
counsel, and agree to find him out by lots Wherein let us observe first, never
a one of them is of David's spirit, who when he saw the people plagued, said,
Lord it is I: Every man excuses himself: for every man would extenuate his
own sin, and diminish it, and every one thinks his sin salued, when he
has excused himself. Let Adam be his own judge and he will say, The woman
tempted him to sin: and let the woman be her own judge, and she will say,
Yonder Serpent persuaded her to it. Let every one be his own judge, and there
will be such posting off of sin, that never a one will be found guilty.
There is none that will be so impudent as to say he has no sin at all, yet
few that will freely confess they have greiously sinned. Therefore these here
say every man within himself, though he be a sinner, yet he is no great
sinner. None are accounted sinners, unless they be openly detected of some
notable and heinous crime. If they be Dicers, swearers, drunkards, brawlers,
pickers, flatterers, pro phaners of the Saboath, sleepers at Church, and such
like, they be not thought sinners: these actions are counted no sins, but
rather recreations. For the multitude count none sinners, unless they be
thieves, traitors, open and gross Idolaters, and taken with such like capital
crimes: no nor these neither, were it not for fear of the law: as none among
the Jews, but Publicans, were counted sinners, all the rest were good
fellows, and just men.

The Papists say, Some thoughts, affections, words, and outward actions, not
agreeing with the Law of God, are easily washed away with a little holy water,
etc. they are not deadly, they deserve not the wrath of God, they are but
venial. Did you ever read of these venial sins in the Scripture? But think
you they have nothing but Scripture? Yes, they have Decrees, they have
decretals, the Ceremonies whereof observed, these venial sins are soon
pardoned, and they have a Pope that can forgive any sins. Thus they lesson
sins, thus they abate the price of sins, and they can buy our sins with
money, or redeem them with Masses, and by a little short penance, purchase a
large and long pardon.

And as the Mariners, every man thought he was no great sinner: so Jonah
thought with himself, Though I be a great sinner, yet am I not so greious a
sinner as these Idolatrous heathens: or if he thoroughly condemned himself,
yet unwilling to be known such a rebel, he thought it may be, it is most
likely, they are many, I but one, peradventure therefore the lot will not fall
upon me, like a thief, which notwithstanding in his own heart he
acknowledge himself guilty of that wherewithal he is charged, yet will not
confess, until the matter be thoroughly sifted, and so clearly proved to
his own face in such sort, that he cannot for shame (though with shame he
confess,) deny it. Therefore, if God had not sifted out this sinner the
better, Jonah would not have been known the man, and the Mariners would still
have contended who was the lesser sinner, therefore they consult to cast lots.

Let us cast lots. They did not use to cast lots, this was no custom among the
Mariners: but the tempest was so wonderful, that it made them seriously to
think of God, and willing to use the means prescribed by god for the ending
of doubt full matters, acknowledging that he orders all, and the Pro. 18. 18
Pro. 26. 33.
lot is the sentence of God: by the falling of the lot, he reuealeth the truth.

These like worldlings never confess God, but when he comes in a tempest:
they will not see his mercy, until his justice appear: they will not
acknowledge Gods government, before he bring on them some judgment, like
Pharaos sorcerers, who confessed not Gods Majesty, while they lived at ease,
but when the Lord plagued them, then cried out, This is the finger of God.
Exodus 52. Exo. 8. 19


Let us cast lots, that we may know for whose cause this evil is come upon us.
Why? what are they the better when they know him? what would they do with him
on whom the lot should fall? Surely they supposing, or rather clearly seeing
this tempest to be sent from some wrathful power, and that for some one man's
sin amongst them, they determined having found him, to sacrifice him unto the
God that was so offended by him, God turns evil into good, but the devil
turns good unto evil. The Gentiles had a custom in the time of the common
plague, to sacrifice one for the rest. This custom they took by imitation of
the Jews, in offering beasts, and of Abraham in offering his son the devil
that father of lies, and schoolemaister of all mischief teaching them. So the
devil took advantage to do evil by the service of God, in moving the
Gentiles to work abomination, by offering men, imitating the Jews commanded
sacrifices, But if they had rightly known the true God, they would have taken
their sins by the throat, and have sacrificed them.

Come, let us cast lots. The mariners were not so wise to prevent the tempest
before it came, as they be diligent to alay the tempest when it may not be
laid. we overtaken with Gods just judgments, are very careful always, to
use all means to be rid of them. But who keeps a watch of his own ways,
and diligently labors to keep himself free from that which necessarily
draws on it self Gods judgment, who purges himself of his sins, least
he be sick? who lets or fetches out his corrupt blood, of pride, lust,
covetousness, least he be sore: who keeps a good diet, and makes his
choice of holy excercises, godly companions, religious conferences? etc. But
know we, he is not safe that is not sound, neither he sound that is
intemperate.

So they cast lots, Whether it be lawful to cast lots, it is not evident by
this example, because they were Gentiles, and therefore no president for us:
but so far may we use them, as the word does lead us, and no further.

There are two Goats brought to Aaron, that he might Leuit 16.
cast lots, to see which Goat should be killed, and which should not: these
Goats signify Christ: for as he dyed he lived again, and as he was
buried, he rose again. Again Number 34. Joshua 7.
the land of Canaan is parted by lots, to see what part each Tribe should
inhabit. Again, that thief Achan is found out by lots, first by his Tribe,
then by his Family and lastly, by his particular person.

Again it is said, that Saul was chosen king by lots: and least any should
have said, that it was his good luck: 1. Sam. 10 1. Sam. 9.
his good lot or chance to be King, therefore the Lord appointed that he
should be anointed before he was chosen by lots. Acts 1. Pro 16 33.


Again Matthias is chosen by lots to the Apostleship in stead of Judas: so
that it is lawful in some causes to cast lots, so that they do attribute
nothing unto them and acknowledge that the lot is cast into the lap, but the
disposition thereof is from the Lord: for they must not say that it is their
chance, fortune, or good luck: for so they make an Idol of it and rob God of
the honor due unto him. For it was not Saules fortune to be King, but Gods
mercy: it was not Achans chance to be caught, but Gods judgment. Lots may be
used to prevent strife, when all other means have been used, and sometimes
before al other means, when in wisdom it is thought the bes^ means.
Brethren often and godly at first divide them inheritance by lots, as the
Children of Israel divided the land of Canaan. Therefore in the Church of
Geneua there is an order, that in the time of plague, there should be a house
set apart for the sick to lodge in, and least they should be vncomforted,
they choose out a Minister by lots to do it.

So they cast lots, Now we are come to put vpour selves to the Court of
Lawyers, to see if they will do any thing for God, for conscience, or for
love, viz that they would end men's suites quickly, and let the poor Clients
have equity. Some say, that Lawyers be good until they be Counselors, like
Lions, which will be gentle until their tallons grow: be not offended, but
amend, for malice speaks not.

I am persuaded, that if the lots were cast to see who troubles the ship, it
would fall upon the Lawyers: be not offended but amend, for malice speaks not.
A poor Client comes forth accusing one, and going home accuses a hundred:
for so many seek to gain by him, so few seek to further him, and so many
seek to hinder him, that all his gain is but labor and loss.

For a small matter many will come to law, to strive for that which with reason
might easily be attained without such contention, and others seek to enrich
themselves with contending for a small matter with their neighbors, yet in the
end loose that they sought, and that they had beside: and so they contend and
strive about a thing commonly, till the Lawyer has gained more by them, then
the thing which is in controversy is worth. These are like the Mouse and the
Frog, which strove so long about Marsh-ground, that at length the Kite came and
took them both from it. Others will come up to Law about a small matter, and
therein so entangle themselves, that they cannot rid their hands of it, until
it have almost undone them like a silly sheep that is hunting of a fly, which
runs from bush to bush, and every bush catches a lock of him, so that the
poor sheep is threed-bareere he has done, and has not a fleece left him to
cover himself withal. So he runs from Court to Court, to sue, to complain,
to plead, till he have spent his cloak for his coat: were it not better to
have cast lots for the coat at first? for the law is like a Butlers box, play
still on, till all come to the Candlestick. Therefore it is lawful, to end
any controversy in a hard matter, to use this mean.

Now whether it be lawful to cast dice, if lots may not be used (as Solomon's
words, Proverbs. 18. 18. The lot causes contention to cease, compared with
Heb. 6. 16. prove) but in hard matters and weighty causes, when the thing is
doubtful, and all good means are tried before to avoid strife: that question
is decided, which none Arguments against dicing. Pro. 18.
but voluptuous men make question of, namely, whether dice-play be a meet
exercise for a Christian soul. Solomon says, the lot causes contention to
cease: therefore, lots are to end strife, but these lots make strife: for
before thou take the Dice, thou know thine own, and no man strives to
take it from thee: but when thou castest the dice, thou do (as it were) ask
whether thine own be thine own, and make a strife of no strife. Art thou
not worthy to loose the gifts of God, which venturest to loose them when thou
need not? Do thou not deserve to forget thine own, which art so greedy
of another, that thou would have his living for nothing but for turning of
a die? Esau did not sell his birth right so lightly, but he had somewhat for it
which refreshed his hunger, but God has given thee a living, and thou spendest
it for nothing. The Mariners did cast lots to find out the sinner: they did
not cast dice to see who should win, as Dicers do: for to whom the lot
falls, he takes all, which deserves to loose all as well'as the other, and
has no right unto it by any law: for God has not allowed one man to take
another goods for the tripping of a Die, but either they must be merited, or
they must be given, or they must be bought, or else it is unlawful, ungodly,
unconscionable to take them: Besides the brawles, the cosenages, the oaths
annexed to this game, which would not agree with it, unless it had been a
meet companion for them. Thou take another man's goods for nothing, whereas
God has appointed thee to get thy living with the sweat of thy brows, for
thou take away that which others sweat for, and whereas thou should live
by working, thou seek to live by playing, like as the ape which lives by
toying. Does any dicer think he does well? Tell me what think thou? for
every sinner does condemn in his prayer to God, that which he excuses before
men: if they which are gamesters repent it, how can they which are gamesters
defend it? Thou should do nothing, but that thou would have God find
thee doing if he should come to judgment: would thou have him take thee
at dice? I am sure thou would not have God see thee so vainly occupied:
neither can thou think, that Christ or his prophets, or Apostles, or
Evangelists were Dicers, for no such lots are named in the holy Scripture, and
yet the Lords day is most profaned with this exercise, cards and dice, as
though they kept all their vanities to celebrate holy days, what have thou to
allege for dice, now evidence is given up against them? have thou any patron
to speak for them, but thy vain pleasure and filthy covetousness, which are
condemned already, and therefore have no voice by law? take away these, and
take away dice. The patron condemns the clients, when one voice condemns
another: if the exercise were lawful, such patrons as pleasure and
covetousness would not speak for it. Take thy pleasure therefore in that
which is good, and the Angels will rejoice with thee: if this were good, God
would prosper them better that use it: but neither winners nor losers are
gainers. I know not how, but there is not so much won as lost, as though the
Devil did part stakes with them, and draw away with a black hand, when no
man sees, for the winner, says he, has not won half so much as the loser
has lost. One would think that some of them should flow, when so many ebb:
there is never an ebb without a flowing, never one loses, but another
wins, but at dice. What a cursed thing is this that turns no man to good,
which robs others, and beggars themselves? the school of deceit, the shop of
oaths, and the field of vanities. Thou do not only hazard thy money (in
this game) but venturest thy salvation, and castest dice with the Devil, who
shall have thy soul. For every thing that comes well to a man, he gives
thanks, but for that which comes by dice, he is ashamed to give thanks:
which shows, that in conscience that gain is evil gotten, and that he
sought it without God. Can this be good when worst men use it most? if it were
good, the evil would like worse of it then the good: but the more a man
sauoureth of any goodness, the more he begins to abhor it, and his
conscience does accuse him for it as for sin. They which doubt whether God do
allow it, need but look how he does prosper them that use it: but they trust
not in God, (the terms of their occupation discrie) for they call all their
casts, chances, as though they relied not upon God, but upon chance. Therefore
if dice make strife without cause, if they take away others goods for nothing,
if we may not live by playing, but by labor, if they which have been dicers,
repent it among their sins, if the holy men never used this recreation, but the
worst most delight in it, if thou would not have God see thee when thou
playest at Dice, nor take thee at it when he comes to judgment, if nothing
but pleasure and covetousness speak for them, if they do not prosper which
take pleasure in it, if they trust not upon God, but rely upon chance, if
thou do not only venture thy money, but hazard thy soul, then the best
cast at dice is, to cast them quite away.

And the lot fell upon Jonah. The lot fell upon Jonah, not because he was the
greatest sinner of them all, (for so is the opinion of the common people, to
censure them worst whom they see most afflicted: Luke. 13. 1. 2. etc.
If any one be seen to bear his cross, then many will say, This is a wicked
man, and so think well of themselves, supposing that God is not bent against
them to punish them as well, (but because Jonah should feel the Heb. 5. 8 1.
Pet. 4 17. 18
hand of the Lord both punishing and preserving him, and be reformed: for God
corrects all his (...) he did his Son, to learn them obedience. But if
judgment begin with the house of God, what shall become of the ungodly? And
the lot fell upon Jonah.

Now when the sinner that troubled the ship is taken, now Jonah can hide
himself no longer. Now he might also fear to be sacrificed by the mariners
presently, For the mariners, partly for the pain they had endured, partly for
the losses they had sustained, partly for the danger wherein they remained,
were no doubt as the shee-Wolues robbed of their whelps, out of measure
furious and fully bent to sacrifice him on whom the lot fell, to appease the
wrathful God. But God stayed, and restrained the rage of the mariners, and
made them afterward willingly to abide the tempest a while, and put themselves
to more pain to save him, endeavoring by rowing to recover land. For having
heard of the true God, and though they lost their goods, having found God who
is all good, shall we (say they) destroy him that has saved us? Shall we
give him up to death unnecessarily, that has brought us to life, and assured
us to reign with God in all glory everlastingly? Surely the thankelesse are
graceless: especially they that love not, and show not forth the labor of
love for their gracious guide to God: but therefore we may see that the hearts
of men are in Pro. 20. 1. Psalm. 33. 15. Ps. 106. 40. Isa 3. 10. 6 Ezra 1 14.
Isa 3. 24. Ne 11. 1 Ps. 105. 1 Sa. 2. 30. Ps. 146. 3.
the hands of God, and he turns them which way he list, he fashioneth
their hearts every one, yea even kings hearts, as rivers of water, does he
turn, to water and make fruitful his vine: to pity and to persecute, to
honor and to shame, to love and hate his people: to deliver their power to the
beast, Reave. 17. 13. and again to eat the whores flesh, and to burn her
with fire 17. 16. 17. Therefore let us never fear to perform our duties
whatsoever, to whom soever: for he forms the hearts of all, who has
promised to honor them that honor him. but to make them contemptible that do
despise him, Neither let us put. confidence in man, nor in Princes; for their
hearts are rivers of water of them selves fleeting easily as they be led
following But especially let us not forget chiefly to make prayers,
supplications, intercessions, and to give thanks for all those on the
godliness, or profaneness of whose hearts, the flourishing 1. Tim 2. 1.
or defacing of the gospel of Christ Jesus, and the chosen of God does most
depend.

And the lot fell upon Jonah. Now Jonah could not deny he was that sinner,
unless he would accuse God of unrighteous judgment: for the lot is cast into
the lap, but the whole disposition there of is of the Lord. Now therefore he
must needs confess it The winds thundering. the waves tumbling the ship
cracking, the mariners quaking, upon their gods crying, their wares forth
casting, Ionahs prayers requested, to cast lots consulting, Jonah kept himself
close, he would not be thought that sinner. The wind said I will over turn
thee: the water said, I will drown thee: the ship said, I cannot hold thee:
the mariners said, We cannot help thee: his prayers said, We cannot profit
thee, his conscience within bleeding, and God at the door of his heart
knocking, and the lots now ready for casting, said threatningly, For thee the
tempest is come, thoufugitiue, and we will discover thee.

Yet Jonah conceales his sin, so much did heabhorre the shame of men, of
strange men, a few men, frail men, or the fear of the fury of the flesh,
Therefore after the winds had roared, and also the waves raged, and the ship
reeled, and the mariners cried, and the lot, his conscience, and God himself
threatened him, the lot also condemned him, and the fear of being sacrificed by
sinners to Satan terrified him, so that he forthwith repented thoroughly, he
declared it openly, and confessed his sin freely. Such a stir has God before
he can come by his own: he must cross us, and set himself and all his
creatures against us: he must strain our bodies, or leave our souls, and
constrain us to it, before we will return from our wicked ways and
thoroughly humble out selves to yield him due obedience. O the goodness of the
great God? O long sufferance and bountifulness unspeakable, which not only
leads, but also in the chains of love draws us to true repentance?

It was Gods great goodness to Jonah, that the mariners sacrificed him not:
greater, that he truly repented: that God continues in his calling, and
blesses his (whose flying from God, deserved flinging to Satan) not so much
solemn preaching, as sudden confession, and short denuntiation of vengeance,
yea made it so powerful, that it converted Idolatrous heathens, most hardened
Idolaters: first Mariners, then Ninevites.

For what a blessing felt Jonah, God vouchsafing him of this honor, to offer
them a lively, holy, and acceptable sacrifice to God, by whom he presently
before greatly feared to have been offered a dead, unholy, and so a delightful
sacrifice to Satan. This fear banished, and that joy possessing him, what a
merey of the almighty did Jonah think it? But before he converted the
Niniuities, he was more to be humbled, fuller to be strengthened, better every
way to be prepared. Therefore God would have the sea to wash him, the Whale to
fast him, and yet miraculously safe to preserve him, that being purified, he
might pray fervently, and being delivered, find power, comfort, and courage
abundantly. Therefore when by Iona. 1. 7 10.
lot being taken, and by his own confession found the man that procured the
tempest, the Mariners in love and compassion of him, had assayed by rowing to
get to land, but could not, the sea raging more and more, and Jonah 13.
himself professed he knew the tempest was sent for his cause, and would be
laid he being cast into the Sea. Jonah 12
at length was cast out of the ship into the swelling purge of the tempestuous
sea. What hope of life then left? is there any? to swallow up all, soon after
he is swallowed whole of a Whale. Here let us mark, that after the tempest
had terrified Jonah, the mariners reproved him: when they had reproved him, his
conscience pricked him: when his conscience had pricked him, the consulting to
cast lots griued him: after grief for consulting, their concluding to cast
lots vexed him: vexed at their conclusion, the lot condemns him: the lot
having condemned him, in what an agony think we was Jonah? partly, that he
should be held that notorious wretch that had brought this woe? partly, least
they in their raging grief, for their great trouble of body, loss of goods,
and danger of life, should forthwith kill him for a sacrifice, to appease the
unknown angry God? But after this agony, the terror of drowning followed, and
after that the horror of the huge fish: first, least it tear him in pieces,
then least it melt him, afterward, least it poison him: lastly, three days and
three nights the comfortless horror of darkness, and noisome stincke in the
fishes belly tormented him.

First then see, the winds could not further him, the waters could not bear
him, the ship could not hold him, the Mariners could not help him: and being
cast out, least all for him be cast away, the Whale would not spare him, the
stinch would ill feed him, the darkness would less glad him, and light
might not visit him. Now see then what Jonah got by this journey,
notwithstanding all the promises of which Satan assured him, and all the
furtherances which the serpent procured him, he lost his labor, lost his
money, lost his joy, lost his credit, lost his quiet, and saw no hope but to
loose his life too, finding plentifully, and bitterly feeling dreadful fears.
He trusted to the winds, the winds could not serve him: he trusted to the
ship, the ship could not keep him: he trusted to the mariners, the Mariners
could not hold him: he trusted to the lot, the lot would not spare him: he
trusted to the waters, the waters could not bear him, neither would the Whale
forbear him, neither did any thing make show of likelihood to save him.
Therefore we may see in Jonah what it profits a man to fly from God,
forsaking his calling, and so practicing the evil motions of Satan in stead
of the known will of God. Assuredly, if we follow his flatteries as Jonah
did, we shall have as he had, accusing consciences, fearful hearts, and the
wrath of God upon our heads. For he has nothing to give us, although he
promise and make us believe he has great kingdoms. Yes indeed, he has
horror of mind for all that obey him, and hell for the reward of his, which
will make all their hearts ache which receive it.

See secondly in this punishment of Jonah, the justice of God. The Be, when
she has once stung, does leese her sting, so that she can sting no more: so
does not Gods justice punishing sin: for it retains power, it has store of
stings to vex still: when one judgment is executed, she ever has other inow
ready, either of the same kind, in another degree more sharp, or of another
sort: for all the creatures with their several powers, are Gods darts to
strike us when he commands. Therefore if we be sick sickness is not dead
with us: if we be poor, poverty ends not: if we be in danger, danger is
not therefore put down for ever after: and if we be vexed, vexation has not
therefore left his sting: his darts, his weapons also are as sharp now as they
were at the first, and sharper too, be cause we are sinfuller. For according
to the sickness is the medicine, and wounds more dangerous, require more
dolourous plasters.

And if thou be disobedient, then he will lead thee through them all, until
he has humbled thee, and made Leui. 26 18. 24. 28. 36. 37. 38. 39 etc.
thee to glorify him with obedience, or utterly destroyed thee.

Thirdly, let us not forget, neither lightly think of this, that God knows
how to punish for sin, yea most severely to correct his children, though
repenting. If our Prophet Jonah here may not keep thee some good while in a due
meditation of it, let that man after Gods own heart the sweet Prophet of
Israel come to thy mind, and in 2. Sam. 18. 6 10. 27, chap. 2. Sam. 12. 13.
15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. chap Psalm. 30. and 75. Hos. 6. 4. 2. Pet. 2. Jonah 1.
17, Ie. 35. 6. Dan 6. 22 Dan. 3 23. Number. 1. 46. Exo. 17. 3 Exo 16 13. Io. 2. 10
Ie 38. 13. Dan. 6. 24, and. 3 26. Ex 17. 6. Exo 16 13. E. 2. 15. 3. 10.
him see, whether God cockereth his entirest friends, or something sharply, if
not bitterly, handles them, settling themselves in their dregs, or securely
serving the Lord.

Lastly, yet consider God is rich in mercy, and full of compassion, both to
punish, unless to far provoked, co^te^t to shake his rod over us, to make us
fear only, and keep us free from feeling his strokes, if that may have his
due work in us, that is, recall, reform, and confirm us: for as the winds
could not overthrow Jonah, nor the waters drown him: so neither could the
whale consume, poison, or annoy him, or ought but fear him, though it had
swallowed him: for Jonah remembering God, God showed he forgot not Jonah.
Therefore when and where Jonah thought verily and speedily to have perished,
then and there God caused him to be three days, and as many nights most
safely preserved. O power omnipotent, O goodness all sufficient, in all
things, at all times. God then as well knows to deliver his out of all
distress in due time, as to reserve the wicked to the day of judgment to be
punished. And in what danger shall we despair? In what extremities ought not
we to hope in our most mighty Savior, remembering Jonah in the whales belly,
Jeremy in the mire of the deep dungeon, Daniel among the fierce Lions, his
three companions in the hot burning furnace, nay, 600000. men of war, and
three times as many more, of men and women, young and old in the wilderness,
lacking now drink, then meat,: and all these delivered out of all danger,
these last miraculously satisfied with drink out of the roeke, and with meat
abundantly from heaven.

Secondly, though Jonah be cast into the troublous sea, and swallowed of a
huge whale, yet he must preach at Niniuie: though Moses fly out of Egypt, yet
he must be the leader of Gods people thence. Joseph is in prison, but he must
be Lord of Egypt, and preserve the Church alive Who would have thought that
Saul should become Genesis 29. 20. 41. 40. 45. 78. Act. 9. 1. 2 1. Cor. 15 10.
Mar, 14 71. Act. 4. 11. 12. Iona 2. 10. Amos. 7. 14. Exo. 2. 3. Iona. 2. 10
Luke. 2. 17.
Paul, or forswearing Peter a faithful Preacher? Suspend then thy judgment
and wonder at Gods works, whether of mercy, or justice, and think not the
worse of a man, though he were cast out of the sea as Jonah, or basely brought
up as Amos, for the deliverer of Israel was brought out of the flagges, and the
conuerter of Niniuie out of a Whale, and the salvation of the whole world, out
of a stall.

And the lot fell upon Jonah. The lot fell upon Jonah, that he might be cast
out of the ship, that as the ship was almost broken, but not altogether, so
Jonah might be almost drowned, but not altogether: almost consumed, almost
poisoned in the belly of the whale, but not altogether: and that being in the
double deep duly humbled, and as gold in a furnace, fined and fit for Gods
works, he might thence in a miraculous manner come forth like Lazarus in his
winding sheet, that he might glorify God once again, and courageously cry
against Niniuie.

And the lot fell upon Jonah. The lot fallen upon Jonah the justice of God
(both manifesting the truth incorruptly, and chastising his disobedient servant
severely) did appear: but with all singular mercy shined, and the mariners
minds were mollified, in that they sacrificed him not to Satan, but much
more, that he by that means truly repented. In so much that the old
idolatrous mariners presently by him were converted, and he cast into the Sea,
was not drowned; swallowed of the Whale, and three days continuing therein,
perished not, but miraculously was preserved, and most graciously cast on land
safe: and lastly, crying against Niniuie, that sinful City, had his preaching
so mightily prevailing, that he wonderfully humbled them all. This mercy was
maruailous, this goodness of God to Jonah most glorious. For the Ninevites
hearing; Yet forty days, and Iona. 3. 5
Niniuie shall be overthrown, first as the mariners had before done, believed
the word of God, though they never heard it before. If we heard the word of
God preached as the mariners and Niniuits did, with trembling hearts in the
sense of Gods Majesty, it would not be but we should feel the power of it
lively, and filled with all joy in believing speedily, but ineffectual and
fruitless is preaching, because there is nothing almost but vnreuerent and
senseless hearing. And why should God teach the heedlesse to learn? Why
should he give pearls to dung-hil cocks, nay to very swine? But they
believed the word as soon as they heard it, though they never heard it before
what does that argue: Surely it shows, that the floolish and simple are more
diligent and ready, both to hear and receive the word of God, then those that
are wise in their own conceit, or also in the view of the world. What says
Christ? The poor receive the Gospel. What says Paul? Not many rich, not many
wise. For though we have Mat 11. 5. 1. Cor. 1. 26. Mat. 23. 13. 14. 25. 26. 27.
28. Luke 12. 47. 48. Act 8. 20
knowledge, if our knowledge be like the Pharisees, that is in show of
sincerity only, in counterfeit holiness, and hollow-hearted friendship
through hypocrisy, it had bin better for us that we had bin ignorant, for it
will but leave us, the more inexcusable, it will be found insufficient to save
us, but sufficient the more fearfully to condemn us because we know our
masters will and do it not. There fore as Peter said to Simon Magus, Thy
money perish with thee: so will the Lord say unto such, Thy knowledge perish
with thee, seeing it is fruitless.

But when Niniuie had believed God, what did they secondly? They speedily, they
notably repented, they proclaimed a fast, they put on sackcloth, they humbled
themselves before the Lord, they earnestly besought him to turn away his wrath
from this woeful City. Jonah Iona 3. 4.
preaching at Niniuie, crying against it, seems to have humbled them and that
without a miracle (without which scant any doctrine is of credit among
Gentiles) not only within forty but within four days: much within forty
days, he converted Niniuie, ruffling Niniuie, old and idolatrous Niniuie, long
before forty days be ended, the seed is sown, grown, increased mightily,
and full ripe, in a soil in reason most barren. Sow therefore, ye seedmen,
where you are set, If ye sow cheerfully, ye shall reap plenteously in due
time: Vaunt not: say not, I have a stony, or a starued, or a thornie ground:
Niniuie repents in sackcloth.

In which willing submission of theirs, and speedy lively repentance at the
words of the Prophet, after he had been three days and three nights in the
Whales belly, the calling of the Gentiles by Christ, after he had been three
days and three nights in the bowels of the earth, might well be signified.
For they no less willingly then the Niniuits, submitted themselves to the
Gospel preached: no less speedily, and peradventure more truly repented.
Iona. 3. 7 6.
For though now they thus wonderfully humbled themselves not the fearful
multitude only, but the richest and greatest, the nobles and king also, and so
all escaped now: soon after they returned to their vomit, and never ceased to
add sin to sin, till they were by open wars miserably wasted, and at length
fulfilling the prophecy of Nahu^, utterly consumed. Therefore, first, for the
comfort of the godly, since Nah 3. 19 1. King 21. 26. 27. 29 2. Chro. 10. 5. 1.
King 14. 22. 2. Chro 14. 6
Ahab humbled himself before the Lord, Ahab, I say, that had done exceeding
abhominably, infollowing Idols, and sold himself to work wickedness in the
sight of the Lord, submitted himself under the hand of GOD, fasting in
sackcloth, though he did all in hypocrisy, had not the evil threatened
brought upon him in his days, seeing Roboam, and the princes of Israel who had
forsaken the Lord, and the whole tribe of Judah, which wrought wickedness in the
sight of the Lord, and provoked him more with their sins, then all that their
fathers had done hu^bling themselves before the Lord, and confessing him just,
had not the wrath of the Lord powered upon them, by Shishak K. of Egypt were not
destroyed, but shortly delivered, yea also things prospered in Judah, though
the Lord had threatened to leave 7. 12.
them in the hands of Shishak, albeit they truly repented not: lastly, for as
much as Niniuie that bloody city full of lies and robbery, the beautiful
harlot, with multitude of 5 13. Nah. 3. 1. 4,
fornications, that mistress of witch-crafts, which sold the people through
her whoredoms, and the nations through her witch-crafts, humbling themselves
with fasting, and putting on of sackcloth, the Lord repented of the evil he
had threatened them, and did it not: how assured may we be, that whatsoever
judgment the Lord threatens us, Jonah 3. 7. 8. 10.
and howsoever he threaten it, it shall not light on us, when we unfeignedly
humble our selves in true fasting, turning from our evil ways, and from the
heart vowing to serve God in all holiness? For this is the clear promise of
the faithful God: If I shut the heaven that there be no rain, or 2. Chro. 7.
13. 14.
if I command the grasshopper to devour the land, or if I send pestilence
among my people: if my people, among whom my name is called upon, do humble
themselves, and pray, and secke my presence, and turn from their wicked ways:
then will I hear in heaven, and be merciful to their sin, and heal their
land. Again, as generally most plainly says just Jehovah: Iere. 18. 7 8.
I will speak suddenly against a nation, or against a kingdom (saying) I will
pluck it up, and root it out, and destroy it but if this nation against which
I have pronounced this, turn from their wickedness, I will repent of the
plague that I thought to bring upon them. Let us then, O beloved of the Lord,
whosoever love the Lord Jesus, be careful to fulfill the condition, and then
confident not doubting of the performance of the promise, by so much the more
by how much the fewer we be, and by how much the longer and clearer the Lord
has threatened most terrible judgments.

Now for the terror of the ungodly, as many of them as repent only when Gods
hand is upon them, and then humble themselves outwardly only, and that but
only when the fierceness of his wrath appears, or else after they have
escaped the feared judgment, fall to their wonted wickedness again: let them
be sure the strong and just God, that consumed Niniuie slidden back, will
overtake them also in wrath, and for ever turn them over to ceaselesse woe.
For the greatness, the beauty, the strength, and riches of Niniuie, could not
withstand the hand of God, or keep it from destruction, but rather furthered
and hastened it. For with the more excellent ornaments that it was adorned by
the Lord, the more heinous and grievous in his sight was the abuse of them.
Therefore the hugeness, or the strength of this or any other City cannot
save it from the judgment of God, being sinful in his sight. Gen 15. Iosu 6.
1. King. 24. 25. Revel 18 2


Great Sodom is destroyed: great Ierico is destroyed: great Niniuie is
destroyed: great Jerusalem is destroyed, and great Rome, the room of all
unclean spirits, stays for her destruction, like a whore that stays for
her punishment till she be delivered: and all these were and shall be
punished for unthankfulness and contempt of the word of God. Yet Niniuie,
Ierico, Sodom, nor Rome, have had half the preaching that we have had, yet
we Genesis 19 21. Iere 41. 17 Gen 17. 18 Esa. 19. and. 17. 5. 6 Genesis 45.
are unthankful too, then what have we to look for, but when Sodom was
burned, Zoar stood safe? when Jerusalem was destroyed, Bethelem stood still? so
the Lord does always provide for his people, though he make never so great a
slaughter and destruction amongst his enemies For the Lord because of his
covenant does always provide for his chosen, although they be but a remnaut,
like the gleaning after harvest, or like a cluster of grapes on the top of the
vine after the vintage, and though there be never so great calamity or
trouble, as we see in the book of Gen 45. chap. when there was a great time of
dearth and scarcity to come upon the land where Jacob was, the Lord had sent
Joseph to provide for his father Jacob, least he should want bread, he, or any
of his sons and folks, and so ordered the matter, that Joseph was treasurer
over all the corn in Egypt. And so among the Turks, and Spaniards, and
Infidels, the Lord will find means to do them good, which unfeignedly love
him, and in the dungeon, in prison, and in bonds, yea and in death, the godly
shall find God.

FINIS.
FOUR SERMONS.

Preached by Master Henry Smith.

And published by a more perfect Copy then heretofore.

printer's device of Thomas Dawson (McKerrow 241), of three cranes and a vine
with bunches of grapes

LONDON Printed by T. D. for Cuthbert Burby. 1607.

decorative border

The Contents.
1 The Trumpet of the soul. 2 The sinful man's search. 3 Mary's choice. 4
Noah's drunkenness. 5 A Prayer to be said at all times 6 Another zealous
Prayer.
THE TRVMPET OF the Soul, sounding to Judgment.
By Henry Smith.
The Text.
Ecclesiastes. 11. Chap. 9. verse. Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let
thy heart be merry in thy young days, follow the ways of thine own heart, and
the lusts of thine eyes: But remember for all these things thou come to
judgment.


WHen I should have preached under the Cross, I mused what text to take in
hand to please all, and to keep my self out of danger: and musing, I could
not find any text in the Scripture that did not reprove sin, unless it were
in the Apocrypha, which is not of the Scripture: this text bids them that be
voluptuous be voluptuous still: let them that be vain glorious, be vain
glorious still: let them that be covetous, be covetous still: let them that be
drunkards, be drunkards still: let them that be swearers, be swearers still:
let them that be wantons, be wantons still: let them that be careless
prelates, be careless still: let them that be usurers, be usurers still: but
says Solomon, Remember thy end, that thou shall be called to judgment at the
last for altogether. This is the counsel of Solomon the wisest then living:
what a counsel is this for a wise man, such a one as was Solomon.

In the beginning of his book he says, All is vanity, and in the end he
says, Fear God and keep his Commandments: in the 12. Chapter he says,
Remember thy maker in the days of thy youth: But here he says, Rejoice, O
young man, in thy youth. Here he speaks like an Epicure, which says, Eat,
drink, and be merry: here he counseles, and here he mockes: yet not after
the manner of scorners, although they deserved it in showing their
foolishness, as it is in the first of the Proverbs, He laughed at the wicked
in derision, as in the second Psalm, God seeing us follow our own ways. For
when he bids us pray, we play: and when he bids us run, we stand still: and
when he bids us fast, we feast, and send for vanities to make us sport: then
he laughs at our destruction. Therefore when Solomon gives a sharp reproof,
and makes you ashamed in a word, he scoffingly bids you do it again, like a
Schoolemaister which beats his Scholar for playing the truant, he bids
him play the truant again. O this is the bitterest reproof of all. But least
any Libertine should misconster Solomon, and say that he bids us be merry and
make much of our selves, therefore he shuts up with a watchword, and sets
a bridle before his lips, and reprooueth it as he speaks it before he goes
any further, and says, But remember that for all these things thou must come
to judgment. But if we will understand his meaning, he means when he says
Rejoice, O young man, Repent, O young man, in thy youth; and when he says,
Let thy heart cheer thee, Let thy sins greiue thee: for he means
otherwise then he speaks: he speaks like Michai in the book of Kings the
second Chapter. Go up and prosper: or like as Ezechiel. Go up and serve other
Gods: or as Saint John speaks in the Revelation, Let them that be wicked, be
wickea still But if there were no judgment day, that were a merry world:
therefore says Solomon, when thou art in thy pleasures flaunting in the
fields, and in thy brave ruffes, and amongst thy Lovers, with thy smiling
looks, thy wanton talk and merry iestes, with thy pleasant games and lofty
looks, Remember for all these things thou shall come to judgment.

Whilst the thief steals, the hemp grows, and the hook is covered
within the bait: we sit down to eat, and rise up to play, and from play to
sleep, and a hundred years is counted little enough to sin in: but how many
sins thou have set on the score, so many kinds of punishments shall be
provided for thee. How many years of pleasure thou have taken, so many years
of pain: how many drammes of delight, so many pounds of dolor: when iniqui
tie has played her part, vengance leapes upon the stage, the Comedy is short,
but the Tragedy is longer: the black guard shall attend upon you, you shall
eat at the table of sorrow, and the crown of death shall be upon your heads,
many glistring faces looking on you, and this is the fear of sinners: when the
devil has entised them to sin, he presumes like the old Prophet in the
book of kings, who when he had entised the young Prophet contrary to the
commandment of God, to turn home with him, and to eat and drink, he cursed
him for his labor, because he disobeyed the commandment of the Lord, and so
as a Lion devoured him by the way. The foolish virgins think that their oil
will never be spent: so Dina stragled abroad, whilst she was defloured: what
a thing is this to say Rejoice, and then Repent? what a blanke to say. Take thy
pleasure, and then thou shall come to judgment? It is as if he should say,
Steal and be hanged, steal and thou dare, strangle sin the cradle, for all
the wisdom in the world will not help thee else: but thou shall be in
admiration like dreamers which dream strange things, and know not how they
come, He says, Remember judgment. If thou remember always, then thou shall
have little list to sin: if thou remember this, then thou sahtl have little
list to fall down to the devil, though he would give thee all the world, and
the glory thereof. Solomon says, The weed grows from a weed to a cockle,
from a cockle to a bramble, from a bramble to a brier, from a brier to a
thorn, Lying breeds perjury, perjury breeds haughtines of heart haughtines of
heart breeds contempt,: contempt breeds obstinacy, and brings forth much
evil. And this is the whole progress of sin, he grows from a liar to a
thief, from a thief to a murderer, and never leaves until he has searched
all the room in hell, and yet he is never satisfied, the more he sins,
the more he searches to sin: when he has deceived, nay he has not deceived
thee: as soon as he has that he desires, he has not that he desires:
when he has left fighting, he goes to fighting again: yet a little and a
little more, and so we flit from one sin to another,, While I preach, you
hear iniquity engender within you, and will break forth as soon as you are
gone. So Christ wept, Jerusalem laughed: Adam brake one, and we break ten:
like children which laugh and cry, so, as if we kept a shop of vices, now this
sin, and then that, from one sin to another.

O remember thy end, says Solomon, and that thou must come to judgment. What
shall become of them that have tried them most? Be condemned most, Rejoice, O
young man, in thy youth.

But if thou mark Solomon, he harpes upon one string he doubles it again and
again, to show us things of his own experience, because we are so forgetful
thereof in our selves, like the dreamer, that forgets his dream, and the
swearer his swearing. So we beg of every unclean spirit, until we have
bumbasted our selves up to the throat, filling every corner of our hearts
withal uncleanness, and then we are like the dog that comes out of the
sink, and makes every one as foul as himself: therefore says Solomon, If
any one will learn the way to hell, let him take his pleasure.

Me think I see the Dialogue between the flesh and the Spirit. the worst
speaks first, and the flesh says, Soul, take thine ease, eat, drink, and
go brave, lie soft, what else should you do but take your pleasure? thou
know what a pleasant fellow I have been unto thee, thou know what
delight thou have had by my means: but the soul comes in, burdened with
that which has been spoken before, and says, I pray thee remember judgment,
thou must give account for all these things, for unless you repent, you shall
surely perish,

No, says the flesh, talk not of such grave matters, but tell me of fine
matters, of soft beds and pleasant things, and talk me of brave pastimes,
Apes, Bears, and Puppits, for I tell thee, the forbidden fruit is sweetest of
all fruits: for I do not like of your telling me of judgment: but take thou
thy jewels, thy instrument, and all the strings of vanity will strike at once,
for the flesh loves to be brave, and tread upon corks, it cannot tell what
fashion to be of, and yet to be of the new fashion.

Rejoice, O young man in thy youth. O this goes brave, for while wickedness
has cast his rubs, and vengeance castes his spurs, and his foot, and thus
she reeles, and now she tumbles, and then she falls: therefore this
progress is ended.

Pleasure is but a spur, riches but a thorn, glory but a blast, beauty but
a flower, sin is but an hypocrite, honey in thy mouth, and poison in thy
stomach: therefore let us come again and ask Solomon in good sooth, whether
he means in good earnest, when he spoke these words: O (says Solomon) It
is the best life in the world to go brave, lie soft, and live merrily, if
there were no judgment. But this judgment marres all, it is like a dampe that
puts out all the light, and like a box that marreth all the ointment: for if
this be true, we have spunne a fair thread, that we must answer for all,
that are not able to answer for one: why, Solomon makes us fools, and gives
us gawdes to play withal: what then, shall we not rejoice at all? Yes, there
is a godly mirth and if we could hit on it, which is called, Be merry and
wise. Sara laughed, and was reproved: Abraham laughed, and was not reproved.
And thus much for the first part.

But remember, for all these things thou shall come to judgment. This Verse is
as it were a Dialogue betwixt the flesh and the spirit, as the two
counselors: the worst is first, and the flesh speaks proudly, but the
spirit comes in burdened with that which has been spoken. The flesh goes
laughing and singing to hell: but the spirit casts rubs in his way, and puts
him in mind of judgment, that for all these things, now ends rejoice, and
here comes in but: if this but were not, we might rejoice still: if young men
must for all the sportes of youth, what then shall old men do, being as they
are now? Surely, if Solomon lived to see our old men live now, as here he
says of young men, so high as sin rages, yet vengeance sits above it, as
high as high Babell. Me thinks I see a sword hang in the air by a twine
thread, and all the sons of men labor to burst it in sunder. There is a
place in hell where the covetous Judge sits, the greedy Lawyer, the griping
Landlord, the careless Bishop, the lusty youth, the wanton Dames, the thief,
the robbers of the Commonwealth, they are punished in this life because they
ever sin as long as they could, while mercy was offered unto them:
therefore, because they would we be washed, they shall be drowned. Now put
together rejoice and remember: thou have learned to be merry, now learn to
be wise: now therefore turn over a new leaf, and take a new Lesson; for now
Solomon mocked not as he did before, therefore, a check to thy ruffes, a
check to thy cuffes, a check to thy robes, a check to thy gold, a check to
your riches, a check to your beauty, a check to your mucke, a check to your
graves: woe from above, woe from below, woe unto all the stings of vanity:
do thou not now marvel that thou have not a feeling of sin? for now thou
see Solomon says true, thine own heart can tell that it is wicked, but it
cannot amend: therefore it is high time to amend: as Nathan comes to David
after Beelzebub, so comes accusing conscience after sin. Me thinks that
every one should have a feeling of sin, though this day be like yesterday,
and to morrow like to day yet one day will come for all, and then woe, woe,
woe and nothing but darkness: and though God came not to Adam until the
evening, yet he came: although the fire came not upon Sodom till the Evening,
yet it came: and so comes the Judge, although he be not yet come, though he
have leaden feet, he has iron hands, the arrowe slays and is not yet
fallen, so is his wrath: the pit is dug, the fire kindled; and all things
are made ready and prepared against that day, only the final sentence is to
come, which will not long tarry.

You may not think to be like to the thief that stea leth and is not seen:
nothing can be hid from him, and the Judge follows thee at thee heels: and
therefore whatsoever thou art, look about thee, and do nothing but that thou
would do openly, for all things are opened unto him: Sara may not think to
laugh and not be seen: Gehezie may not think to lie and not be known: they
that will not come to the banquet, must stand at the door,

What, do you think that God does not remember our sins which we do not
regard: for while we sin the sore runs on, and the Judge sets down all in
the table of remembrance, and his sscrowle reaches up to heaven.

Item, for lending to Usury, Item, for racking of rents Item, for deceuing thy
brethren, Item, for falsehood in wares, Item, for starching thy ruffes, Item,
for curling thy hair. Item, for paynting thy face. Item, for for selling of
benefices. Item, for staruing of souls. Item, for playing at cards. Item, for
sleeping in the Church. Item, for profaning the Sabbath day: with a number
more has God to call to account, for every one must answer for himself. The
fornicator, for taking of filthy pleasure: O son, remember thou have taken
thy pleasure, take thy punishment. The careless Prelate, for murdering so many
thousand souls. The Landlord, for getting money from his poor Tenants by
racking of his rents: see the rest, all they shall come like a very sheep, when
the trumpet shall sound, and the heaven and earth shall come to judgment
against them, when the heavens shall vanish like a scrole, and the earth shall
consume like fire, and all the creatures standing against them: the rocks shall
cleave asunder, and the mountains shake, and the foundation of the earth shall
tremble, and they shall say to the mountains, Cover us, fall upon us, and hide
us from the presence of his anger and wrath, whom we have not cared for to
offend? but they shall not be covered and hid: but then they shall go the
black way, to the Snakes and Serpents, to be tormented of Devils for ever: O
pain unspeakable: and yet the more I express it, the more horrible it is,
when you think of torment passing all torments, and yet a torment passing all
that: yet this torment is greater then them, and passing them all.

Imagine you see a sinner going to hell, and his sumner gape at him, his
acquaintance look at him, the Angels shoute at him, and the Saints laugh at
him, and the devils rail at him, and many look him in the face, and they that
said they would live and dye with him, forsake him, and leave him to pay all
the scores: Then Judas would restore his bribes: Esau would cast up his
pottage: Achan would cast down his gold, and Gehezi would refuse his gifts:
Nabuchadnezzar would be humbler: Balam would be faithful, and the Prodigal
would be tame.

Me thinks I see Achan running about, where shall I hide my gold that I have
stolen, that it might not be seen nor stand to appear for witness against
me?

And Judas running to the high Priests, saying, Hold, take again your money, I
will none of it, I have betrayed the innocent blood.

And Esau crying for the blessing when it is too late, having sold his
birthright for a mess of pottage.

Woe, woe, woe, that ever we were borne, O where is that Dives that would
believe this, before he felt the fire in hell, or that would believe the
poorest Lazarus in the world, to be better then himself, before the dreadful
day come when they cannot help it, if they would never so feign, when
repentance is too late? Herod shall then wish that he were John Baptist.
Pharaoh would wish that he were Moses, and Saul would wish that he had been
David. Nabuchadnezzar, that he had been Daniel. Haman to have been
Mardocheus: Esau would wish to be Jacob, and Balam would wish might die the
death of the righteous: then he will say, I will give more then Ezechias, cry
more then Esau: fast more then Moses: pray more then Daniel: weep more then
Marie Magdalen: suffer more stripes then Paul: abide more imprisonments then
Michai: abide more cruelty then any mortal man would do, that it might be,
Ite, Go ye cursed, might be come ye blessed. Yea, I would give all the goods
in the world that I might escape this dreadful day of wrath and judgment, and
that I might not stand amongst the go. O that I might live a beggar all my
life, and a Leaper: O that I might endure all plagues and sores from the top of
the head, to the sole of my foot, sustain all sickness and griefs, that I
might escape this judgment.

The guilty conscience cannot abide this day. The silly sheep when she is
taken will not bleate, but you may carry her, and do what you will with her,
and she will be subject: but the swine, if she be once taken, she will
roar and cry, and thinks she is never taken but to be slain? So of all
things, the guilty conscience cannot abide to hear of this day, for they know
that when they hear of it, they hear of their own condemnation. I think if
there were a general collection made through the whole world, that there might
be no judgment day, then God would be so rich, that the world would go a
begging, and be as waste wilderness. Then the covetous Judge would bring
forth his bribes: then the crafty Lawyer would fetch out his bags: the
Usurer would give his gain, and the idle servant would dig up his talent
again, and make a double thereof. But all the money in the world will not
serve for our sin, but the Judge must answer for his bribes he that has
money, must answer how he came by it, and just condemnation must come upon
every soul of them: then shall the sinner be every die ing, and never dead,
like the Salamander, that is ever in the fire and never consumed.

But if you come there, you may say as the Queen of Saba said of King
Solomon, I believe the report that I heard of thee in mine own Country, but
the one half of thy wisdom was not told me. If you came there to see what
is done, you may say, Now I believe the report that was told me in my own
country concerning this place, but the one half as now I feel, I have not
heard of: now choose you whether you will rejoice, or remember: whether you will
stand amongst you blessed, or amongst you cursed: whether you will enter while
the gate is open, or knock in vain when the gate is shut: whether you will
seek the Lord whilst he may be found, or be found of him when you would not
be sought, being run into the bushes with Adam to hide your selves: whether
you will take your heaven now here, or your hell then there: or through
tribulation to enter into the kingdom of God, and thus to take your hell now
here, or your heaven then there in the life to come with the blessed Saints
and Angels, so that hereafter you may lead a new life, putting on Jesus Christ
and his righteousness.

FINIS.
THE SINFVLL MAN'S SEARCH.
Job. 8. 5 6. 7. 5 If thou will early seek unto God, and pray unto the
Almighty.

6 If thou be pure and upright: then surely he will awake unto thee, and make
the habitation of thy righteousness prosperous.

7 And though the beginning be but small: yet thy latter end shall greatly
increase.


IN a sick and evil affected body (dearly beloved) we usually see
preparatiues ministered, that the maladies may be made more fit and pliable to
receive wholesome medicines. The like, yea, and greater regard ought we to
have of our souls, which being not crasie only, or lightly affected with
sin, but sick even unto death, had need to be prepared with threats and
exhortations, comforts and consolations, one way or other, that they may be
made fit, not to receive the preparatiue, but the perfection of happy
salvation And for this cause have I made choice of this part of Scripture, as
of a light to shine unto us in darkness a direction to our steps and a
lantern to our paths, while we wander through the boystrous waves of this
wicked world. The text is plain, and object to every man's capacity, naturally
budding unto blossoms. The first, containing our duty which we are to
perform toward God. The second, Gods promises, if we perform this duty.

Our duty toward God, is employed in these three conditions. First, If thou will early seek unto God. Secondly, If thou will pray unto the Almighty.
Thirdly, If thou be pure and upright: so thot the whole consists on these
three points: First, what it is that God requires, namely Division
a diligent and speedy search, in these words, If thou will seek early
Secondly, how thy search is to be made in prayer, in these words. If thou will
pray to the Almighty Thirdly, what effect these things ought to work in us a
purity and sincerity of life in these words: If thou be pure and upright.

As our duty toward God consists in three points so Gods blessing toward
us, is also threefold answerable to the same. Frst, for seeking, he promises,
he will awake unto thee. Secondly, for praying unto him, he will make the
habitation of thy righteousness prosperous. Thirdly, for being pure and
upright, He will make thy latter end increase exceedingly: yea, though the
beginning be but small.

First therefore concerning the search, it is a work both in desire and labor
to be joined to God. In the Psalm this stands for the burden of the song?
They Concerning the search.
called upon the Lord in the time of their trouble, and he delivered them. It
is but, Ask and have, seek and find, knock and it shall be opened unto you:
Saving that here these things are to be regarded, to wit, how, by whom, and
Psa. 107. Mat. 6.
when we must seek the Lord.

How; First faithfully: for if ye have but as much as a grain of
mustard-seede, and say unto this mountain, Remove, it spall remove, and
nothing shall be impossible unto you. Mat. 17. 20. Eccle. 35.


Then next, humbly, for it is the humble petition that pearceth the skies, and
that showed the Publican to depart home to his house more justified then the
boasting Pharisie: and they alone that be humble and meek find rest for their
souls.

And last of all, continually: for we must not faint in Gal. 6 1. These. 6
well doing, because the reward is not promised to him that does, but to him
that continues to do.

But we may long seek and never find, except we seek the Father by the
Son: For no man knows the 1. Tim. 2
Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son shall disclose him: he is the
way, the truth, and the life, and no man comes to the Father but by him.
There is one God, and one mediator betwixt God and man, the man Christ Jesus.
So that if we sin, we have an advocate, Jesus Christ the just, and he is
the propitiation for our sins: only let us seek the Lord while he may be found.

And to this end the word seeking is used in this place, that we may learn,
that as the heavens and the planets, and the whole frame of nature were
ordained to finish their course by motions and operation: so man, as he was
ordained to a most blessed and happy end, should attain thereunto, not by
sloth and idleness, but by an earnest seeking of the same.

The kingdom of heaven is like a treasure, which cannot be found with out
seeking and digging. It is Mat. 13. 14.
like the precious pearl, for which the wise Merchant was content not only to
seek, but to sell all that he had, to buy it. GOD has placed us here in
this world as husbandmen, to plough up the fallowe of our hearts: as laborers
to work in the vineyarde: as travelers to seek a Country, as soldiers to
fight the battle of the Lord, against the flesh, the world, and the devil.

And for this purpose has he proposed unto us an untilled land, a vineyarde,
a triple enemy to fight against: that we might remember, that we must till
the ground, if we will reap the fruit: that we must prune the vine, if we
will drink of the grape: that we must fight, if we will overcome. He that
tilleth the Land, (says Pro. 28.
the wiseman) shall be satisfied with bread, but he that follows idleness,
shall be filled with poverty. Idleness is a moth or canker of the mind, and
the fruits thereof are wicked cogitations, evil affections, and worse
actions: Judge. 1 Pro. 24.
corrupt trees without fruit, twice dead, and plucked up by the roots,
engendring in the mind, a loathing of God and godliness.

Eschew therefore idleness, I beseech you, and by the want ye find in other,
learn instructions for your selves. Be not forgetful how busy your enemy
is, if he find you idle: first, he puts you in mind of some vanity: then
offers opportunity to practice: then he craves consent, and if ye grant
him that, he triumphs by adding practice: he leaves no means unattempted,
whereby he may subvert and bring you to perdition. To one (as to Euah) he
promises the knowledge of good and evil. Another Genesis 3 Exodus 7. 22. 1. King
13 1. Cor. 2
he seduceth with lying speeches, as he did Pharao the King, whom he deceived
by false Prophets. To the Jews he pretended the temple of the Lord. To the
heathen he shows universalities and antiquities. And to other particulers,
he leaves no more unattempted, whereby he may entangle the soul of the
simple, and wrappe them in the snares of death. Fly idleness therefore, and
seek virtue, and the way thereof: seek learning, as for a Jewel, make
diligent search and inquisition after her: seek early, and seek late, in the
morning sow thy seed, and in the evening let not thy hand rest: seek him in
the day of trouble, and he will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify him.

Seek him, there is the commandment: he will deliver thee, there is the
promise: and thou shall glorify him, there is the condition. To disobey the
commandment, is rebellion: to distrust his promise, is infidelity: to refuse
the condition, is vile ingratitude. Wherefore let us seek, and seek
earnestly, with a fervent spirit, and humbleness of heart, and let us
persuade our selves, that there is no finding without seeking, no opening
without knocking.

The second circumstance to be considered in this point, is to whom we must
seek for these things. Our direction Iam. 1. 27
is made unto God, For every good and perfect gift is from above, descending
from the father of lights. And as for many causes we are to seek God, and to
God alone, so especially for these four.

First, because we have nothing of our selves, nor of any other creature, but
whatsoever we have, we have it of God: for what have thou that thou have not
received? in him we live, we move, and have our being. Art thou wise in thine
own conceit? O remember, that the wisdom of the world is foolishness with
God. O consider that the natural man understands not the things of God. 1.
Cor. 2 Romans 1
These things are hid from the wise and prudent, and are revealed to babes and
sucklings. Alas, what were man if he were once left to himself? A map of
misery, and a sink of calamity. Alas, how were he able to resist the fiery
darts of the adversary, who continually goes about like a roaring Lion,
seeking whom he may devour? Here ye may note first his malice, for he daily
accuses us before the chief Judge of the Kings bench: when he cannot prevail
in this court, but sees his bills of accusation repelled, then he remoueth
the matter to the court of our own consciences, 2. Pet. 2. Reave. 2
where on the one side he lays the books of the Law and statutes made
against sin: on the other side, the bills of accusation brought in against
us out of the books of the Law, alleging these strickt places against us:
The soul that sins, shall die the death. Cursed is he that abides not in
every point of the law, to do it. On the other side, he brings in our
consciences to witness against us, and then infers this hard conclusion:
Therefore there is no hope in salvation.

Then if he see that we appeal from justice to mercy, and say, At what time
soever a sinner repents, the Judge puts all his wickedness out of his
remembrance, he deals with us, as crafty worldings deal in matters of
Law, who when they see their matters pass against them in higher Courts,
bring down their case into the Country, to be decided by the Neighbors:
who, either for their simplicity cannot, or for their favor dare not judge of
the truth of the matter.

1 So our adversary, though God himself do discharge us, though our
conscience does testify our innocence: yet he accuses in the third court
before men, where he is bold to power out his whole venom and poison of his
malice against us, and to forge what lies, and slanders, and libels he list,
because he knows they shall be received as true.

2 Thus he accuses Christ Jesus our blessed Lord and Savior before Pontius
Pilate, and caused diverse false and untrue witnesses to come in against him.
But if he were malicious only to wish our destruction, and not mighty to
wreake his malice, we should have little cause to fear. but he is mighty,
therefore he is termed a lion, the power of darkness, a great Dragon, which
drew to the earth, the third part of the stars of heaven: that is, with
earthly Luke. 11. Ephe 6. Reave. 12.
temptation to have overthrown them, which seemed to shine in the church of
God as lamps and stars. O then how easy is our overthrow, if the Lord did
not hold us up, which shine not as stars in heaven but creep like worms on
earth.

3 Yet if he were but malicious and mighty, it were better with us, but he
is fierce, and therefore called a roaring Lion, who laying wait for the blood
of the godly, stirs up bloud-thirstie persecutors to make themselves drunk
with the blood of Saints: as most greiuously he did from the time of John
Baptist, to the reign of Maxentius the space of 294. years, slaying some by
the sword, burning other with fire, hanging some on the gallows, drowning some
in rivers, stabbing some with forkes of iron, pressing others unto death with
stones devouring many thousands of the tender lambs of Christ's flock.

4 To this malice, might and rage, is added his subtle policy, which he uses
in circumuenting the faithful he does not pitch his tents in any one place,
but walks about from place to place to spy out his best advantage, in the
John. 1.
night he sows tares, and in the day he hinders the growth thereof.

5 He proceeds after further, and adds to his policy industry, he
considers our natures and dispositions, and to what sins we do most
incline: and thereunto he applies himself, sometimes by flattery, sometimes
by fear, sometimes by feeding our humors he subtly inticeth us, sometimes
by violence he goes about to enforce us, sometimes by changing himself into
an Angel of light, he endeavors to betray our souls into his hands, and in
whatsoever estate he finds us, he thereby takes occasion to lay siege to
our souls.

Thus ye see noted in a word, the force of our adversary: examine now
yourselues, whether you have any thing in your selves, and you shall find
nothing but weakness and corruption. It is God that gives strength to the
mighty, wisdom to the prudent, and knowledge to the understanding: he
teaches David's hand to fight, Psa. 144.
and his fingers to battle, he gives strength to his arms to break abow,
even abow of steel: wherefore let neither the wise man glory in his wisdom,
nor the strong man in his strength: but let him that glories, glory in the
Lord.

Secondly, we are to seek unto God alone, because none is so present as he
for God, because he is Almighty and with his power fills both heaven and
earth, is present always with them that fear him, and ready to succor them
in distress. The Lord is near to all that call upon him in truth, he hears
our gronings and sighs and knows what things are necessary for us before we
ask.

The third reason why we must seek unto God is, none is so able to help as
he: but of this I shall have particular occasion to speak when I come to this
point, And pray unto the Almighty.

The fourth reason why we must seek Christ alone is, because there is none so
willing to help us as he. It is a great courage to us to make suite, when we
are persuaded of the willingness of him to whom we make suite: and I pray
ye, who was ever more careful for our salvation, and more watchful over us
than the Lord? who ever put his trust in him, and was confounded? In this
respect he is called a Father, because as the father tendreth his son so the
Lord does all those that put their trust in him. Can there be any more willing
to help us than Christ, whose whole head was sick, and whose heart was heavy
for our sakes? yea, in whose body, from the sole of the foot to the crown of
the head, was nothing but wounds and swellings and sores? but alas, this was
nothing to that he suffered for our sakes, He was compassed about with fears
and horrors, till his sweat was drops of blood, and his bones bruised in the
flesh, he was whipped and scourged, and chastised with sorrows, till he
cried out in the bitterness of his soul, O Lord if it be possible, let this
cup pass from me. The heavy hand of God was so grievous upon him, that he
bruised his very bones, and rent his reins asunder: he could find no health
in his flesh, but was wounded, yea wounded to the death, even the most bitter
death upon the Cross. His tender fingers were nailed to the Cross, his face
was wrinkled with weeping and wayling, his sides imbrued and gored with his
own blood, spurting and gushing fresh from his ribs, the shadow of death
was upon his eyes.

O what grief could be like this, or what condemnation could be so heavy,
since there was no wickedness in his hands? since he was the brightness of his
fathers glory, and the Sun of righteousness that shined in the world, as to
see his days at an end, to see such throbbing sighs and careful thoughts
without cause of his, so deeply engraven in the tables of his breast? But was
this all? No, my brethren, since his excellency was such above all creatures,
that the world was not worthy to give him breath, it was a greater grief unto
him, to see himself made a worm, and not a man, ashame of men, and contempt
of the people: to see his life shut up in shame and reproaches, how could it but
shake his bones out of joint, and make his heart melt in the midst of his
bowels? who was ever so full of woe, and brought so low into the dust of death?
upon whom did the malice of Satan ever get so great a conquest?

This though it were exceeding, yet it was not all, no, it was but a taste of
grief in comparison of the rest: behold therefore (if your weary eyes will
suffer you to behold) the depth of all miseries yet behind: the sin that he
hated, he must take upon his own body, and bear the wrath of his Father
powered out against it. This is the fullness of all pains that compassed him
round about, which no tongue is able to utter, or heart conceive: the anger of
the Father burned in him, even to the bottom of hell, and deep sink of
confusion: it wrapped him in the chains of eternal death: it crucified him,
and threw him down into the bottomless pit of calamity, and made his soul
by weeping and wayling to melt into these bitter tears trickling from his
eyes: O God my God, why have thou forsaken me?

O that my head were a well of water, and a fountain of tears, that I might
weep day and night at the remembrance hereof: but least I linger too long
about one flower, while I have many to gather, I will conclude this one point
in a word.

Since Christ has suffered these, and an infinite number more such like
torments for our sakes, it is blasphemous once to dream or imagine any to be
more willing to help us then he: nay, he is more ready to hear our prayers,
then we to offer them unto him, insomuch Esaias 65.
as he complayneth by the Prophet Esaias: I have been found of them which
sought me not: all the day long have I stretched out my hand unto a rebellious
people which walked in a way that was not good, even after their own
imaginations. And unto Jerusalem he says, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often
would I have gathered thee together, as the Hen gathers Mat. 25.
the chickens, but ye would not!

Whereforeto end this point: Seek for knowledge as for a treasure, and for
wisdom, as for the wedge of gold of Ophir. No mention shall be made in
comparison of it, of Coral, Gabish, or that precious Onix: For wisdom is
more precious then pearls. But above all Job. 28.
things, seek it where it may be found: and where is the place of
understanding? Surely, man knows not the path thereof. The deep says, It is
not in me: the sea says, It is not in me: death and destruction say, We
have heard the fame thereof with our ears: all creatures say, It is not with
us: but God understands the way thereof: and unto man he says, The fear of
the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and to depart from evil, s
understanding. Pro. 9.


The third circumstance is, when we must seek unto God: and holy David
answers, Early, even in a time when he may be found. Let us redeem the
day, which Psalm. 32.
we have foreslowed so many days, wherein we have so long hardened our
hearts: let us take up this day, and make it the day of our repentance: let us
make it a day of newness of life, as it is the first day of the new year let
even this moment be the last of a sinful life, and the Eccle 5.
first day to godliness. And as the wise man says, Make no long tarrying to
turk unto the Lord, and put not off from day to day: for suddenly shall the
Lords wrath break, and in thy security thou shall be destroyed, and shall
perish in the time of vengeance

Art thou a Magistrate, placed in high room and authority, and seated in the
throne of dignity? Then use not this thy might to wrong and oppression, grind
not the face of the poor, swell not with pride, despising his low estate:
Sell not thy righteousness for silver, preferring the merchants of Babylon,
before the Citizens of Jerusalem. Amos. 8.


Art thou a private laboring man? Do thy duty truly, be subject, and live
in dread to displease the good Magistrate. 1. Pet. 3.


Art thou old, and have consumed the flower of thy youth in wantonness?
Break off thy course, and frame thy self to sobriety: give the water no
passage, no not a little: for if it have never so little issue, it will
ouer-flowe thee: and if thou do slack the reins never so little, thy sins
will carry thee (like a wild horse) through brambles and bushes, and will leave
no soundnes in thy flesh: work this reformation in thy selfebetimes, even to
day, even this first day of the new year: If you will hear my voice harden
not your hearts.

Art thou young, and do begin to flourish like the young palm tree? O
consider, that the only way to retain the blossoms of thy beauty, and to
keep thy flower from withering, and thy life from fading away, is to seek
early unto God, and to apply thy mind to understanding, to prevent the morning
watches, and to give thy body to be moystened of the morning dew. For beside
the good hours that are well employed in some good study and holy exercise,
early rising bringing health to thy body, and increases the number of thy
days.

Seek therefore, and seek early, consecrate your selves Nazarites unto the
Lord, touch no unclean thing give no provocation to the flesh, Strive with the
Cook in Ec. 12.
watchfulness, and rise with the chirping of the birds: sacrifice your body a
sweet smelling sacrifice unto the Lord. This sacrifice is like a sacrifice of
fine flower: it is like the fat taken from the peace offering: yea, it is
better then any sacrifice, it is like the flower of roses in the spring of the
year, and as the lillies in the springs of water, and as the branches of
frankincense in the time of Summer: and as a vessel of massy Ec. 32. 47. 50.
gold beset with rich precious stones, as a fair Olive that is fruitful,
and as the tree that grows up to the clouds.

Having spoken of the Search, it follows that I speak of the manner how it
is to be made. In prayer, by these words, If thou pray unto the Almighty.

I showed you before, the force of our adversary, receive now a shield against
his force, even the shield of prayer. He is not to be resisted by ringing of
an hallowed bell, nor by sprinkling of holy water, nor by the relikes of
Saints, nor by our own works and merits, for these are weapons of his own
making, but by an earnest seeking to God, which search and seeking must be
made by prayer, against which, his poisoned venom takes no effect.

It is his malice that accuses, prayer pleads thy case before God, and
repelleth all his accusations: for all the Prophets do witness, that
whatsoever we ask in prayer, if we believe, we shall receive it. Is it his
rage and fury that should terrify us? nay, that prayer that Mat. 2.
strengthened Sampson to rent a young lion, as one should have rent a kid,
having nothing in his hand, shall smite and shut up the mouth of this Lion. As
for his policy, and walking up and down, seeking to devour us, it can not
prevail? For the prayer of the faithful shall save them James. 5. 15.
and the Lord shall raise them up, and if they have committed sin, it shall
be forgiven them and after this conflict ended, they shall triumph for ever
with Jesus Christ our Savior. But in any case see you unite to your prayer
knowledge, that you be not seduced to offer your petitions to strange gods, as
Saints, stocks or stones. Then John. 16.
consent that we ask only in the name of Christ Jesus, not for any desert of
our own: for whosoever believes in Christ, shall have remission of sins,
he shall not perish, but have life everlasting, he shall not come into Act.
15. 10.
judgment, but shall pass from death to life. Lastly, a confidence, which is
a certain persuasion of Gods mercy toward us: this is that prayer, of which
the Lamb testifies, That what soever we ask by prayer, it shall be given
us by God the Father. A thing (dearly beloved) so precious, that nothing is
more accepted in Heaven, nothing more grateful to God: a service commanded of
God himself, taught by Christ our Savior, and frequented by the Angels: a
thing of more force with God, then any oration of the eloquent.

Have thou not heard how the Sun stood still in the firmament, and was not
suffered to run his course? Joshua Josh. 6. 2 King. 20. Dan. 6.
and Ezechias prayed, and the Sun stood still Have thou not heard of the
stopping of the Lions mouths? Daniel prayed, and his prayer stopped the Lions
greedy and devouring throats. Have thou not heard of the dividing of the red
sea? The Israelites prayed, and the waters of Jordan were dried up: yea, the
Israelites prayed, and the waters stood about them like to a wall. Have thou
not heard how Exodus 14.
the fiery furnace lost his heat? The three children prayed, and the fire lost
his heat. Have thou not heard how the heavens were opened and shut? Elias
prayed, and the Dan. 3.
heavens were shut up three years: Elias prayed, and the clouds powered down
rain from heaven. 1. King. 8


O sure fortress, more forcible then any engine, and stronger then the gates
of hell, and to conclude, the sum and substance of all in few words: the only
thing whereby mortal men have the clouds and the stars, and the Angels, and
all the powers of heaven at commandment. For as Deborah sung in her song: They
fought from heaven, even the stars in their courses fought against Sisera:
for all creatures have been subject to the prayers of the faithful, to reuege
the Lords quarrel, to help the Lord, to help the Lord against the mighty.
Prayer has ever been the cognizance, and the victory, and the triumph of the
faithful: for as the soul gives life to the body, so prayer gives life to
the soul.

O that I could engraue the love of it in your hearts, as with a Diamond, and
so instill your minds, that my words might be pricks to your consciences,
and thereby give you occasion to pray often. It is a wonderful matter to be
able to persuade men: but if prayer be able to persuade the living God, O how
great is the force thereof, it goes through the clouds, and cease not till
it come near, and will not depart till the most high have respect thereunto. O
that you would therefore pray often, and learn of Christ (the most absolute
pattern of our life) to pray continually. He prayed in his baptism, in the
wilderness, Luke. 6. John. 11. Mat. 26. John. 18. Luke 22. Luke. 23 Mat. 19.
Psalm. 40. Romans 8. 2. Tim 4
in preaching, in working of miracles, in his passion on the mount, in the
garden, in his last supper, in commending his spirit to God at all times, and
in all places, that he might leave unto us an example of the same It
follows. And pray to the Almighty. To those three former reasons which I
brought, why we must seek and pray to GOD alone, I added this as a fourth:
because there is none so able to help us as the Lord. He that trusts in the
Lord, shall be as mount Sion. If God be on our side, who can be against us?
It is God that justifies who condemns? the Lord destroys the counsel of
the heathen, he makes their devices to be of no effect Christ is the Angel
of great counsel, wisdom, and Psalm. 83. Esaias. 9. Pro. 2.
understanding, and there is no device against the Lord. The world
notwithstanding is come to that frame, that every man has got him a strange
kind of belief, Some believe not the Law, but the Prophets: Some be
persuaded in the Supremacy, but not in the Sacrament: some in free will, but
not in merit: Some in invocation on Saints, but not in Purgatory: Some in
pilgrimages and pardons, but not in Images: Some like the doctrine well enough,
but not the Preachers: the most believe little, yet many believe somewhat, few
believe all: therefore to deal plainly, because plain dealing is best, you
must not believe by the halfes: I mean, you must not repose some trust in GOD,
and some in Saints, but all in the Lord. Psalm. 10. 5
The Gods of the Gentiles they have mouths and speak not, eyes and see not,
ears and hear not: then what can be looked for at their hands? But the Lord
is strong and mighty, a merciful God: and therefore through the Scriptures,
he is called a Rock, a fortress, a strong tower, a Shield, a horn of
salvation, a refuge, the Lord Psalm. 18.
of hosts, with other such like appellations, that we might be assured, that
our help and deliverance comes from the Lord.

Put thou any trust in man, whose breath is in his nostrils? Cursed is he
that makes man his strength, and flesh his arm. Surely Pharao, and all
Princes are a broken Iere. 67. 1. Kin. 16 Psalm. 18
staff, on which if a man lean, it will strike into his hand and pierce it,
and lay him groueling in the dust: It is better therefore to trust in the Lord,
then to put any confidence in Princes. Think thou, that Angels, or Saints or
Images can help thee? O foolish and impious pictie, to attribute more unto the
Angels, then they dare arrogate unto themselves. The Angel in the Revelation
forbids John to worship him. As for the Image, we read, that Reave. 19.
to turn the glory of the incorruptible God, into the similitude of a
corruptible creature, is Idolatry. Romans 1
Well may I then affirm with Moses, Cursed be the image, Deuteronomy. 27.
and the image-maker. The conclusion therefore of this point, is this, that we
seek the Lord and his strength evermore, that we pray unto God in humility
and sincerity, and in full assurance of faith continually, who without end is
to be sought, because without end he is to be beloved,

The third thing contained in our duty is, what effect this seeking and
praying ought to work in us, comprehended in these words: If thou be pure and
upright: if the clouds be full, they will power forth rain upon the earth:
and impossible it is, that a man that seeks after God, and prays unto the
Almighty, should not bring forth the fruits of a good life, for if the tree
be good, the fruits cannot be bad: and if the head of the water be pure, it
will send forth pure waters into the cesternes, Wherefore as good motions are
stirred up by prayer, so must they be fostered by practice of life, according
to that of the Apostle: Quench not the Spirit, nor greiue the holy one of God,
by whom ye are sealed to the day of redemption. 1. These. 5


He quenches, dearly beloved, the spirit, which being once lightened with the
sparkles of faith, and felt Gods Ephesians. 4.
motions in his heart, does neglect to increase the one to a flame, and the
other to good works in his life but with the dog turns to his vomits and
with the Sow that was washed, to her wallowing again in the mire. Therefore
(beloved) love and seek the Lord, pray to the Almighty, be pure and upright
in conversation, fly from sin as from a Serpent, for if thou come near, it
will bite thee. The teeth thereof are as the teeth of a Lion, to slay the
souls of men, and all iniquity is as a two edged sword, the wounds that it
gives cannot be healed. I dare not stand as I would upon these points, fearing
tediousness: wherefore let this suffice for the former general part,
concerning the duty we owe unto God.

Now Gods promises for the performance hereof, yield unto us most plentiful
matter of doctrine and consolation. First, of his justice, that as he will
suffer no sin unpunished: so he will suffer no good work unrewarded but
gives to every several action, his several hire, and just recompense of
reward. Shall the hour come, in which all that are in their graves, shall
hear a voice, and come forth, they that have done well, to the resurrection of
life, they that have done evil, to the resurrection of condemnation? Shall the
Lord search Jerusalem with Lanthornes? Shall all full corners be sweept, and
all pleites and wrinkles be unfolded? Shall the Sea, grave, death, and hell,
give up all that is in them. And shall all the dead (both great and small)
stand before God, when the books are opened? And shall every man have praise of
God according unto his deserving: Shall we then discern between the vessels
of honor and of wrath, between sheep and Goats, the just and unjust? Finally,
shall there be an infallible, general, and incorrupt judgment, wherein the
book of all our offenses, shall be laid wide open? Now God be merciful unto
us: be favorable O Lord, be favorable. But to proceed, it is thy nature, O
Lord, to gather 1. These. 5.
up the wheat, and burn the tares, to cut down all fruitless trees, and
cast them into the fire: yea, into a fiery Ephe. 4.
furnace, that never shall be quenched, into an utter darkness, where is
weeping, wailing and gnashing of teeth then be favorable, O Lord, be
favorable.

Does not the Lord spare David, a king, and a Prophet for murder? Does he not
spare the Sichemites for adultery? Nor Absalom for treason: Nor Saul for
tyranny? Nor Eli for negligence? nor A chab, Jeroboam, nor Iezabel for
cruelty? nor Herod, Nabuchadnezzar, and Lucifer for pride? nor Pharaoh for
incredulity? Then beefauorable, O Lord, be favorable to us, in whom almost
every one of these sins do dwell and remain. Did the Lord for corruption
over flow the world with water? Did he burn Sodom for her villainy? Did he
cast Adam and Eve out of Paradise, for eating of the forbidden fruit? Did he
stone a poor wretch to death, for gathering chips on the Sabbath day? Then be
favorable O Lord, be favorable unto us. But does not the Lord spare the
Cedar tree for his height, nor the Oak for his strength? Nor the Poplar for his
smoothness? Nor the Laurel for his greenness? No verily, from the Cedar that
is in Lybanon, even to the Hysop that grows out of the wall, yea, every one
that brings not forth good fruit, is hewne down and cast into the fire: it
is a righteous thing with God, to render vengance to those that disobey him,
and to destroy such as have forsaken the law by everlasting perdition.

Behold, the Lord shall come in the great and latter day of judgment, when
none shall escape his judgment seat, with clouds shall he come, and every
eye shall see him, even they which pierced him through, shall also wail before
him, being summoned all to appear most fearfully before his imperial throne
of majesty: then be favorable O Lord, be favorable. Alas, with what eyes
shall we miserable sinners behold him, so gloriously sitting in his royal
kingdom, with all his mighty and holy. Angels, and whole number of Saints,
sounding with the voice of the Archangell, and trumpet of God, causing the
heavens to pass away with a noise, and the elements to melt like wax, and the
earth to burn with the works thereof? Yea, with what eyes shall we behold
him, when we see the Sun darkened, the Moon eclipsed, and the stars fall
down from heaven? But alas, when he takes the furbished blade into his hand,
when he is ready to throw the fiery thunderboults of his wrath, when he
summoneth before him the worm that never dies, the fire that never shall be
quenched, to revenge upon the wicked, into what a plight are they then driven?
Then leave they off, Be favorable O Lord, be favorable, and say to the
hills, O ye mountains, come and cover us. O ye waters come and ouerwhelme us:
woe, woe, woe, how great is this darkness? The godly on the other side are
bathed in such streams of bliss, and advanced to such happiness, as neither
tongue can utter, nor heart conceive.

The second thing we have to note in his promises, is his mercy, which
exceeds all his works. For God though he have given a curse of the law
against sinners, yet seeing Christ for the penitent has borne the curse,
whereby his justice is not impared, he is content to accept our weakness as our
strength, to recompense our imperfection with reward of greatest perfection,
and that which we can perform but in small part, he is content to accept as
whole, nor for any desert of ours, but in satisfaction of his son, who paid
with the seal of his own blood, the ransom for our sins, he has
cancelled the handwriting that was against us. Wherefore we are to pray unto
God, that whenever our sins shall come in question before him, that he
would look upon Christ Jesus the true looking-glass, in whom he shall find
us most pure and innocent, and to shine most clearly in the righteousness
which he had given us by faith: so that we appear not in our own
righteousness, but in the righteousness of the Lamb, who having taken away
the sins of the world, and having made us as white as snow, though we were
as red as crimson, says, he will be merciful to our iniquities, and will
remember our sins no more. Of him do all the Prophets bear witness, that
through his name all that believe shall receive remission of their sins.
Again, Drink ye all of this; for this is my blood which is shed for the
remission of sins. Christ gave himself for our sins, that he might
deliver us from the curse of the Law, even according to the will of the Father.
Christ bare our sins in his own body on the tree that we being delivered
from sin, might live in righteousness, by whose stripes we are healed, for we
were as sheep going astray, but are now returned to the shepherd and bishop
of our souls. It is no more but believe and be saved: believe, and receive
remission: believe, and lay off thine own righteousness, and inuest thy self
with the righteousness of the unspotted Lamb.

David was young, and after was old, yet in all his days he never saw the
righteous forsaken. Sometimes he scourges his children, but like a loving
Father he lays no more upon them then they are able to bear, for he
afflicts them for his own justice, because they are sinners: for his
wisdom, to exercise their faith: for his mercy, to cause them to repent: but
this is the end of all, he helps them in their distresses, he reuengeth
himself upon his enemies, and gives to his people rest and quietness. O that
we would therefore praise the Lord, and forget not all other his singular
benefits: O that we would confess, that his mercy endures for ever.

The third thing to note in his promises, is his bountiful kindness, in
requiring so small a thing, with so great and liberal blessings: and binds
himself by obligation (as it were) that as sure as we perform the one, so he
will notfaile to accomplish the other.

The fourth, is his patience and long suffering, which is not slacknesse, as
some men account slacknesse: but is patience, because willingly he would have
no man perish, but gladly would have all men to come to repentance. He is
content to stay our leisure, till we seek and pray unto him: and never
smites, till there be no hope of redress:

The fifth, is his love, in that he is content to stir us up to holy
exercises, and purity of life, and to allure us with fair promises of aid,
and prosperous increase of all his blessings in this world. The particular
examination of these blessings would require a larger discourse, then (fearing
tediousness) I dare presume to trouble you withal: wherefore a word of each,
and so I end.

Touching the first, where it is said, God will awake up unto thee, it is a
greater benefit then the words import: for it signifies, not only that he
will hear thee, but that he will also do what thou desire, and satisfy
thy request. As long as the sinner sleeps, the Lord is said to be asleep:
but as soon as the sinner awaketh from sin, Psalm. 78.
God will arise (says David) and his enemies shall be scattered, and they that
hate him, shall fly before him: as the smoke vanishes before the wind, and
as the wax melts before the fire, even so shall the wicked perish at the
presence of God, Wherefore as Paul exhorted the Ephesians, so I exhort you,
Awake thou that sleep, stand Ephesians. 5.
up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light: awake unto God, and God
will awake unto thee, and Christ, even the son of God, the bright morning
star, shall give thee the light of life.

In the second, he promises abundance of worldly blessings, in recompense of
prayer, for it is said, He will make the habitation of thy righteousness
prosperous, that is, Reave. 22. 2. Ps. 1. 12. Prou. 28
the Lord will make peace within thy walls, and prosperity within thy places:
he will command his blessings to be with thee in thy storehouse, and in all
thou set thy hand unto: he will open unto thee his good treasures, even
the heavens to give rain on thy land in due season. Thou shall lay up gold, as
the dust, and the gold of Ophir as the flint of the river: thou shall wash thy
paths with butter, and thy rocks shall power out rivers of oil: thou Job.
22. Ps. 1. 28.
shall call salvation thy wall, and praise shall be in thy gates Lo, thus
shall the man be blessed that fears God.

Lastly, for being pure and upright, he will make thy latter end greatly
increase, and that thou may the less mistrust his promise, he will do it,
though thy beginning be but small.

Here (brethren) ye see what a sea of matter is offered me, whereunto if I
would commit my self, I might discourse unto you, what strange events (by Gods
providence) have happened in the world, what great Kings and potentates have
been plucked down from their thrones, and what contemptible persons in the eye
of the world, have Hest. 8. Genesis 30. Dan. 6.
been advanced to their rooms. How Mardocheus a stranger was exalted into
Hamans place: how Joseph and Daniel the one a bondman in Egypt, the other a
captive in Babylon, were made Princes in those kingdoms, But because I will
not overmuch transgress the bonds of modesty, or hold you longer then in
this place I have been accustomed, only remember what the Prophet says? He
raises the needy out of the dust, and lifts the poor out of the mire, that
be might set him with the princes, even with the princes of Psalm. 113
the world.

Remember the example of David, whom the Lord Psalm. 78.
chose and took from the Ewes great with young, that he might feed his people
in Jacob, and his inheritance in Israel. Remember the example of Job, how the
Lord turned the Job. 42
captivity of Job, as the rivers of the south, how he blessed the last days
of Job more then the first, how he gave him sheep and camels, and oxen, and
she asses, in more abundance then he had before, how he increased him with
sons and daughters, even to the fourth generation, so that he died being old
and full of days. Remember even our Psalm. 126
own estate, for whom the Lord has done great things already: as created
us, and redeemed us, and sanctified us and not long since delivered us from the
gaping jaws of those that sought to suck our blood. Upon some he has Psalm.
41.
bestowed humility, whereby their minds are adorned with virtue: honor upon
others, whereby their persons are invested with majesty: upon others
comelines, whereby the other two are graced: upon others Orchards, which they
planted not, at least unto which they gave no increase: upon others, increase
of virtuous children, whereby their posterity is preserved: upon others, the
free passage of his word, which a long time had been obscured by ignorance, the
mother of devotion, as the shauelings call it, but under a stepdame of
destruction. as we perceive it: and though he bestow but some one or two of
his blessings upon us, yet how much are we bound for these blessings, to sing
praise, and honor, and glory, unto him that sits upon the throne, and unto
the Lamb for ever. But upon whom he has bestowed all these blessings, O how
strictly by good cause are they bound to magnify the Lord, and to rejoice in
God their Savior. Examine then your own consciences I beseech you, whether
God has bestowed all these blessings upon you, or no: and if he have, O what
Psalm. 99. Psalm. 96.
great cause have you to come before his face with praise, to sing loud unto
him with Psalms, to worship and to fall down before him, to give unto the
Lord the glory of his name, to bring an offering of thanksgiving, and to enter
into his courts with praise. And yet who knows whether the Lord has greater
blessings for you in store? ye may be sure he will pull down the mighty
from their seats, and exalt the humble and meek. Surely the Lord does use
virtue as a mean to bring us to honor, and whosoever you shall see endued
with the virtues of this Text, I mean, with seeking unto God, with prayer and
purity of life, ye may be sure there is a blessing reserved for him of the
Lord, yea, such a blessing, as though his beginning be but small, yet his
latter end shall greatly increase.

God increase the love of these things in our hearts, and make us worthy of
Christ's blessings, which he has plentifully in store for us: that after he
has heaped temporal blessings upon us, he would give us the blessing of all
blessings, even the life of the world to come.

FINIS.
Mary's Choice.
Luke 10. 38. 39. etc. 38 Now it came to pass as they went, that he entered
into a certain town, and a certain woman named Martha, received him into her
house.

39 And she had a sister called Marie, which also sat at Jesus feet, and
heard his preaching.

40 But Martha was cumbred about much serving, and came to him and said,
Master, do thou not care, that my sister has left me to serve alone? Bid
her therefore that she help me.

41 And Jesus answered, and said unto her, Martha, Martha, thou carest and art
troubled about many things.

42 But one thing is needful, Marie has chosen the good part, which shall
not be taken away from her.


AS Christ had showed himself loving unto Lazarus and his sisters, in raising
him John 11.
from the death of the body, and then from the death of the soul: so do they
here show their thankful minds to Christ again the one by receiving him into
her house, and the other by entertaining him into her heart. As he was God, he
was received of Mary: as he was man, he was received of Martha. They both
desired to entertain our Savior, as Jacob and Esau desired to please their
aged Genesis 27
Father: but Mary made choice of the better part, and was preferred before her
sister, as Jacob sped soonest of most dainty venison, and prevented his
brother of the blessing. And although the care of Martha in entertayning of
Christ be not to be misliked, yet Mary's diligence in hearing his doctrine, is
of purpose preferred, to teach us, that it is much better with Mary to study in
the word, and first to seek the kingdom of God, then with Mat. 6. 35
Martha to labor in the world, and to neglect that heavenly kingdom. And yet
notwithstanding, such is the corruption of this rustie age, that our greatest
care is to provide for this present life, as the Rich man, Luke, 12. enlarged
his Barnes wherein to put his store for many years: but we never or very late
remember to provide for the life to come, like that other Rich man, Luke, 16.
that never thought of heaven, till he was tormented in the flames of hell.

In the 11. of John, Christ is said to love the whole Family, and here he is
said to come unto them, For whom he loves he cannot choose but visit, like
the friends of Job that came to comfort him in his great adversity: Job. 2.
yea, and the greater love he bears unto any, the oftener he will resort
unto them, yea, he will come and dwell with them, John 14. 23. Like Jacob,
that came down into Egypt, to his beloved Son Joseph, and dwelt in Genesis 47
Gen 45.
Goshen. But Christ is yet more kind then Jacob was, for he came not till he
was sent for with horses and chariots: but Christ came of his own accord to
this beloved family.

Thus does he always prevent us with his blessings: before he was desired,
he came into the world, he called his Apostles before they came to him, and
before he was requested, he came unto this noble house. O happy house that
entertained such a ghest! but thrice happy inhabitants to whom such a ghest
would vouchsafe to come! When he came to the swinish Gadarens, they desired
him to depart out of their coasts, preferring their swine above their Savior:
but this godly family Luke. 8.
received him into their houses, preferring their God before their gold, and
the health of their souls before their worldly wealth. They received him into
their house who had not a house wherein to put his head. Wherein their
hospitality is commended, and shall certainly be Mat. 8. 19
rewarded at the dreadful day: for with this and such like works of mercy,
the Lord shall answer the sentence of judgment, which is to be denounced
against the wicked that never exercised those works of mercy.

Let us learn by their example to be harberous, and given to hospitality,
which is so often commended unto us in the Scripture, and shall be so richly
rewarded at the last day. Those godly Fathers, Abraham and Lot, entertained
Angels in the habit of strangers: so we may daily entertain Christ Jesus in
the habit of a poor Genesis 18 Genesis 19
man, of a blind man, of a lame man: and whatsoever is done unto any of these
that are his members, he accounts and accepts as done unto himself.

Now as the virtue of hospitality is commendable in all sorts of men: so is it
more especially commended to the Ministers, who are expressly commanded by the
Apostle among other things, to be given to hospitality. 1. Tim 3. 2 Number. 35
Unto the Levites in the time of the law, the Lord appointed cities of refuge,
to signify that the Ministers house should be the poor man's harbor, and his
store their treasure: but the true Ministers of our days have no cities of
refuge for others, for they have none for themselves: they have not wherewith
to relieve the wants of others, for they have not to relieve their own.

When Martha had thus entertained Christ as he was man, into her house, Marie
began to entertain him as he was GOD, into her heart, she sat at his feet
to hear his preaching, for no sooner was Christ come into the house, but that
he took occasion to teach and instruct the family, and in stead of bodily
food, which they bestowed upon him, to give unto them the food of the soul.
Thus does he always show himself a thankful ghest, into what house so ever
he enters, he leaves better things behind him then he finds, he loves
not to be in Zachees debt for his dinner, for in stead there of he Luke. 15
brings salvation to his house: neither does he leave his supper unpaid for
here, for in stead thereof he bestows upon them an heavenly Sermon. This
should be the exercise of faithful Ministers, when they are invited to great
feasts, that as they are called the salt of the earth, which serves to season
the meats, to make them sauourie and Mat. 5. 13
preserve them from putrefaction, so they should season the table talk with
some godly conference, to minister grace unto the hearers. Ephe. 4. 29.

These sisters were godly women, and both earnest favorers of Jesus Christ and
yet in the manner of their devotion there is such difference, that the worldly
affection of the one, may in some sort be misliked, in respect of the godly
exercise and practice of the other: Martha is sore in cumbred with much serving
where a little service had bin sufficient, but Mary is attentive to hear the
word of God which never can be heard sufficiently.

Marie sits to hear the word, as Christ used to sit when he preached the
word, to show that the word is to be preached and heard with a quiet mind. In
a still night Mat. 5. Luke 4. John. 8.
every voice is heard, and when the body is quiet, the mind most commonly is
quiet also. But Martha is troubled with other affairs, and therefore unfit to
hear the word as the ground that is surcharged with stones, or ouergrown with
weeds and thorns, is unfit to receive the seed, or yield any fruit to him
that tilleth it As often therefore as Mat. 5. 13
we come to hear the word of God, we must not come with distracted minds, we
must not trouble our selves with Luke 8. 14
the cares of this life, which (as our Savior said) are thorns of choke the
world, and to make it unfruitful For Moses was unfit to walk with God, till
he had put off Exodus 3 Mar. 10
his shoes, and the blind man unfit to come to Christ, till he had thrown
away his cloak: so we must think our selves unfit to hear the word, and
unapt for every heavenly exercise, till we have put of our shoes, that is,
our worldly cogitations and affections, and till we have cast away our cloak,
that is, all lets and impediments which might hinder us from profiting in our
profession.

When our minds are quiet, we are fit to deal with heavenly matters:
therefore the Doctors conferred sitting in the Temple: and God delights to
deal with us when we are most private: he appeared to Abraham sitting Genesis
18. Acts. 2.
in the door of his Tent. The holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles, and
filled all the house where they were sitting. The Eunuch sitting in his
chariot, was Acts. 8.
called and converted by Philips preaching.

Marie sat at Jesus feet, yet sat she not sleeping, as many sit at the
preachers feet, but she sat at Christ his feet, and heard his word: As Paul
was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, and was perfectly instructed in the
law of the fathers. Act. 22.


Her humility is commended, in that she sat at Jesus feet, to show that the
word is to be heard with all humility: her diligence and earnestnes
appears, in that she would not depart to help her sister, to signify that
the hearing of the word must be preferred before all worldly business.

Her diligence and humility serves to condemn our negligence and contempt of
Christ and his word? we do not sit at Christ his feet, nay, we rather set
Christ at our feet, when we are so negligent in hearing of his word.

We are as slow to come to the Church, as the Raven was to come to the Arc,
and as Ioath to spend any Gene. 8.
time in the service of God, as Pharao was Ioath to let the Israelites go to
serve the Lord. If a commodity were Exodus 8. 32.
to be seen, whereour some profit might arise, how careful would we be to
procure it? what pains would we take to get it? Absolon was not more desirous
of a kingdom, then the rich men of our time are desirous of golden 2. Sa. 15.
gain. But if it be a matter of cost or trouble, if they cannot hear the
word preached without some hinderance to their wordly business and some
extraordinary Luke. 8. Ma. 13. 40.
charge to their purse, then like the Gadarenes, they are content to take their
leave of Christ and his word, and had rather lose that heavenly pearl, than
they would part from their worldly pelf.

Thus in Christ we have the patience of a good pastor and in Marie, the
pattern of a good hearer. Let Ministers 2 Timothy 4. 2
learn by his example, to take all occasions to preach the word, to be
instant in season and out of season: and let Christians learn by her example,
first to seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and then to provide
Math. 6
for the things of this life

While Marie was careful for the food of the soul Martha was curious to
provide food for the body, her greatest care was to entertain Christ, and to
make him good cheer, to testify her thankful mind unto him that had done so
great things for them, he had raised her brother Lazarus from death to life,
therefore he was worthy to be well entertained.

If Elias deserved to be well dealt withal at the hand of his hostess, whose
son he had restored to life: or Elisa deserved such entertainment for her
sons reviving, 1. Ki. 17.
then surely our Savior Christ is worthy to be welcome hither, where he had
raised Lazarus out of his 2. King. 4
grave, wherein he had lain by the space of four days before.

It was well done therefore of Martha to show her thankful mind unto Christ,
but it was not well done at that time to show her felfe thankful in that
manner: it was John. 11.
then time to hear the word, for at that time Christ preached the word, it was
no time for her to spend that time in other affairs, and to neglect the
greatest affair, the means of her own salvation.

It was not unlawful for Martha to labor, no more then it was unlawful for
Peter to sleep: but when Christ Mat. 25.
was preaching, it was no time for her to be so busy, in serving, no more
then it was time for Peter to sleep, when Luke. 5.
Christ willed him so earnestly to watch and pray. When Christ preached out of
Simons ship to the people that stood upon the shore, it was no time for Peter
to play the fisherman. But when Christ had left speaking, and commanded him to
launch into the deep, then it was time for Peter to let down the net.

There is a time wherein we ought to labor in our vocation, and a time
wherein we ought to hear the word, and as we may not utterly neglect our
lawful callings to follow sermons, so must we not bestow the Sabbath, which is
consecrated to the service of God, in following the works of our vocation. All
things have their appointed time (says the wise man) Ec 3. and every thing is
seemly in his convenient season, but when things are done preposterously and
out of order, there follows confusion.

Although Martha did not hear Christ, yet did she labor for Christ: many in
our days will neither labor for Christ, nor hear of Christ: but as the
Israelites were Number. 21
weary of their journey in the wilderness, and loathed that heavenly Manna,
so these men are weary of every godly exercise, and are soon cloyed with the
word of God.

The five foolish Virgins wasted their oil to no purpose, and while they went
to buy, were excluded the marriage: Mat. 25
and these foolish men spend this time of grace vainly and wantonly, as though
after this life there were no time of Justice and vengeance to be feared. The
day serves for their pride or profit, the night is spent in sport and
pleasure, and no time is left to hear the Word. When we are praying, they
are playing: When we are preaching, they are eating and drinking, like the old
world, that eat and drank, that married wives, and gave in marriage, while
Noah was preparing the Arc for Genesis 6. Heb. 11. 1. King. 18
the saving of his household. And as Baals Priests wounded themselves to serve
their idol, so these men take dangerous courses, and strangely trouble
themselves to serve the devil.

Now Martha finds her self agreiued, and begins Gen 37. 1 Sa. 17.
to envy her sisters exercise, as Joseph's brethren envied him for his dreams:
and the sons of Ishai, that disdained their brother David, for his forwardnes
in the combat with Goliath.

These two sisters, that in other things agreede so well together, in this do
differ so much, that Christ must have the hearing of the matter, and decide the
controversy: Martha plays the plaintiff, and accuses her sister. Marie the
defendant answers by her advocate, and Christ himself that took upon him
the office of an advocate, is become the Judge, and gives sentence on Mary's
side: Martha complayneth of her sisters slothfulness, and seems after a sort
to blame our Savior for winking at it, requiring him to see the matter
redressed speedily. But Christ reprooueth Marthaes curiosity, and then
excuses, yea, and commends Mary's care.

In Martha it appears how willing we are to please ourselves in our own
conceits, and how ready to conceive amiss of others doings, yea, sometimes to
prefer our own defects before the perfections of other men. If David chasten
his soul with fasting, it shall be turned to his reproof. If he put on
sackcloth, to testify his contritio^ they Psalm. 69.
jest at him, and the drunkards make songs of him. If John Baptist be temperate
in his apparel and diet, they will say, Luke 7 33
he has a devil. If Paul answer discreetly for himself, he shall be
charged to be mad with overmuch learning, Act. 26 Luke. 7. 34.
yea, if our Savior Christ himself frequent the company of sinners, to
reclaim them from sin, they will not stick to call him a friend and
companion of Publicans and sinners. Amongst us, if there be any that be more
forward in religion then the rest and more diligent to hear the word, as Mary
was, there shall not want some or other to censure them at their pleasure, yea,
to find fault, and to condemn them for so doing: yet are not the godly to be
discouraged herewith, or to desist from their godly exercises: for as the Lord
answered for Mary: when she held her peace, so the Lord will defend their
cause and take their part against their adversaries. The Lord cannot abide to
hear his servants ill spoken of, but is always ready to maintain their
right, and to answer for them, He will not suffer Laban to speak an ill word
Genesis 3. 24. Nu. 12.
to his servant Jacob. And if Aaron and Miriam murmr against Moses, the Lord
will punish it with leprosy. What a comfortable thing is this to the godly,
that the king of kings will take their parts, and will not suffer them to
sustain any wrong? He is a most sure and trusty friend, that will not abide
his friends to be back-bited or ill spoken of, but either he will answer in
their defense, or he will find some means to stop their mouths, and restrain
the slandrous tongues of their enemies, as sometime he stopped Balaams passage,
when he went to curse Gods people, and caused the dumb beast to speak, and
reprove Nu. 22. 2. Pet 1. 5.
the madness of the prophet, rather then he would have his people to be cursed.

The repetition of Marthaes name, argues the vehemency and earnestnes of this
admonition. The Lord is feign to be very earnest and importunate with us,
before he can reclaim us. So when God spoke unto Abraham be called him twice
by name: Christ called Peter thrice by name, John 21, to cause him make his
threefolde confession, Genesis 22.
to make amends for his threefold denial. And when the Lord spoke unto
Samuel, he called him 4. several times by name, before he answered: for such
is the 1. Sam. 3.
great mercy of God, that he is content to admonish us often of our duty,
and such is the dullness and perverseness of our crooked nature, that we cannot
be gained by the first admonition: but the Lord must call us often and
earnestly, before we will hearken unto him.

There are two things in the speech of Christ to be observed. The first is, his
modest reprehension of Marthaes immoderate care: the other is, his friendly
defense of Mary's choice. Though Martha was very careful to entertain Christ
in the best manner, yet if he perceive any thing in her worthy reprehension,
he will not stick to tell her of it: he will not sooth her in her saying,
nor smooth her in her own conceit, for all the trouble and cost that she
bestows upon him. If we be often invited to some man's table, and kindly
entertained, it would be unkindly taken if we should find fault with any
disorder: but for as much as all Christ his actions are the instructions of
Christians, therefore every Christian, but especially Preachers, whom it more
specially concerns, must learn by this example how to behave themselves when
they are invited to great feasts, namely speak their conscience freely when
they see a fault. The best requital that we can make for our good cheer, is
to give good counsel and wholesome admonitions to them that inuit us When
Christ dined with the Pharisie, Luke 11. and was misliked for not washing
before dinner, he took occasion to reprove their hypocrisy, their outward
show of holiness, which was the sin of the Pharisees and at another time he
notes them for pressing to the chief places at banquets, and shows what
modesty is to be observed in sitting down to meat, and what ghests should be
bidden to our table. So should Preachers behave Luke. 14.
themselves toward those that inuit them to great feasts, when they see
perhaps some fault or disorder, either in the master of the house, or in some
other of the ghests, to say unto them thus, or other wise as the case requires
I will warn you of one thing that will do you good, that you would leave
your usury and extortion, your covetousness and oppression, that you would
leave your swearing and blaspheming the name of God, that you would forbear
to profane the Lords Sabbath, that you would leave your pride, and excess in
your diet and apparel, that you would forbear to speak ill of any behind
their backs, or to bear any malice or hatred to any of your neighbors.

These are the faults which are easy to be espied almost in every place and
these are the faults which the faithful minister of Christ Jesus should not
leave unreproved 1. Kin. 18 Mat. 14 Mark 6. 20.
wheresoever he comes. But as Elias told Ahab of his idolatry, though he
were his king, and John Baptist told Herede of his adultery, though he did
many things for him, and heard him gladly: so should the preachers reprove the
people for their notorious offenses, notwithstanding some favors and courtesies
received from them. If Christ had cause to find fault with Martha for her too
much diligence in his entertainment, it seems he was not curious in his
diet, but would have been content with simple cates, he was no delicate or
dainty ghest, he did not affect or delight in sumptuous banquets, or costly
fare, he rather requires a religious heart, a constant faith, a willing mind
to hear the word, with an earnest care to live thereafter. These are the
things wherein the Lord delights: these are the iuncates which he
desires, and which he prefers before all earthly cheer.

Thus is Martha reprehended for her curiousitie: now let us see how Mary is
excused and commended for her godly care. One thing is necessary (says
Christ:) and what is that one thing: Even to hear the word preached, which is
the power of God to salvation, to every one that believes. A man may better
want all things, then that one needful thing, and yet we desire all other
things, and neglect that one thing, which is so needful.

This one thing has Marie chosen, and therefore has chosen the better part.
Marthaes part is good, because it provides for this present life: but Mary's
part is better, because it leads to eternal life. It is good to be occupied
about our calling, to get our living: but it is better to be occupied in
hearing the word which is able to save our souls. As the head and the foot
are both needful in the body, so Mary and Martha are both needful in a
Commonwealth: man has two vocations, the one earthly, by his labor: the
other heavenly, by his prayer. There is the active life, which consists in
practicing the affairs of this life, wherein man shows himself to be like
himself, and there is the contemplative life, which consists in the
meditation of divine and heavenly things, wherein man shows himself to be
like the Angels: for they which labor in their temporal vocations, do live
like men, but they which labor in spiritual matters, live like Angels. When
they hear the word, God speaks unto them: when they pray, they speak unto
God: so that there is a continual conference between God and them, because
they are continually, exercised in hearing and praying.

Christ loved Martha for her hospitality, as Isaac loved Esau for his venison.
So did he love Mary for her diligence in hearing his word, as Rebecca loved
Jacob, for harkening to her voice. A Nurse which has her breast full of milk,
does love the child that sucks it from her: and Christ Genesis 25 28.
which has his breast full of heavenly milk, is glad when he has children to
suck the same, Let us therefore (as the Apostle wills us, 1. Pet 2. 12,)
laying aside all maliciousnes, and all guile, and dissimulation, and envy, and
all evil speaking, as newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the word,
that we may grow thereby to be perfect men in Christ Jesus: let us breathe
after the fountain of the living water, which springs up unto eternal life:
and as the faintie Heart desires the water brook Psalm. 42. 1
to quench his thirst: and for as much as many things are so troublesome, and
one thing is so needful, let us seek Ec. 12. 13. Heb, 11. 6 Romans 10. 17.
that one needful thing, the end of all things, even to fear God and keep
his commandments, which we learn by hearing the word of God, whereby faith
(without the which it is impossible to please God) is begotten and nourished in
the hearts of men.

This is that good part which Marie has chosen, by so much better then her
sisters choice, because it concerns a better life, and has the fruition of
this present life. Marie has a double portion: she heard the word, and eat
of 1. Tim. 4. 8
the meat which her sister dressed, for godliness has the promise of this
life, and of the life to come. As for all other things, whether they be
honors, promotions, pleasures, and what not? they serve only for the
maintenance of this present life, which is so short and subject to mutabilitie:
but the word of GOD is the food of the soul, the bread of life, that
immortal seed which brings forth fruit unto 1. Pet. 1. 13.
eternal life. Let the word of God therefore be precious unto us, because it
was so permanent: for heaven and earth must pass, but the word of God
endures for ever. Luke 21 33 1. Pet. 1, 25.
If we make choice of any thing beside, it must be taken from us, or we
shall be taken from it: but if we make choice of this one thing, it shall
never be taken from us, neither in this world nor in the world to come. The
Lord grant that we be not only hearers, but doers of Ia. 1. 22
the word, that it may be truly said of us, as Christ said of his Disciples,
that heard his preaching, Behold thy brother, Ma. 12 50. Luke 11.
my sister, and mother: or as he answered the woman that commended his carnal
kindred, Blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep the same.

FINIS.
THE FIRST SERMON OF Noah's drunkenness.
Genesis 9: 20. 21. Noah also began to be a husbandman, and planted a vineyard:
And he drank of the wine and was drunken, and was un covered in the midst
of his tent.


FIrst, we are to speak of Noah, then of Cham his wicked son and after of
Shem and Iapheth his good sons: In Noah first of that which he did well, and
then of his sin, In Cham: first of his sin, and then of his curse. In his
brethren, first of their reverence, and then of their blessing.

Now we will speak of the father, and after of his children Then (says
Moses) that Noah began to be an husbandman.

This is the first name which is given to Noah after the flood, he is called a
husbandman and the first work which is mentioned, was the planting of a
vineyard: one would think when all men were drowned with the flood, and none
left a live to possess the earth but Noah and his sons, that he should have
found himself something else to do then to plant vineyards: and that the holy
Ghost should have entitled him King of the world, and not a husbandman of the
earth, seeing there be no such men as Noah was, which has more in his hand,
then any King has in the world, or shall have to the worlds end: but thereby
the holy Ghost would show, that God does not respect Kings for their titles,
nor men for their riches, as we do, and therefore he names Noah after the
work which he did, not after the possessions which he had, an husbandman.

It seems that there was great diversity between this age and ours: for if
we should see now a King go to plough, a noble man to drive the teame, a
gentleman keep sheep, he should be scorned for his labor, more then Noah was
for his drunkenness: yet when we read how this Monarch of the world thought
no scorn to play the husbandman, we consider not his princely calling nor his
ancient years, nor his large possessions to commend his industry, or
modesty, or lowely mind therein. Which may teach us humility, though we
learn to disdain husbandry. Of whom will we learn to be humble, if kings
give examples, and the son of God humbles himself from heaven to earth, and
yet we contemn the example of the kings of the earth, and the example of the
King of heaven?

The time was when Adam dug and delued, and David kept sheep, and all the
house of Jacob were called men occupied about cattle: but as they for this
were abominable to the Egyptians (as Moses says in the same verse) so they
which do like them, are abhorred of their brethren: and they which live by
them, scorn them for their work, which would be chastened themselves,
because they work not.

There was no art nor science which was so much set by in former times, and is
now profitable to the Commonwealth, bringing lesie profit unto her self that
may so justly complain of her fall without cause, and her despite from them
that live by her, as this painful science of husbandry: that it is marvel
that any man will take the pain for the rest, to be contemned for his labor,
and be a scorn for the rest, which might hunger and starve, if he did not
labor for them more then they do for themselves. No marvel then though many
in the poor countries murmr and complain, that other cannot live by them,
and they cannot live themselves: but it is marvel if their complaints do not
grow in time to rebellion, and pull others as low as themselves: for why should
the greatest pain yield the less profit? yet this is their case, for if you
mark, you shall see, that the husbandman does bare the price of his fruits so
soon as the dearth is past, though he raises it a little while the dearth
lasts: but they which raise the price of their wares with him, seldom fall
again, but make men pay as d^are when the dearth is past, as if it were a
dearth still. Thus a plentiful year does damage him, and a hard year does
vantage them. So this painful man is feign to live poorly, fare meanly, go
barely, house homely, rise early, labor daily, sell cheap, and buy dear,
that I may truly say, that no man deserves his living better, no man
fulfilleth the law nearer: that is, Thou shall get thy living in the sweat of
thy brows, then this poor son of Adam, which picks his crumbs out of the
earth. Therefore he should not be mocked for his labor, which has vexation
mough though all men speak well of him: and in my opinion, if any deserve to
be loved for his innocence, or for his truth, or his pain, or the good which
he brings to the Commonwealth, this Realm is not so much beholding to any
sort of men, (but those that feed the soul) as those that feed the body,
that is, those that labor the earth: yet you see how they live like drudges,
as though they were your servants to provide food for you, and after to bring
it to your doors: as the beasts serve them, so they serve you, as though you
were another kind of men. I cannot think upon their misery, but my thoughts
tell me, that it is a great part of our unthankfulness, that we never
consider what an easy life and living God has given unto us, in respect of
them.

If the Apostles rule were kept, they which do not work, should not eat: but
now they which do not work, eat most, and the husbandmen which work, eat
not, but are like Bees, which provide food for other and pinch themselves. Let
us consider this, for they had not one law and we another: but the same curse
which was denounced upon Adam, was denounced upon all his children. That every
man should get his living in the sweat of his brows. Although I know there be
diverse works, and diverse gifts, and diverse callings to work in: yet always
provided, they which do not work should not eat, for in the sweat of thy
brows, that is, in labor and travel: thou King, and thou Judge, and thou
Prelate, and thou Landlord, and thou Gentleman, shall get thy living, as Adam
thy father did, or else thou do avoid the curse, and a greater curse shall
follow, that is, they which will not sweat on earth, shall sweat in hell.

Adam had food as well as thou, and so had Noah, and more then thou, unless
thou had all, for they had all, and yet they might not be idle: because their
hands were not given them for nothing: some work with their pen, some with
their tongues, some with their fingers: as nature has made nothing idle, but
that he which is a Magistrate, should do the work of a Magistrate: he which
is a Judge, should do the work of a Judge: he which is a Captain, should
do the work of a Captain: he which is a minister, should do the work of a
minister: as when Noah was called an husbandman, he did the work of an
husbandman. This contempt of the country, does threaten danger to the land, as
much as any thing else in our days, unless their burden be eased, and their
estimation qualified in some part to their pains. Thinking that you have not
heard of this theme before, seeing the words of my text did lie for it, thus
much I have spoken to put you in mind how easily you live in respect of them,
and to rectify our minds toward our poor brethren, which in deed seem too
base in our eyes, and are scorned for their labors, as much as we should be
for our idleness.

Then (says Moses) Noah hegan to be an husbandman In that itis here said that
Noah began, it does not disprooue that he gave not himself to husbandry
before, but it imports, that Noah began to set up husbandry again after the
flood before any other, so this good man recomforted with the experience of
Gods favor (which had exempted him and his seed out of all the world) and
rejoicing to see the face of the earth again after the waters were gone,
though an old man, and weaker then he was, yet he returned to his labor a
fresh, and scorned not to till and plant for all his possessions as though he
were an husbandman: such a lowlines is all ways joined with the fear of God,
that they that are humbled with religion, do not think themselves too good to
do any good thing.

Here note by the way, that none of Noah's sons are said to begin this work,
but Noah himself, the old man, the hoary head and careful father begins to
teach the rest, and shows his sons the way how they should provide for their
sons, and how all the world after should labor and travel, till they
return to dust so the old man whom age dispenceth withal to take his ease,
is more willing to provide for the wants of his children, then they are which
are bound to labor for themselves and their parents too, as the Storke does
feed the dam when she is old, because the dam fed her when she was young.
What a shame is this to Shem and Iapheth, that is, to us which are young and
strong, that the father should be called a labourer, when the sons stand by?
Now the ground was barren because of the flood, and could not bring forth
fruit of it self, because of the curse: therefore it pitied Noah to see the
desolation and barrennes, and slime upon the face of the earth, which he had
seen so glorious and sweet, and fertile, with all manner of herbs and fruits
and flowers before. Therefore he sets himself to manure it, which waited
for nothing now, but a painful labourer to till and dress it, that it might
bring forth delights and profits for sinful man, as it did before.

By this we may learn to use all means for the obtaining of Gods blessings,
and not to lose any thing which we might have or save for want of pains: for
that is sin, as Solomon notes in the 24. of the Proverbs, when he reproves
the slothful husbandman, because his field brought forth nettles and
thistles, in stead of grapes, not because the ground would not bear grapes,
but because the slothful man would not set them. Shall God command the earth
and all his creatures to increase for us, and shall not we further their
increase for ourselves? As we increase and multiply our selves, so we are
bound to join hand and help, that all creatures may increase and multiply
too, or else the fathers should eat the childrens portion, and in time there
would be nothing left for them that come after: this regard Noah seems to
have unto his posterity, and therefore he gave himself unto husbandry, which
is commended in him unto this day, and shall be recorded of him so long as
this book is read: whereby we are warned, that he which lives only to
himself, is not to be remembered of them which live after: But as David cared
how the realm should be governed after his death, as well as he did during
his life: so though we die and depart this world, yet we should leave that
example, or those books, or those works, behind us, which may profit the
Church and Common wealth when we are dead and buried, as much as we did when
we lived among them: Even as Noah planted a vineyard, not for himself, but
for the ages to come after.

Some do think that Noah planted the first vineyard and drunk the first
wine, and that there was no use of grapes before: which opinion they are led
unto, that they might excuse Noah and mitigate his fault, if he did sup too
deep of that cup, the strength and operation whereof was not known unto him,
nor unto any man before. But it is not like, that the excellent liquor and
wholesome juice of the Grape did lie hid from the world so many hundred years,
and no doubt but there were vines from the beginning, created with other trees:
for how could Noah plant a vineyard, unless he had slips of other vines or
graps that grew before, seeing he did not create fruits but plant fruits as
we do? For this is principally to be noted, that so soon as he had
opportunity to do good, he omitted no time, but presently after the flood
was gone, and that the earth began to dry, he plied it with seeds, and
wrought it till he saw the sruites of his labor By this we learn, to omit
no occasion to do good but whenever we may do good to count it sin if we
do it not.

But if we be so exercised, then all our works shall prosper like the vineyard
of Noah, because the fruit of the vine does cheer the countenance and glad the
heart of man. Therefore some have gathered upon the planting of this vineyard,
a signification of gladness and thankfulness in Noah for his late
deliverance, as the Jews by their solemn feasts did celebrate the memorial
of some great benefit but I rather judge, that God would have us see in this
example, what men did in those days, and how we are degenerare from our
parents, that we may prepare against the fire, as Noah prepared against the
water,

This is worthy to be noted too, that GOD did not so regard his husbandry,
but that he had an eye to his drunkenness, and speaks of his fault as well
as his virtue, whereby we are warned, that though God bless us now while we
remember him, yet he will chasten us so soon as we forget him: though we
be in a good name now, infamy will rise in an hour: though we be rich at
this present, poverty may come presently though we be whole while we be
here, yet we may fall sick before night, even as Noah is praised in one
verse, and dispraised in another: even now God commends him for his lowliness,
and now discommends him for his drunkenness: as though he had forgot all his
righteousness, so soon as he had sinned, and would call in his praise again.

This was to show, that Noah was not saved from the flood because he deserved
to be saved, but because God had a favor unto him: for he which was not
drowned with water, was after drowned with Wine. As the Pharisees when they had
done well, were proud of it, and lost their reward: so when Noah had done a
good work, he spotted it with sin, and was dispraised where he was praised,
as though God had repented him that he commended him. He planted well, but
he drunk not well: therefore that which was good, did him no hurt: then
seeing he was trapped with a good work, whatsoever we do, we may remember how
easy it is to sin, if we miss in the matter, or in the manner, or time, or
place, or the measure, as Noah did. He which planteth the vineyard, is worthy
to taste of the grape: but if thou have found honey (says Solomon) eat not to
much, least thou surfeit. So if thou have found wine, drink not too much, least
thou surfeit. A little wine is better then a great deal, and if thou will
follow the Apostles counsel, thou must drink it but for thy stomachs sake,
least that happen to thee, which thou shall hear of this noble Patriarch.

Though he were never so righteous before God and men, though he escaped the
destruction, which lighted upon all the world, though he had all the fowls of
the air and beasts of the land at his command, though he passed the
pilgrimage of man nine hundred years, yet Noah was but a man: so ancient, so
righteous, so mighty, so happy, Noah showed himself but a man, for drinking
the wine which himself had planted, he was drunken. This was Noah's fault, he
was drunken with his own wine, as Lot was defiled with his own daughters. If
Cham his son had taken too much, and stripped himself as his father did, the
holy Ghost would scarce have spoken of it, because he was a man of no note, but
when the father forgot himself, and gave this offense, mark the manner of the
holy Ghost, as though he would show you a wonder: he displayeth Noah's
drunkenness, as Cham displayed his nakedness: as if he would say, Come and
see the strength of man. He which was counted so righteous, he which believed
the threatening like Lot when the rest mocked, he to whom all the fowls of the
air and the beasts of the earth flocked in couples as they came to Adam, he
which was reserved to declare the judgments of God, and to begin the world
again: Noah the example of sobriety, the example of moderation, is overcome
with drink, as if he had never been the man. How easy, how quickly the
just, the wise, the prudent, has lost his sense, his memory, his reason, as
though he had never been the man!

And how hard is it to avoid sin, when occasion is at hand, and pleasant
opportunity tempts to sin? it is easier for the bird to go by the net,
then to break the net: so it is easier for a man to avoid temptations, then
to overcome temptations: therefore GOD forbad Balaam, not only to curse the
people as Balak would have him, but he forbad him to go with Balaks servants,
knowing that if he went with them, and saw the pomp of the Court, and heard
the King himself speak unto him, and felt the tickling reward, it would
strain his conscience, and make him doubt whether he should curse or bless.

Peter but warming himself at Cayphas fire, was overcome by a silly Damsel to
do that which he never thought, even to forswear his Lord God: therefore
Daniel would not eat of the kings meat, least he should be tempted to the
kings will, showing us that there is no way to escape sin, but to avoid
occasion. Therefore David prays, Turn away mine eyes from vanity: as though
his eyes would draw his heart, as the bait tilleth on the hook. Noah thought
to drink, he thought not to be drunk: but as he which comes to the field
to sound the trumpet, as slain as soon as he which comes to fight: so the
same wine distempereth Noah, which has distempered so many since. Where he
thought to take his reward, and taste the fruit of his own hands, God set an
everlasting blot upon him, which sticks fast till this day, like a bar in
his arms, so long as the name of Noah is spoken of, that we cannot read of
his virtue, but we must read of his sin: whereby every man is warned to
receive the gifts of God reverently, to use them soberly, and to sanctify
himself, before he reach forth his hand unto them, that they may comfort and
profit us, with that secret blessing which God has hid in them: or else
euerything, the best gifts of God may hurt us, as the pleasant wine stained
and confounded the great Patriarch, when he delighted too much in it, which
he might have drunk as Christ did at his last supper, and this disgrace had
never been written in his story: but GOD would have a fearful example like
the pillar of salt, to stand before those beasts, whose only strife is to
make trial, who can quaffe deepest and show all their valiantness in wine.

Because there is such warning before us, now we have the drunkard in
schooling, I will spend the time that is left, to show you the deformity of
this sin. If any hear me which have been overtaken with it, let them not
marvel why he cannot love his enemies, which loves such an enemy, as this,
which leads till he reeleth duls him till he be a fool, and steals away
his sense, his wit, his memory, his health, his credit, his friends: and
when she has stripped him as bare as Noah, then she exposes him like Noah
to Cham, and all that see him do mock him: it is a wonder almost, that any man
would be drunk that has seen a drunkard before, swelling and puffing, and
foming, and spuing, and groueling like abeast for who would be like a beast
for all the world? Look upon the drunkard when his eyes stare, his mouth
driuels, his tongue faulters, his face flames, his hands tremble, his feet
reele: how ugly, how monstrous, how loath some does he seem to thee? So
loathsome do thou seem to others when thou art in like taking.

And how loathsome then do thou seem to God? Therefore the first law that
Adam received of God, was abstinence, which if he had kept, he had kept all
virtues beside, but intemperancie lost all, In abstinence the law came to
Moses, and he fasted when he received it, to show that they which received the
word of God, receive it soberly. A temperate man seldom sins, because the
flesh which does tempt is mortified, least it should tempt but when the
handmaide is above the mistress, and a man has lost the image of GOD, and
scarce retains the image of man, all his thoughts, and speeches, and actions
must needs be sin, and nothing but sin, because the band of virtue,
sobriety, is broken, which kept all together: when did thou want discretion
to consider? when did thou want patience to forgive: When did thou want
continency to refrain? When did thou want heart to pray, but when sobriety
was fled away, and in temperancie filled her room? If shame let to sin, it
casts out shame: if fear let to sin, it casts out fear: if love let to
sin, it expulseth love, if knowledge let to sin, it expulseth knowledge,
like a covetous Landlord, which would have all to himself and dwell alone.

There is no sin, but has some show of virtue, only the sin of
drunkenness is like nothing but sin: there is no sin but although it hurt
the Soul, it beautifieth the body, or promises profit, or pleasure, or glory,
or something to his servants: only drunkenness is so impudent, that it
descrieth it self: so unthankful that it makes no recompense: so noisome
that it consumes the body, which makes sinners spare, lest they should
appear to be sinners. Every sin defiles a man, but drunkenness makes him
like a beast: every sin desaceth a man, but drunkenness takes away the
image of a man: every sin robs a man of some virtue, but drunkenness
steals away all virtues at once: every sin deserves punishment, but
drunkenness vpbraides a man, while the wine is in the stomach: and though he
would dissemble his drunkenness, yet he is not able to set a countenance of
it, but the child descrieth him, the fool knows that he is drunk, because
his face betrayeth him, like the leprosy which brast out of the forhead: so
worthily has he lost the opinion of sobriety, which has lost it self. His
son thinks himself more master now then his father: his servant makes him
a fool: his children lead him like a child: his wife uses him like a
servant, and although his drunkenness leaves him when he has slept, yet no
man seeks to him for counsel after, no man regards his word, no man reckons
of his judgment, no man is persuaded by his counsel, no man accounts of his
learning, no man has any glory to accompany with him, but so soon as
drunkenness has made him like a beast, every man abhors him like a beast,
as they did Nabuchadnezar: the spirit flies from him least it should grieve
it, his friends go away least he should shame them, and no virtues dare come
near, least he should defile them.

How many things fly out when wine goes in? how is it then that he which
loves himself, can be so cruel to himself, that he should love his life,
and shorten his life? that he should love his health, and destroy his health?
that he should love his strength, and weaken his strength? that he should love
his wealth, and consume his wealth? that he should love his credit, and crack
his credit? that he should love his understanding, and ouerturne his
understanding? that he should love his beauty, and deforme his beauty? the
Poets need faining no more, that men are transformed into beasts, for if they
were living now, they should see men like beasts: some like Lions, some like
wolves, some like Foxes, some like Bears, some like Swine: who is the beast
when the beasts satisfy nature, and man satisfies appetite? when the beasts
keep measure and man exceedes measure? when the beasts are found laboring,
and man found surfeiting, who is the beast? I have read of a bird which has
the face of a man, but is so cruel of nature, that sometime for hunger she
will set upon a man and slay him: after, when she comes for thirst unto the
water to drink, seeing the face in the water like the face of him whom she
devoured, for grief that she had killed one like her self, takes such
sorrow, that she never eats nor drinks after, but beats, and frets, and
pines her self to death. What will thou do then which have not slain one
like thy self, but thy self, thy very self with a cup of wine, and murderest
so many virtues and graces in one hour?

As Esau sold his land and living for a mess of pottage, so the drunkard
sells his sense: and wit, and memory, and credit for a cup of wine. Thou
have not murdered thy brother like Caine, but thou have murdered thy self
like Judas: as the Rachabites abstaining from wine, as Ionadab bad them,
obtained the blessing which God had appointed to the Israelites: so let us take
heed, least they which we account Idolaters, whilst they fast and watch,
obtain the blessing which God has appointed for us (get away the blessings)
while we sit down to eat, and rise to play. Therefore, as Christ said,
remember Lots wife, so I say, remember Let. one hour of drunkenness did him
more hurt, then all his enemies in Sodom: remember Noah one hour of drunkenness
discovered that which was hid six hundred years. Ten times more might be said
against this vice: but I have said enough to make you abhor it, I have had as
much as I would.

Some go about to excuse Noah because he was an old man, and therefore might
soon be taken cupshot: some because the Wines were hotter in those Countries,
then they are with us, some because of his change of drinks, which had not
woonted himself to Wine before: some because as most men delight in that which
by great labor they have brought to pass of themselves.

So no marvel though Noah had a longing to his own grapes, following herein
the example of a curious Cook which does sup and sup his broth, to taste
whether it be well seasoned, that he may mend it if he can, or mend the
next: but as the Fly by often dallying with the candle, at last scorcheth her
wings, with the flame, so taking, he was taken, and at last was drunk: yet
this is imputed to him for his fault, that he was drunk, as the punishment
which follows does witness. Such is the providence of God, that his mercy
might be glorified in all, he has concluded all under sin, and suffered the
best to fall, that no man might trust in his own strength, and that we seeing
their repentance, may learn to rise again, how greiuous soever our sins
be. If we have been Idolaters, if adulterers, if persecutors, if murmurers,
if murderers, if blasphemers, if drunkards: Aaron, and Moses, and Lot, and
Abraham, and David, and Solomon, and Peter, and Paul, and Noah, have bin the
like, who reign now in the kingdom of Christ with his Angels, and so may we,
if we repent like them. These examples, says Paul, are not written for our
imitation, but for our admonition.

Thus you have seen Noah sober, and Noah drunken whereby we may see that a
man may be drunk with his own wine, he may surfeit with his own meats, he
may lust with his own wife, he may offend with his own gifts his own honor
may make him proud, his own riches may make him covetous, his own strength
may make him venturous, his own wit may make him contentious: therefore as the
child pluckes out the sting before he takes the honey: so let every man,
before he receives the gifts of God, sit down, and look what baytes what
snares, what temptations Satan has hid in them, and when he has taken out
the sting, then eat the honey, and he shall use the blessings of Christ, as
Christ did himself.

FINIS.

