A GODLY AND Faithful Retractation made and published at Paul's cross in
London, the year of our Lord God 1547. the 15. day of May, by Master
Richard Smyth Doctor of diuinitye, and reader of the Kings Maiestyes lecture
in Oxford.

Reuokyng therein certain Errors and faults by him committyd in some of his
books.

Londini, Anno Domini M. D. XLVII.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

A godly and Faithful Retractation made and published at Paul's cross in
London, In the year of our Lord God M. D. xlvij. the xv. day of May, by M.
Richard Smyth Doctor of divinity and reader of it in Oxforde.
THe holy Prophet David (good christen audience) says right truly: Omnis homo
mendax. That is to wytt: Every man is a Liar of his own corrupted nature: The
which thing how true it is, theldest and best Writers in the Christen Church,
do evidently declare, because they all have erred in their books. Wherefore
the great Clerk saint Austen, in an Epipistle written to Marcella writes of
himself; Vos qui me multum diligitis, si talem me asseritis, vt nunquam in
scriptis errasse me dicatis, frustra laboratis, nec bonam causam suscepistis:
facile meipso iudice superamini, quonia^ non placet mihi cum a charissimis meis
talis existimor, qualis non sum. That is to say: Ye that love me much, if ye
said that I am such that ye affirm that I never erred in my writyngs or Books,
ye labor in vain, ye have not taken in hand a good cause: ye are easily
overcome, I my self being Judge: For it pleases not me when I am esteemed
such a man of my moast dear friends as I am not. Here we se that this blessed
father saint Austen was not ashamed to confess his error in writing: which
thing he did not by words only, but also in a certain Book wherein he wrote
very many things in which he confesses that he was deceived. This Book is
called in Latin, Liber Retractationum: And in Englysh, a Book of Retractations
or Reuocations, of such things which he wrote amysse and erred in. Shall I
now be ashamed to acknoledge my self to have been deceived in my Book of
Traditions? Am I worthy to be resembled or compared to this noble aunciente
Doctor of Christ's church? Will ye not believe S. Austen in other points of our
Religion because he erred, and also confessed his error in diverse and sundry
things of his books? To be short, who of all the Writers of books erred not?
S, Ambros, S, Hierome, Chrysostom, Hilary, Ciprian, Origin, Tertulian, and all
the other Doctors of ye church were deceived in some points of their Books,
as learned men do well know. Why therefore may not I err, or why should I be
ashamed too confess mine Error and too revoke it? Ought not every good man and
woman too be sorry for my fall in this my Book, and too rejoice with me
acknowledging the truth in this matier of man's Traditions, Precepts,
Ordinances, Rites, Ceremonies? Who says not that I have a just cause to
excuse my wekenesse and fault, and ask of you mercy? which I trust I have
optayned of the Kings gracious highness, and his most honorable Counsel: by
whose goodness and clemency I am here admytted and suffered too show mine
Errors and Faults in my book of Traditions, which I made of late entitled
thus: A brief Treatise, setting forth diverse truths, necessary both too be
believed of Christen people and kept also, which are not expressed in the
Scripture, but left to the Church by the Apostles Traditions, made and set
forth by Richard Smyth, Doctor of Divinity and Reder of it in Oxforde. Which
Book I do Reprove and Revoke in diverse Faults in it, of the which I will a
non recite certain perticulerly, and then I shall give unto you a true and
General Doctrine of all those things of which I do entrete in that my Book,
that thereby you may well perceive and see, after what sort they ought too be
taken of Christen people that no man err therein,

FIRST, Whereas I spekyng in my book of Traditions, of the autorite of
Bysshoppes in making laws and ordenances, which the people ought to obey, I
did say and teach in this wise: That men ought to obey the Bysshoppes
commandment in all things leaful, upon pain of everlasting damnacyon. And
that these words of Matthew: Do as they bid you, but not as they do, be
understand not only of things contained in Scripture, but also of the Churches
ordenau^ces besides Scripture made by the Ministers of the Church, although
the said Ministers do abuse their auctorite for their own be nefite and
profit. And further, where I taught that it is more convenient that the people
obey their Bisshops commandments and Decrees although it be but in a thing
indifferent of it self and not commanded by God, then that servants should
obey their masters, or children their fathers and mothers.

And finally, where I said concerning the same matter: That as subjects be
bound to obey and fulfill their Princes Laws, which are not contained in Gods
Laws being not against it, even so be Christen people bound too obey and do
that which their Bisshops byddeth them do. All these sayings I do now
Revoke, Disanull and Condemn as erroneous and false. And do profess and
acknowledge first that the auctorite as well of the Bishop of Rome, whose
auctorite is justly and lawfully abolyshed in this Realm as of other Bisshops
and other called ye ministers of the church, consists in the dispensacion and
ministratio^ of Gods word, and not in making Laws, Ordinances and Decrees
over the people beside Gods word without the consent and authority of the
Prince and people.

Secondly, I say and affirm that no Bishop nor none of the Clergy assembled
together have authority to make any Laws or Decrees besides Gods Law over the
people without the consent of the Princes and the people: and if they do make
any such, no man is bound to obey them.

Thirdly, I say that in those cou^tryes, where by the auctorite of the Prince
they have made any such Laws, thauctorite of those Laws, does not appende
and hang of the Bisshops and the Clergy, but of the princes and chief heds in
every country

Fourthly, I say and affirm that within this Realm of England and other the
kings Dominions, there is no Law, Decree, Ordinance or Constitution
ecclesiastical in force and available by any man's auctority, but only by the
Kings maiestyes auctority or of his Parliament.

And where in any foresaid book of Traditions, I said that Tenthes of
Benefices be dew only to them that do preche and teache the Scripture, and also
that he that serves not he Altar nor precheth not the Gospel can not justly
live by the Tenthes, but is in conscience bound to restore the profits and
fruits taken thereby: Which my sayenges as it lies in words and sentences is
seditious and sclaunderous to the Kings majesty's procedinges and the Laws
and Ordres of this Realm, which have granted Tenthes and Tithes to many Ley
persons: Therefore this my saying as it may be taken, and justly by the words
and sentences as they be put, I will not nor entend to defend nor aueere the
same: but I require that I may put them and declare them gently, that I meant
not in these my sayings of any Lay men, to the derogation of the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm: but I meant only of Curates and Priests which
receiving their Tithes, do not their duties accordingly.

And where also in my said book of Traditions, and likewise in my book of the
Sacrifice of the Mass, I following Damascene and other Ancient Authors, wrote,
that the Disciples of Christ did make certain Canons, which saint Clement did
gether together and put in writing, and that these same Canons must be taken
for the Appostles doctrine and techyng, and their words without doubt to be
believed and kept as that which is contained expressly in scripture. Now
having red many things, which at that time I had not diligently marked and
wayed: I do think, affirm, and confess that doctrine to be not true, but a
vain, unlawful, unjust, and vnportable burdein to Christen consciences: And
that those Canons pretended to be of thappostles making and gatherd of saint
Clement, not to be made of thappostles: or if they were, not to be made
otherwise than but for an order in the Church for that time, not ever for to
endure whereof many at this time in no wise be too be observed: And those which
do remain, not to be of that force as Gods law to charge men's consciences
otherwise, then as man's Ordinances and Policy which may be taken away by
Superior powers as well and with so little scruple of conscience as other of them
which many years a go were taken away, and to sum clean contrary laws made

In the said book of Traditions also I said and affirmed, that Christ and his
Appostles taught and left to the church many things without writing which we
must both believe steadfastly and also fulfill obediently under pain of
dampnation ever to endure. Amongst the which I rehearsed by name a great
number to be obeyed, kept and followed: as the observation of Lent from flesh
or wine, the keeping of the Sacrament in the Pyx, the receiving of it at the
priests hands, the hallowyng of the water in the Font, the thrice dippyng of
the Child in the water at the Christenyng, the puttyng on of the Chrisome, the
Consecration of the Oil, and Anoyntyng of the christened child, the hallowyng
of the Aulters, the prayeng toward the East, the Sensyng of the aultare, the
Wasshyng of the hands, and saying Confiteor, and lifting up of the Sacrament
at the Mass, the making of Holy Water, That the. xii Appostles (every man a
peace for his portion) made the Creed, and many mo besides these. And after
like sort I spoke of Canons, Decrees, and Ordinances of bishops and general
counsels.

Now I do confess the said doctrine as concerning thobseruyng of the said
Traditions under that pain, to be false and Tirannicall, an unjust, unlawful,
and untrue burdein of men's consciences, not fit to be taught, preched, or
defended,

Likewise of the beleuynge of things where I did say, that there are diverse
things not expressed in the scripture which we are bound to believe egally
with those things which arr written in Scripture, in the number of which I did
co^fusely and indiseretely for an example bring some of the before rehearsed and
other many. As concerning many things in my book put, and the more number
there by me reconed and named I affirm and say to be false, and in no wise
true, but very dangerous and unjustly, onerous to the consciences of christen
men: and too be true only in those Doctrines which necessaryly may be gathered,
and consequently do follow too the words and sentences in Scripture, so that
in effect they may be justly counted to be in scripture, though the very form
of words be not there: Of the which in my Book is very few, yet some I did
rehearse: as Baptismus pueroru^, Descensus Christi ad inferos, Virginitas Marie,
Trinitas personarum, Processio Spiritus sancti, and a few other.

And because I would declare the true acceptions, dignity and authority of
scripture too be distinct, diverse, and of higher, surer, more stable and
firm order and credence, then the other unwritten Tradicions and Assertions,
wandering in thobseruation of many years, and the churches canons and Decres,
ordinances and traditions left by succession.

Here I do declare, set forth, confess, affirm, and asserte my true and
steadfast opinion, belefe and faith in these things propounded and vttred unto
me as concerning scripture written, and other Traditions unwritten and not
declared in the said holy Scripture.

The scripture of tholde and new Testament written by thinspiratio^ of the Holy
ghost concerning our belefe, is too be believed, accepted and taken as an
undoubted truth, not to be altered, reformed or changed by any man, nor to
be minished nor abrogate by any custom, but under perell of dampnation to be
believed, and under the same danger to be followed, having authority given
unto it by almighty god, taught and enspired by the holy ghost dependyng of no
man's authority, nor violable or defesible by any power, otherwise then under
the perell and danger of eternal damnation.

Such things as in the Acts of the Apostles or any other place of Scripture,
as for a time was taught and setfurthe for an introduction of the weak in the
faith, not to remain for ever, as faith incresed was abrogate, none otherwise
than it was thauctors mind and intentes they should those that concerned
eating, drinkyng, coueryng or discoueryng of heads, or such other externe
rites and ceremonies, rather concerning an order among men outwardly to be for
a time observed, than an eternal law to rule and govern the soul.

Such things as sometime be called traditions not expressly and by words
found in holy scripture, but which may necessarily and well be gathered of holy
scripture, are to be believed and followed, in somuche and as far as they may
truly be gathered of the scripture, or consequently do follow the wourdes and
intentes of the same.

Traditions pretended to be made of thappostles, and by some authors ascribed
to them as concerning things to be believed not found in scripture directly
nor necessarily, and directly consecutyng and followyng to scripture, laufully
and without perell of dampnation may be doubted of, and also denied and refused
by the superior powers, and such as have Authority in the church.

There be many things ascribed to thappostles, and called traditions deduced
from the time of thappostles and read in the name of old Authors, and set
forth under the pretensed title of their name, which be feyned, forged and
nothing true, full of superstition and vntrewth, feyned by them which would
magnify their own power and authority, as is the Epistles of Clemens,
Anacletus, Euaristus and Fabianus, and other which arr set forth by the bishop
of Rome and his accomplices, which be forged, feyned and of none authority nor
to be believed, but cou^terfeyted by them: who with the color of antiquity
would magnify that usurped power of the bishop of Rome.

Traditions of the church, whether they be in deed or have been counted so
ancient that they have been used from the beginning of the church and the time
of thapostles, or else have been appointed and prescribed of later days by
Decrees of the bishop of Rome or other bishops or by general counsels
concerning superiority of one bishop over another: Watching, Fasting,
Kneeling Sensynges, Enoyntyng, Blessings and all other such Rites, Ceremonies
and comen Orders to be used in the church of God, does not bynd but where they
be received, and by disuse may be abrogate, or by contrary law made in any
country by thauctority of the superior powers many be clean taken away, and
other Rites, Canons, Traditions and Ceremonies brought in for them with out any
danger of sin or grudge of conscience. And with any such last before
rehearsed, the Kings majesty for the time being may either of laufull and just
cause, or of his mere goodness without any cause dispense or absolve, any man
from being bound to them.

And the said person with whom the superior powers have dispensed with all,
and so made free from them, may use his said liberty with out any danger of
sin or scruple of conscience, either to the Kings majesty which gave
liberty, or to him which has obtained the liberty or Dispensacion. None
otherwise than in any other act, statute or proclamation made by humane
polycie, the Kings majesty and the high powers may. When contrary wise that
that is Gods law and commanded by scripture always to be observed, no man
can dispense with it, nor give any man liberty to break it, under danger of
sin and corruption of conscience.

This is my full, firm, and stable belefe as touching the scripture written,
and Traditions unwritten, and what thing soever I or any other heretofore have
preached, taught, written or endyted to the contrary of these my assertions and
belefe now declared unto you: or if any man hereafter (which God forbid) should
preach, teach or set forth any thing which is not consonaunt and agreyng to
these aforesaid articles and assercions, believe good hearers, and know you
surely, that it is a false, untrue and deuellysh doctrine and ungodly
usurpation upon the holly Scripture, contrary too the true, pure, and
Catholicall doctrine of Christ's church. In the which faith and belief
contained in the said. vi. Assertions, I do entende good hearers with the
grace of almighty God to live by Christ, and all my hope is also too dye therein
if need shall be. And whenever God shall call me thereunto (his grace assistyng)
I shall be ready.

AND now concerning another book which I made of the Sacrifice of the Mass,
where the moast chief and principal article of our faith, and moast directly
perteynyng too the redemption of our sins and to our salvation is: That our
sauyor Christ Jesus by his moast precious death and effusion of his moast
precious blood upon the cross did redeem man kind, taking away our sins,
pacifying the indignation of his father, and cancellyng thobligation that was
against us: In which Sacrifice making unto his father, our said Sauyoure
Ihesus Christ as saint Paul says plainly to the Hebrews, was not a priest
after the order of Aaron, forasmuch as he was of another Trybe: and also, that
preesthod was imperfite and unprofitable bringyng nothing too perfection: But
our Savior Christ made his sacrifice upon the Cross parfectly, absolutely,
and with the most highest perfection that could be, so much, that after that one
oblation and sacrifice for syn made by him but once only, another he nor any
other creature should at any time after, make any mo oblacions for the same. And
for as that saint Paul says, he was called an eternal priest of the order of
Melchysedeth, and not of Aaron.

This faith ought every man and woman undoubtedly to believe and openly to
profess upon pain of everlasting dampnation, and also too dye in this
professyon if case shall so require: The which moast wholesome and moast
necessary doctrine of our faith I not dilygently considering, as many times too
right great clerks and learned men in much writynge in like mattiers it has
chanced to say too far. The infirmite and weakness of men being such, that
seldom in many words error has escaped. So in my book of the Sacrifice of the
mass, I did incircumspectly and rashly write and set forth too the people,
that Christ was not a priest after the order of Melchisedech, when he offered
him self upon the Cross too his father for our sins, but was a priest after
the order of Aaron. And that when Christ did offer his own body too his father
after thorder of Melchisedech tappease his wrath, it may not be understand of
the sacrifice of the cross, but of the sacrifise that Christ made at his
Maundy in form of bread and wine: To the which in deed saint Paul's doctrine
is contrary, both in other places, and in thepistle and Hebreos very
manifestly, against whom, who without doubt had the very spirit of God.
Neither it becomes, nor I will not willingly teach or defend any thing:
Wherefore you shall impute that, good Audience, too the frailty of man's nature,
and too my negligent marking, having at that time rather a respect too a
fantasy that then I had in my mind, than too the true and infallyble doctrine
of scripture. And moreover in the same my book, I said not only that the
Sacrifice of the mass is the self same substance of Christ but also the
self same oblacion or offering of our sauyoure Christ's very flesh and blood
which him self once offrid to his father on the cross to appeal his wrath.
And that the priests do continually and daily in the mass offer not only the
self same body of Christ, but also to the same effect, that Christ did offer
himself to his father at his Maundy. Of the which words and doctrine, if they
be not very warely and circumspectly read, and more favorably taken then the
words as they lie, may well bear, it might be gatherd, that priests herein be
egall with Christ. Priests of thorder of Melchisedech, appeasing the wrath and
indignation of the father of heaven, crucifying or offering Christ to the same
effect that Christ in his own person did upon the cross, which is a
blasphemy intolerable to be herd of christen ears. For Christ as saint Paul
says, was but once offered, once gave up himself for the redemption of our
sins on good friday on the cross, nor never before nor after was offered for
us, but in a sacrament and as a commemoration of the same.

And so of the Maundy or Supper of our Lord, Christ himself says Hec
quotiescu^que feceritis, in meam commemorationem facietis. Ones he dyed for our
sins, and once again he rose for our justification. He dies no more, and
his sacrifice was so good so full, so pleasant, so precious to god, that there
needed no more oblatio^s to appease god, nor only for the sins past, but also
for all the sins to the day of Doom.

There need no more sacrifices, no more offerers, but as having a respect and
a remembrance of that most holy, most perfyte, and most entier Lamb, then and
for ever offered up for us. But these before said I can not deny but spoken of
me and written, And as I do not now like them, so at thexample of saint Austen
and other good doctors, I am not ashamed to retracte them, call them again,
and condemn them. For when I followed mine own invention not directed by
Scripture, I began as the nature of man is to wander, and at the last went
clean contrary too Gods word.

Wherefore, I hertely exhort every man as touching matiers of faith to found
the same upon Gods certain, true, and infallyble word: lest by doing the
contrary, they fall into superstition, idolatry, and other manyfold errers as I
my self sometime, and many other (although I do not come hither too accuse any
man) yet I perceive of late time have done. Wherefore, these my two books, the
one of the Sacrifice of the mass, and the other of the Traditions unwritten, in
those points before rehearsed, and all other wherein they be not full co^sonant
to scripture, I forsake and renounce as false erroneous, and against the true
word of God. Requiring the good christen reder whosoever shall read them, to
give no further credence unto them then I would my self: That is, not to take
as undoubted truth all that is therein written, but as written of a man that
sometime falls: to be so far true as they be consonaunt to scripture, where
they be not against scripture, to be humane persuasion, which may either be so
or not so, as the great resone shall lead: where they be not consonaunt to
scripture to be erroneouse and false, and that I much lament and am sorry that
I wrote them in those points. And I desire every man that has any of the said
books, to beware of them, and to give no credence to them in all such
things in them written, as be not consonant to the scripture, as they avoid
occasion of error, and tender the truth of Gods word and his glory. To whom be
laud, praise, and honor Amen.

Imprented at London in Paul's churchyard at the sign of the brazen serpent
by Reynolde Wolf.


