A PLAIN Declaration made at Oxforde the 24. day of July, by Master Richard
Smyth, Doctor of divinity, upon his Retractation made and published at Paul's
cross in London, In the year of our Lord God, M. D. xlvij. the xv. day of
May.



Londini, Anno Domini M. D. XLVII.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

A plain Declaration made at Oxforde the 24. day of July by Master Richard
Smyth Doctor of diuinitye, upon his Retractation made and published at Paul's
cross in London, ye xv. day of May Anno Domini M. D. xlvij.
Solomon says Dominus proteget gradie^tes simpliciter: God will defend them
yt walk plainly At my first return from London immediately after my Sermon
which I made last at Pawles Cross according to my bounden deuty and promys,
I should have chiefly and most princypally declared and set forth plainly
and fully here in Oxforde all that my Retractation wyche I red and professed
openly at Paul's cross. But in this behalf I utterly deceived my self: For I
did omytt and let pass my most weighte matter, because I intendid to set
forth three things at once. The one was too show that ye Declaration of al my
doings as towchyng my books, was but a Retractation and not a Recantation. The
second was the earnest answering unto such (as I hard say) had conceauid by
mistaking of my Retractation, that I should deny and condemn the sacrament
of thalter (wherein is present ye very body and blood of Christ) and the
sacrament of Baptism. The laboringe in these two things withdrewe and
troubled me very much that I could not earnestly travail in setting forth
of my retractation according to my duty. For as touching the first where as I
said I made a retractation and not a recantacion, it was but an excuse of my
doings. For as much is commenly signified and meant by Retractation as by
recantacion. And because that all men for ye most part which herd me so say
do gather and take hereof (as I am credibly infourmed) that I did stick still
and stand to mine old doctrine in all things: And that the retractacion sent
abroad in my name was either none of mine, or else that I was compelled and
forced to agree unto it: I am very sorye that they so did mistake me. But I am
most sorye of all that I for my part thorough my dark vtteraunce should give
them occasion so to think. Wherefore at this time I purpose to read unto you my
retraction which I declared at Paulis cross, unto the which I agreed and
consented freely and wyllyngly without any manner of force or compulsion. And to
thentent you shall well perceive that this is my doctrine and my belefe, I shall
to my power both now and at al times hereafter, when occasion shall serve, set
forth, maintain and defend the same. And here I shall most ernestly require
you, and in our savior Christ beseech you, another to mistake me on the one
side, another to be offended or grieved with me on the other side. For in this my
retractation I do not deny the holy sacrament of the altar, nor the Sacrament
of baptism, nor finally any other thing comprised in the body of holy
scripture as necessary matter of our belief. And where as syns the time yt I
declared my retractatio^ at Pawlis cross I wrote and sent abroad sundry
letters for mine excuse, and made also as it were a gloss and an exposition of
my said retractacion, whereby I might seem rather to travail for to preserve
mine estimation, then clearly and syncerely to set forth the doctrine which I
in my retractation wyllynglye did profess: In this and in all other my
writings, readynges and teachinges, what so ever I have written, read or
taught heretofore, this that I now teach I know to be true. For that I have
groundely tried and serched the same. We have a saying Amicus Socrates amicus
Plato, magis amica VERITAS: He is my friend, and he is my friend, but the truth
is most my friend. Truth is to be in braced, truth is to be defended, truth
is my profession. Another my fame nor estimation of my self, another frendshyp
of my dear friends, nor any other things shall make me ashamed of truth. I
remember what the Lord of truth does say: He that is ashamed of me before men,
I shall be ashamed of him before my father which is in heaven. Now therefore I
will read unto you my Retractation.

THe holy Prophet David (good christen audience) says right truly: Omnis homo
mendax. That is to wytt: Every man is a Liar of his own corrupted nature: The
which thing how true it is, theldest and best Writers in the Christen Church,
do evidently declare, because they all have erred in their books Wherefore the
great Clerk saint Austen, in an Epistle written to Marcella writes of himself:
Vos qui me multum diligitis, si talem me asseritis, vtnunquam in scriptis
errasse me dic^tis, frustra laboratis, nec bonam causam suscepistis; facile
meipso iudice superamini, quonia^ non placet mihi cum a chariss^^is meis talis
existimor, qualis non sum. That is to say: Ye that love me much, if ye said
that I am such that ye affirm that I never erred in my writyngs or Books, ye
labor in vain, ye have not taken in hand a good cause: ye are easily overcome,
I my self being Judge: For it pleases not me when I am esteemed such a man of
my moast dear friends as I am not. Here we se that this blessed father saint
Austen was not ashamed to confess his error in writing: which thing he did not
by words only, but also in a certain Book wherein he wrote very many things
in which he confesses that he was deceived. This Book is called in Latin,
Liber Retractationum: And in Englysh, a Book of Retractations or Reuocations,
of such things which he wrote amysse and erred in. Shall I now be ashamed to
acknoledge my self to have been deceived in my Book of Traditions? Am I worthy
to be resembled or compared to this noble aunciente Doctor of Christ's church?
Will ye not believe S. Austen in other points of our Religion because he erred,
and also confessed his error in diverse and sundry things of his books? To be
short, who of all the Writers of books erred not? S, Ambros, S, Hierome,
Chrysostom, Hilary, Ciprian, Origin, Tertulian, and all the other Doctors of
ye church were deceived in some points of their Books, as learned men do well
know. Why therefore may not. I err, or why should I be ashamed too confess
mine Error and too revoke it? Ought not every good man and woman too be esory
for my fall in this my Book, and too rejoice with me acknowledging the truth
in this matier of man's Traditions, Precepts, Ordinances, Rites, Ceremonies?
Who sees not that I have a just cause to excuse my wekenesse and fault and
ask of you mercy? which I trust I have outayned of the Kings gracious
highness, and his most honorable Counsel: by whose goodness and elemency I
am here admytted and suffered too show mine Errors and Faults in my book of
Traditions, which I made of late entitled thus: A brief Treatise, setting
forth diverse truths, necessary both too be believed of Christen people and
kept also, which are not expressed in the Scripture, but left to the Church
by the Apostles Traditions, made and set forth by Richard Smyth, Doctor of
Divinity and Reder of it in Oxforde. Which Book I do Reprove and Revoke in
diverse Faults in it, of the which I will a non recite certain perticulerly,
and then I shall give unto you a true and General Doctrine of all those
things of which I do entrete in that my Book, that thereby you may well
perceive and see, after what sort they ought too be taken of Christen people
that no man err therein *

FIRST, Whereas I sp^kyng in my book of Traditions, of the autorite of
Bysshoppes in making laws and ordenances, which the people ought to obey, I
did say and teach in this wise: That men ought to obey the Bysshoppes
commandment in all things leaful, upon pain of everlasting damnacyon. And
that these words of Matthew: Do as they bid you, but not as they do, be
understand not only of things contained in Scripture, but also of the Churches
ordenau^ces besides Scripture made by the Ministers of the Church, although
the said Ministers do abuse their auctorite for their own benefit and
profit. And further, where I taught that it is more convenient that the people
obey their Bisshops commandments and Decrees although it be but in a thing
indifferent of it self and not commanded by God, then that servants should
obey their masters, or children their fathers and mothers. And finally, where
I said concerning the same matter: That as subjects be bound to obey and
fulfill their Princes Laws, which are not contained in Gods Laws being not
against it, even so be Christen people bound too obey and do that which their
Bisshops byddeth them do. All these sayings I do now Revoke, Disanull and
Condemn as erroneous and false. And do profess and acknowledge first that
the auctorite as well of the Bishop of Rome, whose auctorite is justly and
lawfully abolyshed in this Realm as of other Bisshops and other called ye
ministers of the church, consists in the dispensacion and ministratio^ of
Gods word, and not in making Laws, Ordinances and Decrees over the people
beside Gods word without the consent and authority of the Prince and people.

Secondly, I say and affirm that no Bishop nor none of the Clergy assembled
together have authority to make any Laws or Decrees besides Gods Law over the
people without the consent of the Princes and the people: and if they do make
any such, no man is bound to obey them.

Thirdly, I say that in those cou^tryes, where by the auctorite of the Prince
they have made any such Laws, thauctorite of those Laws does not appende and
hang of the Bisshops and the Clergy, but of the princes and chief heds in every
country

Fourthly, I say and affirm that within this Realm of England and other the
kings Dominions, there is no (...) Constitution (...) and available (...),
but only by the kings ma^^styes au^^ority or of his (...).

And where in my foresaid book of Traditions, I said that Tenthes of Benefices
be (...) only to them that do preche and teache the Scripture, and also that he
that serves not the Altar nor precheth not the Gospel can not justly live
by the Tenthes, but is in conscience bound to restore the profits and fruits
taken thereby: Which my sayenges as it lies in words and sentences is
s^^itious and sclaunderous to the Kings majesty's procedinges and the Laws
and Ordres of this Realm, which have granted Tenthes and Tithes to many Ley
persons: Therefore this my saying as it may be taken, and justly by the words
(...) they be put, (...) to defend nor (...): but I require that I may (...)
them and declare them gently, that I meant not in these my sayings of any.
Lay men, to the derogation of the Laws and Statutes of this Realm: but I meant
only of Curates and Priests which receiving their Tithes, do not their duties
accordingly,

And where also in my said book of Traditions, and likewise in my book of the
Sacrifice of the Mass, I followyng Pamascene and other Ancient Authors,
wrote, that the Disciples of Christ did make certain Canons, which saint
Clement did gether together and put in writing, and that these same Canons must
be taken for the Appostles doctrine and techyng, and their words without
doubt to be believed and kept as that which is contained expressly in
scripture. Now having red many things, which at that time I had not
diligently marked and wayed: I do think, affirm, and confess that doctrine
to be not true, but a vain, unlawful, unjust, and vnportable burdein to
Christen consciences: And that those Canons pretended to be of thappostles
making and gatherd of saint Clement, not to be made of thappostles: or if they
were, not to be made otherwise than but for an order in the Church for that
time, not ever for to endure whereof many at this time in no wise be too be
observed: And those which do remain, not to be of that force as Gods law to
charge men's consciences otherwise, then as man's Ordinances and Policy which
may be taken away by Superior powers as well and with so little scruple of
conscience as other of them which many years a go were taken away, and to sum
clean contrary laws made

In the said book of Traditions also I said and affirmed, that Christ and his
Appostles taught and left to the church many things without writing which we
must both believe steadfastly and also fulfill obediently under pain of
dampnation ever to endure. Amongst the which I rehearsed by name a great
number to be obeyed, kept and followed: as the observation of Lent from flesh
or wine, the keeping of the Sacrament in the Pyx, the receiving of it at the
priests hands, the hallowyng of the water in the Font, the thrice dippyng of
the Child in the water at the Christenyng, the puttyng, on of the Chrisome,
the Consecration of the Oil, and Anoyntyng of the christened child, the
hallowyng of the Aulters, the prayeng toward the Taste, the Sensyng of the
aultare, the Wasshyng of the hands, and saying Confiteor, and li^ting up of
the Sacrament at the Mass, the making or Holy Water, That the.xii Appostles
(every man a piece for his portion) made the Creed, and many mo besides these.
And after like sort I spoke of Canons, Decrees, and Ordinances of bishops
and general counsels.

Now I do confess the said doctrine as concerning thobseruyng of the said
Traditions under that pain, to be false and Tirannicall, an unjust, unlawful,
and untrue burdein of men's consciences, not fit to be taught, preched, or
defended,

Likewise of the beleuynge of things where I did say, that there are diverse
things not expressed in the scripture which we are bound to believe egally
with those things which arr written in Scripture, in the number o^ which I did
co^fusely and indiscretely for an example bring some of the before rehearsed and
other many. As concerning many things in my book put, and the more number
there by me reconed and named, I affirm and say to be false, and in no wise
true, but very dangerous and unjust, onerous to the consciences of christen
men: and too be true only in those Doctrines which necessaryly may be gathered,
and consequently do follow too the words and sentences in Scripture, so that
in effect they may be justly counted to be in scripture, though the very form
of words be not there: Of the which in my Book is very few, yet some I did
rehearse: as Baptismus pueroru^, Descensus Christi ad inseros, Virginitas Marie,
Trinitas personarum, Processio Spiritus sancti, and a few other.

And because I would declare the true acception, dignity and authority of
scripture too be distinct, diverse, and of higher, surer, more stable and
firm order and credence, then the other unwritten Tradicions and Assertions,
wandering in thobseruation of many years, and the churches canons and Decrees,
ordinances and traditions left by succession.

Here I do declare, set forth, confess, affirm, and asserte my true and
steadfast opinion, belefe and faith in these things propounded and vttred unto
me as concerning scripture written, and other Traditions unwritten and not
declared in the said holy Scripture. 1 Thaucto^ite of scri^ture.


The scripture of tholde and new Testament written by thinspiratio^ of the Holy
ghost concerning our belefe, is too be believed, accepted and taken as an
undoubted truth, not to be altered, reformed or changed by any man, nor to
be minished nor abrogate by any custom, but under perell of dampnation to be
believed, and under the same danger to be followed, having authority given
unto it by almighty god, taught and enspired by the holy ghost dependyng of no
man's authority, nor violable or defesible by any power, otherwise then under
the perell and danger of eternal damnation.

Such things as in the Acts 2 Things i^ scr^ptur^ for a tim^ commanded.
of the Apostles or any other place of Scripture, as for a time was taught and
setfurthe for an introduction of the weak in the faith, not to remain for
ever, as faith incresed was abrogate, none otherwise than it was thauctors
mind and intent they should: those that concerned eating, drinkyng, coueryng
or discoueryng of heads, or such other externe rites and ceremonies, rather
concerning an order among men outwardly to be for a time observed, than an
eternal law to rule and govern the soul.

Such things as sometime be 3 Things ^ecessary^y gatheed of scri^ture.
called traditions not expressly and by words found in holy scripture, but
which may necessarily and well be gathered of holy scripture, are to be believed
and followed, in somuche and as far as they may truly be gathered of the
scripture, or consequently do follow the wourdes and intentes of the same.

Traditions pretended to be made 4 Things ^ belief ^ot neces^arily ga^hered
of ^cripture.
of thappostles, and by some authors ascribed to them as concerning things to
be believed not found in scripture directly nor necessarily, and directly
consecutyng and followyng to scripture, laufully and with out perell of
dampnation may be doubted of, and also denied and refused by the superior
powers; and such as have Authority in the church.

There be many things ascribed 5 ^^^^ed f^^^ed dic^ous. doc^r^n^.
to thappostles, and called traditions deduced from the time of thappostles and
read in the name of old Authors, and set forth under the pretensed title of
their name, which be feyned, forged and nothing true, full of superstition and
vntrewth, feyned by them which would magnify their own power and authority,
as is the Epistles of Clemens, Anacletus, Euaristus and Fabianus, and other
which arr set forth by the bishop of Rome and his accomplices, which be forged,
feyned and of none authority nor to be believed, but cou^terfeyted by them:
who with the color of a^^tiquitie, would magnify that v^^^ped power of the
bishop of Rome.

Traditions of (...) ^^^ther Things ^^ncerni^g ^aners ^ot neces^rely ga^hered
or ^cripture.
they be in deed or (...) so ancient that they (...) ^sed from the begyn^^^
(...) and the time of (...) have been appointed (...) of later days by (...)
bishop of Rome (...) by general (...) superiority of one (...) ^^^ther:
Watching, (...) Sensynges, (...) and all other such Rites, Ceremonies and
comen Orders to be used in the church of God, does not ^ynd but where they be
received, and by disuse may be abrogate, or by contrary law made in any
country by thauctority of the superior powers may be clean taken away, and
other Rites, Canons, Traditions and Ceremonies brought in for them with out any
danger of sin or grudge (...). And with any such (...), the kings (...)
may either (...) cause, or of his (...) any cause (...) man from be^^ (...).

(...) with whom (...) have dispensed (...) all, (...) free from them, (...)
use his said liberty with (...) sin or scruple of (...), either to the
kings majesty which gave liberty, or to him which has obtained the (...)
^^^pensacion. None otherwise than in any other act, statute or proclamation
made by humane polycie, the kings majesty and the high powers may. When
contrary wise that that is Gods law and commanded by scripture always to be
observed, no man can dispense with if, nor give any man liberty to break it,
under danger of sin and corruption of conscience.

This is my full, firm, and stable bele^e as touching the scripture written,
and Traditions unwritten, and what thing soever I or any other heretofore have
preached, taught, written or endyted to the contrary of these my assertions and
belefe now declared unto you: or if any man hereafter (which God forbid) should
preach, teach or set forth any thing which is not consonaunt and agreyng to
these aforesaid articles and assercions, believe good hearers, and know you
iurely, that it is a false, untrue and deuellysh doctrine and ungodly
usurpation upon the holly Scripture, contrary too the true, pure, and
Catholicall doctrine of Christ's church. In the which ^aythe and belief
contained in the said. vi. Assertions, I do entende good hearers with the
grace of almighty God to live by Christ, and all my hope is also too dye therein
if need shall be. And whenever God shall call me thereunto (his grace assistyng)
I shall be ready.

AND now concerning another book which I made of the Sacrifice of the Mass,
where the moast chief and principal article of our faith, and moast directly
perteynyng too the redemption of our sins and to our salvation is: That our
sauyor Christ Jesus by his moast precious death and effusion of his moast
precious blood upon the cross did redeem man kind, taking away our sins,
pacifying the indignation of his father, and cancellyng thobligation that was
against us: In which Sacrifice making unto his father, our said Sauyoure
Ihesus Christ as saint Paul says plainly to the Hebrews, was not a priest
after the order of Aaron, forasmuch as he was of another Trybe: and also, that
preesthod was impertite and unprofitable bringyng nothing too perfection: But
our Savior Christ made his sacrifice upon the Cross parfectly, absolutely,
and with the most highest perfection that could be, so much, that after that one
oblation and sacrifice for syn made by him but once only, another he nor any
other creature should at any time after, make any mo oblacions for the same. And
for as that saint Paul says, he was called an eternal priest of the order of
Melchysedech, and not of Aaron.

This faith ought every man and woman undoubtedly to believe and openly to
profess upon pain of everlasting dampnation, and also too dye in this
professyon if case shall so require: The which moast wholesome and moast
necessary doctrine of our faith I not dilygently considering, as many times too
right great clerks and learned men in much writynge in like mattiers it has
chanced to say too far. The infirmite and weakness of men being such, that
seldom in many words error has escaped. So in my book of the Sacrifice of the
mass, I did incircumspectly and rashly write and set forth too the people,
that Christ was not a priest after the order of Melchisedech, when he offered
him self upon the Cross too his father for our sins, but was a priest after
the order of Aaron. And that when Christ did offer his own body too his father
after thorder of Melchisedech (...) his (...), it may not be understand of the
sacrifice of the cross, but of the sacrifice that Christ made at his Maundy in
form of bread and wine. To the which in deed saint Paul's doctrine is
contrary, both in other places, and in thepistle ad Hebreos very manifestlye,
against whom (who without doubt had the very spirit of God) Neither it
becomes, nor I will not willingly teach or defend any thing. Wherefore you
shall impute that, good Audience, too the frailtye of man's nature, and too my
negligent marking, having at th^^ time rather a respect too a fantasy that
then I had in my mind, than too the true and infallible doctrine of scripture.
And moreover in the same my book, I said not only that the Sacrifice of the
mass is the self same substance of christ, but also the self same oblacion
or offering of our sauyoure Christ's very flesh and blood which him self once
offrid to his father on the cross to appease his wrath. And that the priests
do continually and daily in the mass offer not only the self same body of
Christ, but also to the same effect, that Christ did offer himself to his
father at his Maundy. Of the which words and doctrine, if they be not very
warely and circumspectly read, and more favorably taken then the words as
they lie, may well bear, it might be gatherd, that priests herein be egall
with Christ. Priests of thorder of Melchisedech, appeasing the wrath and
indignation of the father of heaven, crucifying or offering Christ to the same
effect that Christ in his own person did upon the cross, which is a
blasphemy intolerable to be herd of christen ears. For Christ as saint Paul
says, was but once offered, once gave up himself for the redemption of our
sins on good friday on the cross, nor never before nor after was offered for
us, but in a sacrament and as a commemoration of the same. And so of the Maundy
or Supper of our Lord, Christ himself says Hec quotiescu^que feceritis, in
meam commemorationem sacietis. Ones he dyed for our sins, and once again he
rose for our justification. He dies no more, and his sacrifice was so good so
full, so pleasant, so precious to god, that there needed no more oblatio^s to
appease god, nor only for the sins past, but also for all the sins to the
day of Doom.

There need no more sacrifices, no more offerers, but as having a respect and
a remembrance of that most holy, most perfyte, and most entier Lamb, then and
for ever offered up for us. But these before said I can not deny but spoken of
me and written, And as I do not now like them, so at thexample of saint Austen
and other good doctors, I am not ashamed to retracte them, call them again,
and condemn them. For when I followed mine own invention not directed by
Scripture, I began as the nature of man is to wander, and at the last went
clean contrary too Gods word.

Wherefore, I hertely exhort every man as touching matiers of faith to found
the same upon Gods certain, true, and infallyble word: lest by doing the
contrary, they fall into superstition, idolatry, and other manyfold errers as I
my self sometime, and many other (although I do not come hither too accuse any
man) yet I perceive of (...) time have done. Wherefore, these my two books,
the one of the Sacrifice of the mass, and the other of the Traditions unwritten,
in those points before rehearsed, and all other wherein they be not full
co^sonent to scripture, I forsake and renounce (...) erroneous, and against the
true word of God. Requiring the good christen reder whosoever shall read
them, to give no further (...) unto them then I would my false: That is, not
to take as undoubted truth all that is therein written; but as written of a man
(...) falls: to be so (...) be consonaunt to scripture, (...) they be not
against scripture, (...) humane persuasion, which may either be so (...) not
(...), (...) sone shall (...) consonaunt to scripture (...) (...) that I much
(...) and (...) that I wrote them in th^se points, And I desire every man that
has any of the said books ^s (...) of them, and to give no (...) to them in
all such things in them written, as be not consonant to the scripture, as they
avoid occasion (...), and tender the truth (...) and his glory (...) Amen.

(...) vnderstand^ (...) with (...) of my doc^^^^ which I preached here in
(...) ^eportinge (...) that th^se.iiii. thin^ to (...): y^ (...) the ^^rites of
christ: (...) person and the worthiness of the work The truth is they did
mistake me, applieng those words to our justification, which I spoke of the
works of a man that is already justified. But to thintente that no man
hereafter shall waver or doubt of my faith and conscience, in the matter of
justification: This is my certain and true doctrine therein, wherein I am
fully resolved and persuaded, which I have ever taught syns I have been a
teacher of the scripture, purposing (god willing) ever to remain in the same.
This I say and affirm good audience, that this saienge; that we be justified
by only faith in Christ, is no new invented saying or proposition, but many
times used of ye best and most ancient doctors: as Origin, saint Basyl,
saint Chrysostom, Ambrose, S. Barnarde, and diverse other m^^and is a sure and
undoubtful truth spoken of them in this meaning and sense, to seclude and
put away the merits of al men's deeds, how good so ever they seemed to be, and
only to ascribe the glory and merit of our justification to Christ and to
his holy blood and passion, by which we are sanctified, redeemed and made good
So that it was of the^ used to abate our pride, and to take away our glory, yt
we should truly acknowledge in us the benefit of god, the weakness,
imbecillitie, and insufficiency of our selves, not that a Christian man may
contemn or despise good works, or that we should think a christian ma^s life
to be an idle and a sluggishe life, destitute of the fear of god, hope,
repentance, charity, prayer, fasting, alms deeds, and all good works, and
obedience to the commandments of god. But that we should acknowledge, that
when we have done all that ever we can do, that we are but unprofitable
servants, and have deserved no thanks for our works or merits, but by the
mere grace and goodness of god through the merits only of his dereste beloved
son Christ Jesus. Which doctrine that only faith in Christ does thus
justify, is true, catholyke, and a necessary doctrine to be taught to
christen men in this manner: The which doctrine the most part of all which I
have read of the ancient doctors do confess and teach. And therefore it may
after this sort justly and truly be set forth publyshed and taught also among
us christen men, although this saying has been evil taken and depraved of some
as false and erroneous. And if a man in deed should think thus, that beleuinge
well (if a man might do so) and doing evil or doing nothing at all
according to his belefe and profession having time and space thereto, yet he
should be saved, he surely thinks folyshly and madly and so as never learned
man wrote or thought that was a christen man and in his right wits. For
scripture is plain: He that loves God keeps his comma^deme^tes: And they
that be Christ's sheep, hear his voice: and do thereafter. wherefore they that
take prechers teachinge that we be justified by only faith as though they would
have them do no good works, they take the^ wrongfully, folyshly, and contrary
to their true meaning, and understand them not: whose meaning is (as I
suppose) to show the wekenes of man, and the goodness of god: the infirmite of
us, the benefyt of christ: the imperfectnes of our works, tha boundaunt grace
of our savior: tha batynge of our pride, the glory of the cross of Christ:
man's weakness and gods power. And in very deed all our works fasting,
prayers, alms deades, pains, torments, poverty, abstinence, and all kind
of suffering, which a man is able to do or abide, is not able to deserve or to
get remission of sin, For it is only the mere mercy and great liberalite of
almightye god, through only death of his son Jesus Christ, that freely
pardons our offenses, and makes us acceptable to him. In whom we beleuynge
faithfully, and putting al our confidence and trust in him, and fully and
firmly cleauynge to him, can not be deceived, but on his back and with him we
shall be carried into the house of his father in heaven


