Of unwritten very ties Cum priuilegio,

Of unwritten very ties.
IN the day of Pe^tecost wha^ the holy ghost descended upon the apostles and
discyples of Christ, they received such grace and goostly knowledge, that they
hade forth with the gift of the understanding of scripture: and to speak in
the tongues of all men. And also that upon whom soever they laid their hands,
the holy ghost should descend upon them. And there upon they by their
prechyng and good doctryn converted i^ short time, great multitude of people
unto the faith of Christ And after that diverse blessed me^ i^ strength of the
faith, wrote the life, miracles, doctrine, passion death, and resurrection of
our master Christ: but four of those writings were only received by all the
hole church of Christ. that is to say, of Matthewe. Mark, Luke and Ihon. and
they received them to be of such auctorytye, yt it should not be lawful to any
man, that would confess Christ, to deny the^, and they were called ye four
gospels of Christ. And ye epystles of Paul, the Acts of ye apostles, the
epistles that be called canonyke. And ye apocalips were received to be of like
auctorytye, as ye gospels were. And thus by assent as well of the people, as of
the clergy, was the new testament affyrmed to be of such auctorytye, as it
is now taken to be of, and as it is of in deed. so yt it is not lawful to
deny any thing that it affermeth, ne to afferme any thing that it denies, and
it is no marvel though it be taken to be of such strength, for it was
auctorysed when the people that were newelye converted to ye faith, were full of
grace and of devotion, replenished with virtues, desyryng always the life to
come, and the health of their own souls, and of their neighbors. Tha^ also
were blessed bisshops, blessed priests, and other blessed persons of the
clargy: and what could such men ask of god ryghtwisly, that should be denied
them. And who may think, but that they and all the people, at ye said
auctorisyng of scripture, prayed devoutly for ye assistau^ce of ye holy ghost
that they might have grace to auctorise such thing as should be to his honor /
to the increase of his faith, and to ye health of the souls of al his people.
The time also that this auctorysynge of the new testament, and ye gatherynge of
it together was made, was (as I suppose) the time of the most high and gracyous
shedynge out of the mercy of god into the world, that ever was from ye
beginning of the world unto this day: and I mean the time that was from the
incarnacio^ of Christ unto the said auctorysyng of the new testament was
accomplished: for in part of ye time our lord was here himself in bodyly
presence, preaching and teaching his laws / gatherynge and chewsynge his
apostles and disciples / ye should teach and preach his laws wha^ he was
gone: which they did not only by word, but also by good examples, that yet
remain unto this day: so that al ye time may in manner be called the golden
time. And not only the new testament was tha^ received, but also ye old
testament. And by preaching and teaching of these testame^tes, was ye faith of
Christ meruaylously increased in many countrees. After all this, by a co^me^
speking among ye people, the bishops, priests and other of the clergy, which
were as lanternes unto the people, and ye special maynteyners of the chryste^
faith, were called the church, or men of the church: and under ye color of ye
name church many of ye clergy in process of time, pretended yt they might make
exposicions of scripture, as the universal church of Christ, yt is to say, as
ye hole congregation of christen people might, and thereupon when couetyse and
pride somewhat encresed in many of the clargie, they expounded very favorably
diverse textes of scripture, yt sounded to ye mayntenaunce of their honor,
power, jurisdiction and riches. And over ye took upon them to afferme, yt they
were ye church that might not err / and that Christ and his aposteles had
spoken and taught many things, that were not expressly put in scripture, and
that the people were as well bound to believe them, and that under like pain,
as if they had been expressed in scripture, and called them unwritten veryties,
where of I shall, as for an example recyte part. First ye Christ after his
maundye, and after he had wasshen the fete of his apostles, taught them to make
holy cream, for mynistracio^ of ye sacraments: and yt they have as full
auctorytye to do ye same, as if it had been contained in scriptuere, that
christ had given the^ power to it. That it is a tradicio^ of ye apostels, that
images ought to be set up. That ye apostels ordained that al faithful people
should resort to the church of Rome, as to ye most high and principal church
of al other: and yet it can not be proved by scripture, ne by any other
sufficient auctoritye, yt they made any such ordinance. Also that ye Creed,
which is commonly and universally used to be said by the co^me^ people, was
made by the.xii. apostels: and though ye artycles thereof, ar fermely and
steadfastly to be believed of every christen man, as artycles sufficiently proved
by scripture yet that they were gathered together by the.xii. apostels: and
specially that every one of the apostels made one article, as paynters show yt
they did, can not be proved by scripture, ne is not necessari to be believed for
our salvation, and though it were but a small offense in the people to believe yt
it were an article necessary to be believed for our saluacyo^, because the
clergy, which be the lanternes and leders unto the people, do instruct them
that it is so: And it is nether against ye law of god, nor the law of reason,
but that it may be so: yet it is a great offense to the clergy, to afferme for
certain yt thing, that is to them self uncertain, and therefore it would be
reformed, for eschewyng of offenses unto the clergy. Also yt the people shall
pray into the est is not proved by scripture: and yet they say, that by the
tradicio^ of the apostles it is to be believed. Also yt our lady was not borne
in orygynal sin. That she was assumpte into heaven body and soul, Al these
and many other, diverse of ye clergy call unwritten veryties, left in the
world by the tradicion and relacio^ of the apostles, which as they say, the
people are bound to believe as well as scripture: For they say, yt sith no man
were bound to believe scripture, but because ye church says, this is
scripture: so they say that in the things before rehearsed, the church
wytnessethe the^ to be true, and that ye people have assented to them many
years: wherefore it is not lawful to doubt at them, ne to deny them: To this
reason it may be answered: that if it can be proved by as good and as high
auctoryte, that these things were left in the world by the tradicion and
relacyo^ of the apostles, as the auctorysynge of scripture was: that than they
are to be believed as verily as scripture: But if they be wytnessed to be so by
some bishops and priests, and some other of ye clergy only: or that they be
witnessed to be so by decrees and laws made by bisshops of Rome, and by ye
clergy of Rome or by opinion of doctors only: tha^ no man is bound to accept
them, ne believe them, as they are bound to believe scripture. For scripture, as
it is said before, was auctorysed by ye hole church of god and in the most
elect and most gracious time, yt of lykelyhode has been sith the beginning
of christ's church. And if it be said, that many of ye said opynio^s have been
affermed and approved by general cou^selles, in whom no error may be
presumed: it may be answered: that though ye church gathered together in the
holy ghost, may not err in things perteyning to the faith: that yet for as
much as some general counsels have been gathered, and not by ye power of kings
and princes, that be heads of ye church And that laws have been also made at
such general co^sels, of diverse things which have not perteyned to the faith
but to ye mayntenau^ce of the auctoritye or profyt of the clergy, or of soch
artycles as ar before rehearsed, that they call vnwryte^ veryties, which
undoubtedly perteyn not merely to the faith. That it may therefore be lawfully
doubted, whether soche counsels were gathered in the holy ghost or not, and
whether they erred in their judgments or not, and it is no doubt, but ye in
some general counsels they have done so in deed. And I suppose yt there be but
few matters more necessary, ne more expedient for kings and princes to look
upon, tha^ upon these vnwrytte^ verytyes, and of making of laws by the
clergy. For if they be suffered to maintain that there be any verytyes, which
the people are bound to believe upon pain of dampnacio^, beside scripture, it
will persuade partly an insufficiencye in scripture, and there upon might follow
great dangers many ways. And if it were admytted, that ye clergy might be
received to afferme that there be soche veryties, beside scripture, yet they
could not prove them. For if they would in proof thereof say, yt the apostles
first taught those verities, and that they have so continued from one to
another unto this day, and show none other auctorytye thereof but that: than
al ye saying may as lightly be denied, as it was affermed, and with as high
auctorytye. And if they will ferther attempt to approve it by laws made by the
bishops of Rome, and by the clergy at Rome: yea or by laws and decrees made
at general counsels: yet these laws and decrees may be lawfully doubted at, as
before appears: so that they cannot by reason thereof drive any necessitye of
belefe i^to any person. Wherefore kings and princes yt have received of god the
high power and charge over the people, ar bound to prohybyte soch sayings upon
great pains: and not to suffer a belefe to be grounded upon things
uncertain. But yet if some of the said articlys that be called vnwrytte^
verities were suffered to continue as things that be more like to be true,
tha^ otherwise: and no necessity of belefe to be deryued there upon. I suppose
verily it might well be suffered that they should stand still not prohabyte, as
it is of that article yt the.xii. apostles made ye Creed: that it is good to
pray into the est: that our lady was not borne in original sin: yt she was
assumpted body and soul, And therefore if it were ordained by kings and
princes that no man upon pain, to be taken as a breaker of the quietness of the
people, should deny any of the said articles: it were well done to keep unity
among the people: but diverse realms may order soch things diversely, as they
shall seem co^uenyent, after the dysposicio^ of the people there. For they be
but things indifferent, to be believed, or not believed and ar nothing like to
scripture, to the articles of the faith, the.x. commandments, ne to soch
other moral lerni^ges as ar merely deryued out of scripture. For they must of
necessity be believed and obeyed of every christian man. For after saint Paul ad
Ephe. iiii. There must be one God, one faith, and one Baptism But to suffer
them to stand as unwritten veryties, that may not be denied: and to have their
auctorytie only by laws made by ye clergy, it seems dangerous For it might
cause many of the clergy to esteem more power in the clergy tha^ there is in
deed: and that might lift many of them into a higher estimacion of them
self, than they ought to have: whereby might follow great danger unto the
people. For as long as there be disorders in the clergy, it will be heard to
bring the people to good order. And all this yt I have touched before, may be
reformed, without any rebuke to the clergy that now is. For the pretense of
soch unwritten verytyes, ne yet of making of laws, to bind kings and princes
and their people: ne yet that both powers, that is to say, spiritual and
temporal, were in the clergy, began not in the clergy yt now is, but in their
predecessors. And as to ye said other prete^ced vnwryte^ verities, yt is to
say, yt alme^ should resort to Rome, as to ye most high and principal church.
And yt it is a tradicion and an unwritten verytie, ye images ought to be set
up, it were well done, yt they and soch other opinions, whereby prdie couetyse or
vain glory might spring her after, were prohabyte by authority of the
parlyame^te upon great pains. And as to ye said vnwryte^ verytie, that holy
cream should be made after ye mau^dye, it perteyneth only to the^ that have
authority to judge whether it be an unwritten verity, or not, and to judge
also what is the very auctoritye of making of that cream. And therefore I will
no ferther speak of ye matter at this time.

Imprinted at London in saynct Andrews Paryshe, in the Waredrop By Thomas
Raynalde M.D.XLVIII.


