SERMONS OF THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD MILES SMITH, LATE LORD BISHOP OF
GLOUCESTER.

TRANSCRIBED OVT OF HIS ORIGINAL MANVSCRIPTS, AND NOW PVBLISHED FOR THE COMMON
GOOD.

PSALM 112.6. The Righteous shall be in everlasting Remembrance.

PROVERBS 10.7. The memory of the Just is blessed.

LONDON, Printed by Elizabeth Allde for Robert Allot, dwelling at the Black
Bear in Paul's Churchyard. 1632.

NOBILISSIMIS, ACPIETATE, ET PRVDENTIA SPECTATISSIMIS DOMINIS.

DN. HENRICO COMITI DANBIENSI, ET DN. EDVARDO COMITI, NORVICENSI,
HAS Reuerendi in Christo Patris, and doctissimi Praesulis, Milonis SMITHI,
Gloucestrensis nuper Episcopi Conciones.

Humillime dedicat qui D. V. plurimum debet.

I. S.

THE PREFACE.
THESE Sermons following, which gravely fell from the lips of this worthy
Bishop, some of them in the ordinary course of his Ministry, other some at
more special times, are now by the Religious care and industry of certain of
his friends and neere-ones imprinted, and sent forth into public view. Plin:
prae^at. Hist. Natural.
Pliny the great Naturalist taxes some of the Greek and Latin Writers in his
time, of folly at the least, for sending abroad their empty and worthless
Pamphlets with an ouer-praise in the Title, promising much at the first sight,
but utterly deceiving the Reader in his further search; like the Apple whereof
Solinus writes, that grows where Sodom and Gomorrha stood, which has a rind
or outside pleasing to the eye, but being pressed, Fumum exhalat. and
fathiscit. in vagum pulu^r^m S^lin. cap. 38. ined^t. H. Stepha^i.
though but lightly with the hand, it euaporats and becomes unprofitable. And
as former ages have suffered in this kind, so I would it were not the just
complaint, and grieuance of the times wherein we live. Multitudes of Writers we
have and books without number, eu^n to Vt omnium rerum sic literarum
intemperantia quoque laboramus. Sen^c. Epist. 106. Plaut. in Poe^.
excess: many of them such, as (notwitstanding their plausible Inscriptions)
give just occasion to the buyer, after perusal, to cry out with Him in the
Comedy, Polego and oleum, and operam perdidi; And to complain in the Prophets
phrase, I have spent my money for that which is not bread, and my labor, Isay
55.2.
for that which satisfies not. But now, he that shall with judgment read
these ensuing labors, will find somewhat more than a naked Title to commend
them. And albeit diverse of them seem to be the fruits of his younger years,
and come not forth in that luster and beauty as the Author, had he purposed to
have made them public, could, and would have sent them, (being transcribed
from his Original Manuscripts, as they fell to hand, without choice) yet such
they are, as I persuade my self, will pass the eyes of the Learned (who are
fittest and ablest to judge) not without deserved approbation. There is in them
as well matter for the understanding to work upon, whereby the Reader may be
made Eruditior, the better Scholar, as to move the affections, whereby he may
become Melior, the better Christian. Milk and strong meat both for men and
babes; the wise may thence be made more wise, and the weak more strong.
Concerning the man himself, whose memory in many respects is blessed, how much
might be spoken of him, how many singular gracious parts he had, deserving
commendation on his behalf, imitation on ours, it cannot in a few words be
expressed. But for my part, I purpose not here to undertake a story of his
life, I was not so exactly learned therein, neither have I been sufficiently
instructed for so great a work; my intentions only drive at this, namely, to
let them know that knew him not, what he was in the general of his carriage,
confining my discourse within the compass of a few particulars, lest otherwise
the Preface exceeding the proportion of the subsequent work, that witty scoff
might be applied to me, that sometime by the biting Cynicke, was cast upon the
Citizens of Myndus:

Di^gen. Laert. in vit.
Viri Myndij portas claudite, ne vrbsvest ra egrediatur. Briefly then; For the
manner of his life, and the constant tenor thereof, this I can affirm, that
therein he showed forth the fruits of the spirit, to wit, such as whereof the
Apostle speaks, Galat. 5. Love, Joy, Peace, Longsuffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance. In all which graces he had so large a
part, that should I run over, and examine them particularly with Historical
relation, and application to him, I suppose that a few lines, nay leaves, would
not contain the Commentary, that might be written of him. Add hereunto, that
(...), (...).
that sincerity, and godly pureness that appeared in all his actions, striving
not so much to seem, as verily and indeed to be a pattern of gracious
deportement, and then it may be said of him, as sometime of old Symeon, that he
was a just and a religious man, Luke 2. And as our Savior testifies of
Nathaniel, Luke 2.25. John 1.48.
John 1. An Israelite in whom was no guile. And see how nature and grace did
cooperate in this godly Bishop, in furnishing of him with an aptitude to every
good work. He always showed himself most ready to minister to the necessity
of the indigent and needy, having a tender touch even naturally that way.
Yearly pensions he allowed whilst he lived, as his great charge would give
him leave, to be distributed to the poor, as of the place where he was Bishop,
so in other places where he had means, besides the daily relief they of the
City found at his gates. Exhibition of maintenance he continued to diverse
poor Scholars in the University of Oxford, whose Parents were not able to
sustain that charge, and was ever forward in succouring and releeuing poor
Strangers and Travelers that came unto him. To be short, the bread that he
gave, it was not Panis lapidosus, Seneca. 2. de Beneficijs ca. 7.
as Fabius Verrucosus in Seneca termed a hartlesse sour gift; but whether his
Alms were great or small, they were always mixed with alacrity and
cheerfulness, which Plato so long ago commended in Leptines; (...). Plat.
Epist 13. ad Dionys. Tyrann.
and the Apostle Saint Paul notes to be a quality which God himself is much
affected withal, 2 Corin. 9. And as he was pitiful to the poor, so very
charitable toward all, and apt to forgive wrongs and injuries done unto him,
hardly to be digested in the stomach of a carnal man. The virtuous and
religious he always praised and encouraged, using instruction and rebuke to
the contrary-minded; not in the voice of Thunder, in an ouer-zealous strain
and heat of Passion: but in the still voice, in the sweet and soft words of
meekness, the most likely, if not the only way of winning in the course of
discipline, (...). Oecum in Epist. Iacobi. cap. 1.
as learned Oecumenius sets it down. And that he was not so quick in the ear,
and so nimble in the eye, as many are to spy after, and catch at the
weaknesses of other men, cannot be attributed to any remissness in him, but
to charity; For it is certain, that he could not easily be brought to suspect
evil in any, where he did not see it, or had some strong evidence of truth
leading him on to believe it. The byas of his good inclination still hanging in
matter of doubt, (as every good man's should do,) (...), Semper quicquid dubium
est, humanitas inclinat in melius, Senec. Epist. 81.
toward the better sense. Which property because I find it so much commended
in the writings of the wise and learned, as an undoubted token of a good man, I
could not pass over unremembered, Vt quisque est vir optimus ita difficillime
esse alios improbos suspicatur, says the Roman Orator Tully, that Father or
founder of Eloquence as Pliny calls him. Cicer. ad Q. Fratr. li. 1. Ep. 1.
Plin. H. Nature. li. 7. ca. 30.
And not much different is that saying of the Greek Divine Gregory Nazianzen,
(which he oftentimes repeates in other parts of his writings, with some
alteration in term, and phrase of speech only, Nazian: (...). Etiam (...),
etc.
) (...), he that is least jealous of evil in others, is freest from it
himself. So then as true gold is discerned from counterfeit metals, by
touching or rubbing of it upon the stone, as Saint Basil some-where notes; and
as the Elect child of God is distinguished from the bastard castaway by his
unfeigned love to the brethren as Saint John speaks, Basil.
and the true Disciples from the false, 1 John. 3.14.
and fained by the mutual love they bear each to other, as our Savior
delivers it. In like manner may we conclude from this excellent and so much
commended quality engraven and stamped by the finger of God in the heart of
this worthy Prelat, John 13.35.
to wit, Charity, (the Queen of Virtues, as one calls it, the life of Virtues,
as another,) that he was no other then a lively fruitful plant in Gods
Vineyard, a true Disciple, one that had rightly learned Christ, whom God had
made a great example of virtue in this declining age, to be admired easier then
imitated. But his Piety it must not be forgotten; His care of Gods true worship
and zeal unto his house, which he ever loved, it is and will be remembered with
much honor to his Name. It was his joy to see a company of well-deuoted people
to meet together to praise God; and to that end did not only continue a
Lecture, (begun in his Predecessors time,) to be read in the Cathedral
weekly on the Tuesday, by the grauest Orthodox and conformable Preachers
within his Dioeces, from the time of his entrance into that See, till he died,
being full twelve years and upwards: but did usually present himself in the
Assembly at Divine prayers and Sermons, both on the Sabbath and Lecture days,
if vrgency of occasions hindered not. And herein as his Piety and Zeal is set
forth unto us, so likewise his Wisdom too; Private devotions are good,
commended in the holy Scripture, yea, and commanded too, but public are
preferred. David professed that he would call upon God, Evening, Morning, and
at Noonday, and praise him always, Psalm. 55. Psalm. 34.1.
but amongst the people, in the house of the Lord, it rejoiced him much to do
it, Psalm, Psalm. 122.
122. and mourned in his restraint, Psalm 42. Now what is it that works
unanimity in affection, and makes it sure and strong as death? does not
uniformity in Religion? Catic. 8.
Certainly there is nothing that ties the hearts of the people so close unto
their guides and Governors, and makes them so faithful each to other, as a
joint harmony and consent therein. It knitteth souls together as it is said of
Jonathan and David, 1. Sam. 18. Yea, (...).
and causes one soul in a manner to bear two bodies, as Gregory Nazianzen
spoke of himself and Saint Basil, and before him Minutius Felix, of himself,
and his Octauius. Gregor. Nazian. in laudem ^asilij magn. Orat. funebr.

Crederes vnam mentem in duobus fuisse diuisam. Minut. F^l.

Isocrat. in Orat. ad Demonic.


This the wise Greek Orator Isocrates well knowing, does in his Paraenesis to
Demonicus earnestly exhort and persuade him to worship the Divine Power ((...))
always, but chiefly (...), with the people. Public worship freeth from
suspicion, when priuacy therein (the other being neglected) oft-times
occasioneth jealousy of superstition. When Xenophon would prove to the
Athenians, that Socrates had not brought in any strange gods or new fashions in
Religion amongst them for which he was accused, the Argum^nt of defense for him
was this, that he did sacrifice upon the common Altars of the City, (...),
etc. says Xenophon. Now herein, I say, Xenophon. (...) l. 1.
did Piety and Prudence manifest themselves in this Worthy, they met together
and kissed each other, as the Psalmist speaks of Righteousness and Peace; He
delighted inthe Assembly of the Saints, and in the place where Gods honor
dwells, Psalm. 85.10.
and would be there, and thus he gained by it: from men a reverend esteem; He
was honored and beloved of all sorts. And God, I doubt not, in Christ, (after
whom he longed, even to his last gasp,) has given him to find the fruit of
his holiness in the fruition of that blessed presence, where is nothing but
fullness of joy for euer-more.

Touching the things of the world, he carried himself as though he looked not
after them, nor cared for them; never seeking for (as I have credibly heard)
any preferment that he had, before it was by Gods Providence cast upon him. But
this I can truly report and from his own mouth too (who was not wont to speak
otherwise then became the servant of God) that the Bishopric of Gloucester
was conferred upon him unsought for, and unlooked for, at the suit of the most
Reverend Father, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace that now is.
(...).
So that what Nazianzen spoke of Saint Basil, so long ago, may be verified of
him, He pursued not honor, but honor pursued him.

Nazianz. Orat. funebr. in Basil.
And now for his sufficiency in learning, as therein I suppose he was inferior
to none, either for knowledge in Divinity, or skill in the Eastern Tongues: so
joining to the height of his knowledge the humility of his mind, for my part I
must confess that I never knew or heard of his match. Ofhis exactness in
those languages, this may be a sufficient testimony; that he was thought worthy
by his Majesty of blessed memory, to be called unto the Great work of the last
Translation of our English Bible: wherein he was not (...), one to make up a
number, or to be met withal at every turn; but (...), a chief one, 2 Timothy
2.15.
a workman that needed not to be ashamed, as the Apostle speaks. He began
with the first, and was the last man ofthe Translators in the work: For after
the task of translation was finished by the whole number, set apart and
designed to that business, being some few above forty, it was reuised by a
dozen selected ones of them, and at length referred to the final examination
of the learned Bishop of Winchester, that then was Doctor Bilson, and of this
Reverend Bishop, Doctor Smith, (viri eximij and ab initio in toto hoc opere
versatissimi, as the History of the Synod of Dort expresses him) who happily
concluded that worthy Labor. Act. Synod. Dodrach. pa. 22.
Which being so ended, for perfecting of the whole work as now it is; he was
commanded to write a Preface, and so he did in the name of all the Translators,
Zeal to promote the common good, etc.
being the same that now is extant in our Church Bible, the Original whereof I
have seen under his own hand. And here I have occasion offered me to say
something of his modesty and great humility, who though he were so useful an
instrument, so strong a helper in the former work, as also the sole Author of
this latter, the Preface, (a comely gate to so rich and glorious a City,) yet
could I never hear that he did at any time speak of either with any
attribution to himself more than to the rest. So that as the Sun the nearer
it comes to the Zenith, or point of the firmament over our heads, the less
shadow it casts, so certainly the higher he mounted into the mysteries of
Divine and humane knowledge, the lower and less he seemed to be in his own
eyes, High in worth, (...). Nazianzen. (...).
and humble in heart, as Nazianzen spoke of Athanasius.

And now concerning the course of his studies (wherein I would propose him as a
pattern to be imitated by young Students in our Universities,) He constantly
applied himself from his youth, (as they that were then acquainted with him
knew,) to the reading of Ancient Classical Authors of the best note in their
own languages, wherewith, as also with Neoterickes, he was plentifully stored,
and lusted after no worldly thing so much as books, Nullius rei praeterquam
librorum auarus, was sometime his own speech merrily, but (as I persuade my
self,) truly. For there was scarcely a book (in so great a number) to be
found in his Library, especially of the Ancients, that he had not read over a
capite ad calcem, as has been observed by those who have had the perusal of
them since his death. He ran through the Greek and Latin Fathers, and
iudiciously noted them in the margent as he went, being fitted for that
purpose, by the dexterous use of his pen, wherein he came not short, even of
Professors themselves in that faculty. The Rabbis also, so many as he had with
their Glosses and Commentaries he read and used in their own Idiome of speech,
and so conversant he was and expert in the Chaldie, Syriacke and Arabicke, that
he made them as familiar to him almost as his own native tongue. But for the
Hebrew this I can affirm from credible relation, that being upon a time sent
unto, and requested (whilst he was a Residentiary in the Cathedral Church of
Hereford,) by the then Deane of the same Church, (upon some special occasion,)
to read the first Lesson at Evening prayer there; He yielded thereunto; and
having with him a little Hebrew Bible, (the same I suppose that he afterward
used to his death, and I have oftentimes seen) of Plantins Impression, sine
punctis; He delivered the Chapter thence in the English Tongue plainly, and
fully to that learned and judicious Auditory; (far be from all the least
suspicion of ostentation in him for that act, that never knew to boast of
himself, or any thing that he had, or any thing that he did.) Stories of all
times he knew, and for his rich and accomplished furniture in that study, had
this Eulogium given him by a grave and learned Bishop of this Kingdom, Bis^^p
King.
to be a very walking Library. Moreover he was so well acquainted with the Site
of places, namely Topographie, and observed so well the time when every thing
of note was done in those several places, that he has caused great Travelers
and Scholars falling into discourse with him, upon that point of Learning to
confess themselves much bettered in their knowledges by his remembrances, and
to depart away with admiration of his skill. Philip. 4.8.
What shall I say more of him? Whatsoever things were true, whatsoever things
were honest, whatsouer things were just, whatsoever things were pure,
whatsoever things were of good report: If there were any virtue or praise, he
thought on them, yea, he sought after them and profited in them. He lived here
to a good old age, seventy years and upwards, guided the Sea whereof he was
Bishop, with discretion and care, provided for his children, leaving to every
one an honest portion to live upon, and for the poorer sort of his servants a
competent liuely-hood. He fought the good fight of faith, and has now
finished his course, and received at Gods hand, (I doubt not) his (...), his
reward of victory, 1 Cor. 9.24. 2 Timo. 4.8.
1 Cor. 9. And his Crown of righteousness, 2 Timoth. 4. 2 Timot. 4.8.
Which never shall be taken from him. He made Christhis All in all, Coloss.
3.11.
his life whilst he lived, and found him in death his advantage. The words of
the Apostle, Philip. 1.21. (...), were his living M^tto, And none but Christ,
none but Christ, his dying speech. To conclude, he turned many to
righteousness, whilst he was in his Pilgrimage here, Dan. 12.3.
and now shines as the Stars in the Firmament.

SERMONS OF THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, MILES SMITH, late Lord Bishop of
Gloucester. THE FIRST SERMON.
JEREMY 9. Verse 23. Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong
man glory in his strength, neither the rich man glory in his riches:

Verse 24. But let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands, and
knows me, etc


THE Prophet Zachary in his first Chapter has thus, Your fathers, where are
they? Zachary 1.
and do the Prophets live for ever? but did not my Words and my statutes which
I commanded by my Servants the Prophets, take hold of your fathers? Meaning
that they did take hold of their fathers, 1. Cor. 10.
and would take hold of them also, excep^ they repented. So, 1. Cor. 10. The
Apostle says, These things came to them for ensamples, but are written to
admonish us, on whom the ends of the world are come. Signifying, tha tthe
Judgments of God recorded in the Word, and thewhole Word it self was not
ordained for the use only of them, in whose days it was written, but to be
for the instruction of the Church in all succeeding ages. In a City of Egypt
called Diospolis, in a Temple there called Pylon, there was pictured a little
boy to signify Generation, Clem. Alexandr. lib. 5. Stromat.
and an old man, to signify Corruption, also an Hawke, a symbol of God (for
the quickness of his sight,) and a fish, a symbol of hatred: (Fish were an
abomination to the Priests of Egypt, as witnesses Herodotus, Herodot. lib. 2.
lib. 2.) and lastly, a Crocodile to signify Impudency. The whole device being
laid together importing this much, and preaching this much, (...), that is, O
ye that are young and coming on, O ye that are old and going out of the
world, (O all together) to you all be it known, that God does hate Impudency.
This has Clemens Alexandrinus in the 5. of his Stromats. The like may be said
of the present Text that I have in hand, that albeit it be a part of a Sermon,
that the Prophet Jeremy made unto the Children of Israel a little before their
captivity into Babylon, (wherein he assures them, that piety only, and no
carnal sleights or abilities should be able to do them good in that fearful
day,) and so might seem to be proper to that Nation, and to that occasion; yet
for all that, if we will not mistake it, we are to take it for an everlasting
Sermon: (there is mention in the Revelation of an everlasting Gospel, Revel.
14.6.
) and even for a general Proclamation against all haughtiness, and vain
confidence of men, whether they be Jews or Gentiles, young or old, even
against all those that do not set God before their eyes, making him their
stay, but do boast themselves of the sharpness of their wit, or of the
strength of their arm, or of the greatness of their wealth, which the Lord
does not account of. And that this general use is to be made of this parcel
of Scripture; the holy Ghost himself, the best Interpreter of his own
meaning, does plainly declare, 1. Cor. 1.31. and 2. Cor. 10.17. Tertullian. de
spectaculis.
1. Cor. 1. ver. 31. and 2. Cor. 10. ver. 17. To which places for breuity sake
I do refer you. And here that observation of Tertull. in his book De
spectaculis, has fit place: Specialiter quaedam pronunciata, generaliter
sapiunt: cum Deus Israelitas admonet disciplinae, vel obiurgat, vtique ad omnes
habet. Certain things uttered (in the Scriptures) for one special purpose, or
upon one special occasion, have yet a general drift or importment: when God
admonishes the Israelits of their duty or finds fault with them, (for
neglect thereof,) it concerns all. So then as the Apostle says to Timothy,
That he suffered trouble for the Gospels sake unto bonds, but the Word of God
was not bound: 2. Tim. 2. Heb. 11.
and as it is said of Abel, Heb. 11. That he being dead, yet speaks; So it
may said in some sort of the Prophet Jeremy, that though he were bound, as
concerning bodily presence to his Countrymen the Jews, and though his bones
are rotten long sithence, yet for all that his words remain lively in
operation, even to this day, and by the same he speaks and preaches unto us
now here assembled. And what does he speak unto us in the words of my Text? In
sum and in gross this much, to purge out the old leaven of arrogance and
insolency, that we may be a sweet leaven of modesty, and thankfulness unto the
Lord. In particular these two points, first, that Solomon the other of Seneca.
In the 20. of the Proverbs Solomon says, Many will boast, every one of his
goodness, but who can find a faithful man? Where he shows the fault to be
general, Proverb. 20.^.
or as good as general. So Seneca, Epistle 47. speaks indefinitely, Regum
nobis induimus animos, Seneca epist. 47.
every one of us bears the mind of an Emperor; then we will not be far
behind for boasting. This for sentences: as for examples, let me produce unto
you but two of hundreds, namely, of Cato the elder, and of Tully. What a
notable man was Cato the elder! He had that commendation given him by consent,
which none in his time was thought to deserve except it were one, to be Optimus
Orator, optimus Senator, Plinius hist.
and optimus Imperator (as Pliny reports) to wit, a most singular Orator, a
most singular Senator or Statesman, and a most singular General: and yet this
so incomparable a man, was so much given to boast himself, that his veriest
friends were ashamed of him. As for Tully, he was so excellently qualified,
that none but a Tully, that is, one admirably eloquent, is sufficient to speak
of his worthiness: and yet this is not left unremembered by them that were
willing to conceal a small blemish in him, that his speech which flowed from
him as sweet as the honey, he made to taste as bitter as worme-wood many times,
by his interlacing of his own praises. Thus, as dead flies corrupt the sweet
ointment, as Solomon says, Eccles. 10.
and as desperate staruelings that have nothing else to feed on, will fall to
their own flesh, as Plutarch says (and eat the brawnes of their own arms)
so for want of other boasters, P^utarchus lib. de ratione vel modo qu^ qui^
seipsum la^det (...). 1. Co^rai^^i^iam
many will fall to boast themselves, and though they offend God, and be
offensive to men, yet they will do it. That such do offend God (not only are
displeasing to men) may appear hereby, first, Babel, Esaias 47.
for boasting, and saying, I am, and none else, I shall be a Lady for ever, and
in now Babel for her proud names of blasphemy, whereof this was one, Hieronym.
Algasiae quaest. 11.
as Hieronymus says, Roma aeterna, Rome shall flourish for ever: but also in
his dearest children, as in David, for numbering the people of a vainglorious
mind, 2. Sam. 24. Esaias 37.
and in Ezechiah, for showing his treasures to the Ambassadors of the King of
Babel, of the like bragging pride. Thirdly, for that the Saints of God have
greatly abhorred this vice, and refrained it as much as might be; Galat. 6.
as Saint Paul to the Galatians, God forbid that I should glory but in the
Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ: God forbid. And to the Corinthians, If I must
needs glory, I will glory of mine infirmities; 2. Cor. 11.
that is, I will be far from carnal boasting. Lastly, for that God has
wrought this instinct or law of Nature in the very heathen to condemn it, as
namely Tully, that I told you of even now, howsoever he fell in practice, yet
when he spoke from his book, he could say, Deforme est de seipso praedicare,
falsa praesertim: (...). Offic. 1.
It is an euil-fauoured thing to make vaunt of ones own doings, specially if
he lie never so little. And the Greek Orator says, To speak of my self
(that which may sound to mine own praise) I take it to be (...), so odious a
thing, nay so burdenous and so irksome, Demosth.
that very necessity shall not enforce me to do it. These points might be
enlarged by amplifications, and set forth with variety of colors, and
strengthened with many reasons and proofs, you may easily gather; but as they
that have a long journey to make, and but a short time allowed them, must make
but short baits by the way, and cannot stand to take every acquaintance that
they meet by the hand, and as they that are to paint or to print a pitched
field within the compass of a sheet or two of paper, can make but few
Soldiers, whole or complete, but are feign to set down for the most, their
heads only or their helmets: so having many things to ^andle, and within the
compass of a short hour, I must be content to touch only the heads of the
greatest part of them, and as for long discourses I must let them alone. We
have seen, dear Christians, by many signs and tokens, that the
vainglorious man is no way gracious with God, but contrariwise very odious to
him, but why he should be so odious to him, and so far out of his books, we
have not seen. You shall understand therefore, that God hates pride, and all
that pertains to it, not of any emulation: for who can come near unto God,
within any degree of comparison, that he should be afraid of him? (emulation
is a kind of fear of the worth or rising of another, lest he should top us,)
but of pure justice, and for the due demerit of the sin. For shall the axe or
saw boast it self against him that uses the same? Esaias chap. 10. Shall the
pitcher exalt it self against the potter? Esaias 10.
or the thistle say, I am not a thistle? Acts 17.
who made us of one blood to dwell upon the face of the earth? who took us up
when we lay polluted in our blood, even when we lay polluted in our blood, who
took us up, and said unto us, Live? Ezech. 16. Coloss. 1.
who delivered us from the power of darkness, and translated us into the
Kingdom of his dear Son, in whom we have redemption in his blood, even the
forgiveness of our sins? who paid our ransom for us when we were not worth
a groate? cast his garment over us to cover us, when we lay stark naked? and
which is as great a mercy or benefit, as any of the former, who passes by our
iniquities, and winketh at our faults, whereby we trespass against him daily
and hourly? I say, who has forgiven us, and given us so many things, and so
many mo, who but the Lord? Now this being our condition and none other, and we
being thus obnoxious to God, and defective in our selves, is it for any of us
to talk of his sufficiency being over head and ears in debt, or to please
himself in his beauty, being blacker then a Blacke-more? why then art thou
proud, Ecclesiastic. 10.
earth and ashes? why do thou boast, as though thou had not received that
which thou have? nay why do thou not cover thy face for shame, 1. Cor. 4.
because of the manifold pollutions wherewith thou art distayned? Yet foolish
man will be wise, naked man will be gay, filthy man will be pure, though man
newborn is like a wild Asses colt, as Job says. Job 11.
Now when the Lord sees this, namely, that for all the cost and charges that
he is at upon us, yet that we remain vile and beggarly, and for all our
vileness and beggerlinesse, yet that we will not be acknowne of it, but
contrariwise stout it with him and beard him, and ta^^ unto our selves stiff
necks, and proud looks; is it any marvel if the Lord hate pride, which
works this strangeness and breach betwixt him and his creatures? For, but
for pride, which like that same Albugo or white spot in the eye, dimmeth our
understanding (nay douteth it many times) the similitude is not mine, but
Gregory's in his Pastoralls, and but for self-love the mother ofpride, which
makes us pur-blind at the least, Gregor. de cura Pastor. part prima.

Isidor. Pelusi^t. epist.


( Isidorus Pelusiota says of the affection that we bear to another, that it
is pur-blind, (...), how much more then is it true of selfe-affection?) we
should know God and the height of his favor, and the breadth of his love, and
the worth of his pardon, and so be provoked to greater thankfulness toward
him* also we should know our selves and the sum of our debt, and the depth
of our misery, and so be stouped and humbled, and urged to make supplication
to our God. To these two duties of humility and thankfulness, the whole Law
and the Prophets, and Evangelists, and Apostles, and whatsoever is written in
the Book of God, and whatsoever thence is to be colle^ted, may in some sort be
referred; and therefore forasmuch as pride is such a special hinderance to the
performance of these special duties, no marvel if the Lord have the same in
special detestation. Tertull. contra Iudaeos.
Add hereunto, that as Tertullian calls the Commandment that God gave Adam
in Paradise, Matricem omnium Praeceptorum Dei, The very matrix or womb of the
Commandments of God; and as Theodoret calls Moses, (...), A very Ocean of
all Divinity; and as some have called Rome, Theodoret 2. de rup.
Epitome^ vniuersi, An Epitome or abridgement of the whole world: so it may be
said of Pride, that it is the sum of all naughtiness, and a very Sea of it,
and there is no sin almost but pride participates with it. It is a kind of
Idolatry, it makes a man to bow to himself, and to burn incense to his own
yarne, as the Prophet Habbakuk speaks; it is a kind of sacrilege; Habbak.
1.16.
it robs God of his honor, even of the honor of saving of us freely, and
working all our works in us, Esaias 48.9. and 26.12.
as Esaias voucheth; It is a kind of drunkenness, it makes a man to err from
a sound judgment, and to speak and to do things absurdly: The proud is as he
that transgresses by wine, says the Prophet. Habbak. 2.5.
Fourthly, it is a kind of murder, it slays the soul while it makes it to
doat upon it self, even as the Ape kills her young one by clipping it too
hard. Fifthly, it is a very adultery, it coupleth us to another from the Lord,
even to self-conceit. If we say (says Augustine) that we are any thing, and
do not give the glory unto God, August. in Johan. tractat. 13.
Adulteri sumus, nos amari v^lumus, non Sponsum, we are plain adulterers, we
would have our selves to be loved, and not the Bridegroom. Sixthly, a false
witness and a lying glass it is, making us believe that we are that, that we
are not; fair, when we are foul, (...). Theocr. in Bucol. (...).
Love* (and self-love much more) makes those things tha^ are not fair, to
seem fair, (it so blinds the eye.) Lastly, it is most covetous and most
envious, hunting after praise as after a prey, and not daining that others
should come near them within many leagues. Stand apart, come no near me, for
I am holier then thou, said those proud hypocrites in Esaias. Esaias 65.5.
Thus as Aristotle says out of Theognis, Aristotle Ethic.
that in Justice all virtues are couched together (...) summarily: so it may be
said of pride, that in it all vices are lapt up together, as it were in a
bundle; and therefore God hating every sin particularly and by it self, he
must needs abhor pride* which is a confluence and a collection of them. Now,
as he hates pride, which is the daughter of self-love, as I told you: so he
hates all the daughters of pride, whereof boasting or glorying seems to be
one of the youngest and worst. Sorry Crow, Gell.
sorry egg, said they that judged the controversy betwixt Coran and Tisias:
Like mother like daughter, says Ezechiel: and so, Ezech. 1^.44.
Hateful mother, hateful daughter, may we say. When the Roman Soldiers had
slain Maximinus the Tyrant, Aur^l* Vict^r.
they made search for his son, and slew him also, saying, E pessimo genere ne
ca^ulum quidem relinquendum, Of a vile litter not one whelpe was to be left
alive. When Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger son Ham had
done unto him, he cursed even Hams son for Hams offense, saying, Cursed be
Canaan, a servant of servants shall he be, etc. Gen 9.
Stasius his verdit is remembered by Clemens Alexandrinus, (...), He that
kills the wicked parent, Clem. Alexandr. Strom. 6.
and spares his ungracious brattes, is a very fool. This Justice appears to
be in God toward pride and her daughters: he hates both the one and the
other, yea, he hates all them that be in love with either. I shall not need,
I hope, to prove that vain glory is prides own daughter, for that were to
prove a crab to come of a crab-tree, or a blacke-berry of a bryer, or dross of
the corruption of metal, or scumme of the uncleanness of the meat. What is
choler else, they say, but the froth of blood, spuma sanguinis? and so, what is
glorying else, but a very froth of pride? they froth out their own shame,
while they boil up with their own praises: and if vaunting be in the branch,
vanity is in the root, that is certain. All boasting therefore is to be
avoided and abhorred as bad fruit of a bad tree; and if all boasting, then
boasting of wisdom, or strength, or riches, as it follows in my Text, Let
not the wise man glory in his wisdom, etc. Of boasting in general we have
spoken enough already: now let us see more particularly, what be the things
that he forbids us to boast of. The Prophet sets down three, the first,
wisdom, the second, strength, the third, riches; of these I am to speak in
order. Quod generi attrib^tum est, etiam in specie redundat, says Tertullian:
That which is true in the general, Tertul^. de baptis.
will be found true in the special, or particular, with advantage. For as much
therefore, as we have proved already, that boasting in general is unlawful,
I shall not need to prove seriously or amply, that it is unlawful to boast of
these particulars, wisdom, strength, or riches, only a slight skanning over
the points may serve the turn. Of wisdom first, this I have to say, that of
all the gifts wherewith the Lord does beautify the soul of man, none seems
to be comparable to it; sure I am, none ought to be preferred to it. For it is
the very stern of the vessel, the very Sun of our Firmament, the very eye
of our head, the very heart of our body. Where wisdom sits at the stern,
there matters are ordered in a probable course to a laudable end. But where
wisdom is wanting, there the Sun goes down at noonday, to use the
Prophets words, there the light that is in us, is turned into darkness, as
Christ speaks; and then how great is the darkness! So thought Lactantius,
Vt Sol oculorum, sic sapientia lumen est cordis humani: As the Sun is the
light of our eyes, Lactant. li. 2. c. 8.
so the light of our heart is wisdom. So thought the Poet (...), Fields,
Phocylid.
towns, ships, are all managed and governed by wisdom. Wisdom therefore is
a most precious thing, that is certain, and the merchandise thereof is better
then silver, Proverb. 3.
and the gain thereof is better then gold, as Solomon says* but not to be
boasted of for all that. And why? First, because it is not our own, or of our
selves, Cyprian ad Quirin. lib. 3.
as Cyprian says, In nullo gloriandum, quia nostrum nihil est: we are to
boast of nothing, because nothing is our own, or of our selves, and Augustine
upon John says, Christ said not, Without me you can do little: but, Without
me you can do nothing. Where then is glorying? Is it not excluded? For if it
were lawful to boast of that which is not our own, then the Crow might have
been justified for brauing it with her borrowed feathers, or stolen ( furtiuis
coloribus) and the Ass for ietting with the Lions skin about him, and the
Ape for skipping up and down in his masters Iacket; but now these were
ridiculous in so doing: therefore we cannot reasonably boast of that which is
not our own, except we will be like to these unreasonable beasts; let this be
the first reason against glorying in wisdom. The second this, Our wisdom is
many ways imperfect; therefore if we be wise, we will not brag of it; for
will any brag of his lame leg, or his one eye? Indeed now I remember,
Plutarch. in Agesila. and Sertor.
Agesilaus bragged of his club-foot, and had never done bragging of it; also
Sertorius bragged of his one eye, and had never done bragging of it; but by
their leave, I think this bragging was but from the teeth outward, and rather
to prevent and forestall others from gibing, then of any delight that they
took therein themselves, (bragging lightly breaks not forth, but some inward
joy or tickling helps it forward) and therefore it was like to the same
Sardonius risus, and notwithstanding that exception, the proposition remains
firm, that we boast not naturally or usually of our infirmities or
imperfections. But now our wisdom is imperfect and very imperfect, why then
should any boast of it? That it is imperfect Saint Paul shows, 1. Cor. 13. 1.
Cor. 13.
We know in part, and we prophecy in part. Again, now we see in a glass
darkely, yea, and that which an Egyptian Priest said to a Grecian, Plato in
Timaeo. Pl^^. lib. 7. ca. 31.
by the report of Plato, Ye Grecians are always children. The same will be
found true, not only of the Grecians, but of the Egyptians themselves, and of
the English and all; For understanding, we are but children. I grant, that in
all ages and in all Nations some have gone away with the name of wisdom; as
that Roman Conelius Nasica, was so called, that Grecian that was called (...)
(not (...) but (...)) Democritus Abderita was so called; that Jew that was
surnamed Hochacham, Aben-Ezra was so surnamed, so were also R. Iebudah, and R.
Jonah, as appears by Kimchi, in his Micdol. That Britain that was called
the Sage: Gildas was so called, Gildas sapiens, etc. Yet for all that, to talk
of wisdom indeed, The depth says, It is not in me: the Sea also says, It
is not with me, as Job says. Job 28.
Who ever satisfied others, or himself either, in delivering the cause of
ouer-flowing of Nilus in the Summer time? who ere could give any sound reason
why the Lodestone should draw the iron to it so as it does? or direct, or
turn to the Pole-starre, so as it does? who ever went about to give a probable
reason, why or how the little fish called Echincis, should be able to stay or
to stop so great a vessel as it is reported to stay, and that being under
sail too? And to omit these secrets of Nature; Who ever attained to that
perfection in any Art, but he left much for them that should come after, both
to invent better, and to devise anew? And as for points of Divinity, wherein I
confess we have the greatest help through the benefit of the Word, which is
a light unto our feet, Psalm. 119.
and a Lantern to our steps; touching the same also, it is a most certain
truth, that the most acute and judicious Divines have both acknowledged their
ignorance, (in some matters not so necessary to be understood,) and deplored
their own fights. What a good speech is that of Irenaeus* Some things in the
Scriptures (by Gods providence) are hard to be comprehended in this life,
Irenaeus lib. 2. cap. 49.
Vt semper quidem Deus doceat, homo autem semper discat quae sunt a Deo? That
God might have always somewhat to teach us, and that man might have to learn
always those things that are of God? What a modest speech is that of Augustine;
Quo me contemnas, August. contra Origenist. and Priscillianist.
quem magnum putas esse Doctorem, etc? That thou may (no longer have me in
admiration, but) contemn me whom thou take to be so great a Doctor? I cannot
tell what the same Thrones, and Dominions, and Principalities, and Powers do
mean, nor wherein they differ. I will not trouble you with more quotations to
this purpose. So then, Exodus 39.30.
as Moses caused it to be superscribed or graven upon the plate for the holy
Crown, Holiness 'to the Lord, meaning to the Lord only; and as St. Paul to
Timothy ascribes immortality to the Lord, 1. Tim. 6.16.
to the Lord only (who only has immortality,) and as a Canutus.
King of this Land contended, that the name of King was due only to the King
crucified, Jesus Christ: so surely the name of wisdom is due, and to be
ascribed to God only, as being only wise. Why it is so ascribed by Saint Paul
in express words, in the forenamed Epistle, 1. Tim. 1.17.
Unto the King immortal, invisible, unto God only wise, and. Yea, what say
you, if heathen men themselves, as arrogant as they were, have acknowledged no
less? Laertius writes, Laertius in Thalete.
that certain young men of Ionia standing upon the Sea shore, and beholding
Fishermen making of a draught, agreed with them a-great for their draught,
that what they should hale up to land in their net, should be theirs. Now it
was so (by Gods providence) that together with certain fish, they enclosed a
certain piece of plate (which no man knew when it was sunk there) and dragged
the same to land in their net. The same being claimed and seized upon by the
young men, by virtue of their bargain, they cast between them how to dispose
of it. But when they could not agree about the sharing of it, they sent to the
Oracle for resolution from thence. They were returned answer from the Oracle,
to send it to the Wisest. They send it therefore to Thales their countrie-man,
a man of great note in those days for wisdom. But when it was brought to
him, he disabled himself, and disdained the name of Wise, and sent it to such
a one as being more wise then he. The second also he would none of it, but
sent it to a third, and the third to a fourth, etc. and so they posted it from
one to another, till seven had it. The seventh and last Solon, he made no more
ado, but sent it to the Temple at Delphi, for a present to God, acknowledging
him only to be wise. A marvelous confession for heathen men to make, touching
the alone wisdom of God. And thus God that ordained his praise out of the
mouths of babes and sucklings, Psalm. 8. 2. Pet. 2.
as it is in the Psalm, and made the dombe beast speaking with man's voice to
rebuke the madness of the Prophet, as it is in the Apostle, made these men
which were but babes in Christ, nay, even as beasts before him, being without
God in this world, to set forth his honor and praise, and even to rebuke the
mad arrogance of many Christians in our days. Man's wisdom therefore touching
matters of learning, is imperfect, you hear, by the confession of the wisest,
and therefore not to be boasted of. So is it uncertain concerning matters of
Policy, and therefore this a third reason why wisdom ought not to be gloryed
in. Prudens futuri temporis exitum caliginosa nocte premit Deus, Horatius.
says one, (...), says another; thus it is; Pindar.
future things they are to be, they are not yet; therefore we cannot see them,
they may fall out another way as well, as that way as we imagine* they be futura
contingentia, therefore we may deceived in them. The Chirurgian that deals
with an outward wound sees what he does, and can tell whether he can heal it
or no, and in what time: but he that is to make an incision within the body, be
it for the stone or the like disease, he does but grope in the dark as it
were, and may as well take hold of that which he should not, as of that which
he would. So the Artizan that works in his shop, and has his tools about
him, can promise to make up his days work to his best advantage; but the
Merchant-venturer that is to cut the Seas, and had need of one wind to bring
him out of the haven, another to bring him about to the Lands-end, another
peradventure to bring him to the place of traffic where he would be, he can
promise nothing neither touching his return, neither touching his making of
commodity, but as the wind, and the weather, and the men of War by the way,
and as the honesty and skill of them whom he tradeth with, shall give him
leave. Just so fares it in these matters of prudence and policy; they are
coniecturall, they are not demonstratiue, therefore there is no Science of
them; they have need of the concurrence of many causes that are casual, of
many men's minds that are mutable, therefore we cannot build upon them; yea they
are built many times upon the errors and negligence of our enemies, and they
peradventure be awake as well as our selves. Antigonus, that wise Prince (he is
reckoned among them that having but one eye, were exceeding politic and
crafty) thought and made certain account of it, to come upon his enemy Eumenes
at unawares, and to take him napping, but he found Eumenes as vigilant as
himself, and so was feign to retire with a flea in his care as wise as he
came. This for matters of war. So for matters of peace; Solomon the wisest of
all, thought that if he might join in affinity with his neighbour-Princes, and
take many of their daughters to be his wives and women, he should not only
strengthen the Kingdom in his own hand, but also stablish it in his house
long and long; also he thought peradventure, that by occasion of his marriages
and affinities being so great, many of the vplandish people would be trained
and won to the knowledge of the true God of Israel, but how was he deceived?
His wives and worshippingwomen turned his heart from the Lord, he could do
little or good no upon them or theirs. And as for the secret underminers of
Salomons State and succession, 1 Kings 11.
where found they entertainment but among his allies? Let me instance this
point in one or two examples more. Constantine the Great, that worthy Christian
and great Politician, though that if he might build a City in the confines of
Europe and Asia, that might be aemula Romae, a match to Rome, and place one of
his sons there to keep his Court, he should not only eternize his name, but
also fortify the Empire no less, then if he had environed it with a wall of
brass. Also Phocas and Pepinus thought, the one if he might dignifie the
Bishop of Rome with an extrauagant Title, (to be called Universal Bishop,)
the other, if he might lade the Church of Rome with Principalities, even with
Principality upon Principality, they should deserve immortally, well, not
only of that Sea, but also of the whole house of God. But the way of man is
not in himself, as Jeremy says, Ierem. 10 23.
neither is it in man to foresee what will fall out luckily or cross. The
building of new Rome was the decay of old Rome; so it proved: and the dividing
of the Empire was the destruction of the Empire, and no less, as wise men
know: also the lifting up of the man of Rome, was the hoysing up of the man of
sin, and the locking of him in the chair, even in the chair of pestilence.
Thus there is no policy so provident, no providence so circumspect, but the
same is subject to errors and crosses, and therefore no cause why it should be
trusted to, and therefore no cause why it should be gloryed in. Let not the
wise man glory in his wisdom, etc. If any wisdom might be boasted of,
surely one of those kinds of wisdoms that I erst reckoned up unto you, to
wit, wisdom or skill in the Arts, wisdom or knowledge in Divinity, wisdom
or policy touching matters of State: but these you have heard, are not to be
relied upon, because they are uncertain, because they are imperfect: and
therefore much less are we to rely upon any such as is worse, or inferior to
these. But yet the world is the world, it has done so, and does so, yea, and
blesses it self for so doing; therefore this wound has need to be searched
and ransacked a little deeper. Homer, I remember, Homer. (...). Cyprian.
Hieronym. Augustine.
cries out against (...), or Discord, O, I would it were perished (and
therefore) out of the company of the gods and men. So Cyprian against
Covetousness, O detestabilis caritas mentium, etc. O the same detestable
blindness of men's minds, etc. Hieronymus against Luxury or lechery, O ignis
infernalis luxuria, O Lechery a very hellish fire. Augustine against error and
mistaking; O errare, O delirare; O what a vile thing it is to be blinded with
error, etc. Thus every one cried out against those sins wherewith their times
were most pestered and poisoned. Surely if I were appointed to touch the sore
of the daughter of our people, (we have many so res, from the crown of our
head to the sole of our feet, we are little else but sores and botches and
biles) but yet if I were to touch that which does most of all apostumate and
ranckle, then I ought to cry out, O Policy, policy. Policy I mean falsely so
called; but indeed cunning and cudgeling. This lets that the Prince and the
Realm cannot be served many times as they should be, nor Justice administered
in many places as it ought to be, nor the Gospel of the Son of God so
propagated as were to be wished. Many could wish, that in musters and presses,
the likeliest men to do service, and not the weakest of friends should be
appointed; also, that they were helped to their right that suffer wrong; also,
that the incorrigible were cut off by the sword of Justice; also, that the Sons
deceitful workers craftily crept in, in pretense to advance the Romish faith,
but indeed to supplant English loyalty and faithfulness, that I say their
goings out, and their commings in, and their haunts were better marked, and so
the danger that is threatened by them prevented. But yet to put our hand to the
work, every one to do some service in his place, as for ensample, Constables
to precept the ablest and fittest persons for the wars: Sheriffs to make
returns of indifferent Iuries for the trial of rights: Jurors to have God and
a good conscience before their eyes, and not to turn aside to by-respects,
etc. This we will not be induced to do; Amerin gebar lehabe reb quidib li tab
be dim vaashallem lac be dinac Jonathan methurgem. in Esaias. c. 1. v. 23.
What lets us? Policy: for we say, If we shall be precise in our office this
year, or in this action at this time, others will be as precise against us or
ours another time, and then what shall we gain by it? And if we should not
leave somewhat to such a person and to such a cause, we should offend such a
great One, and he will sit on our skirts. Thus policy overthrows Polity, that
is the Commonweal; and thus the fear of men casts out the fear of God, as
the Wise man complains. Another vanity, nay wickedness I have noted under
the Sun, and that is this; There be that have the door of faith opened unto
them, and have opportunity to hear words whereby they and their household might
be saved, and the same do also consent in the inward man to the doctrine
taught and published among us by authority, that the same is the truth, and the
contrary, falsehood* and yet to give their names unto the Gospel soundly, or
to protest against Popery and superstition zealously, they will not be drawn.
What withholds them? Policy; for they think that continuing doubtful, nay
though they should be enemies, if but secret ones, they shall leese nothing,
the State holding as it does, these be the times of mercy (though certain
ungrateful men cry out against them, as though they were bloody, for none
other cause, but for that they are restrained from shedding innocent blood, as
heretofore they were wont in the days of their tyranny) and if there should
be a change, then their very doubtfulnesse and staggering would be remembered,
and they advanced thereby. Plutarch.
Thus as Demades said to his countrymen of Athens, when they paused to decree
divine honors to King Demetrius, Take heed, my masters, lest while you be so
scrupulous for heaven and heavenly matters, you leese not the earth in the
mean time, and your earthly possessions. So some seem to make no reckoning at
all of their heavenly inheritance, so that they may uphold, or better their
state upon earth. Call you this wisdom, or policy, or providence, or the
like? Then Achitophel was a wise man, to prefer the expectancy of honor at
the traitor Absaloms hands, before the present enjoying of favor and good
countenance from King David his anointed Sovereign. Then Esau was politic, to
esteem more of a mess of potage, then of the blessing, Hebr. 11.
which afterward he could not recover, though he sought it with tears. Yea,
briefly then that Emperor was provident, (were it Nero or whosoever else)
that fished for Menise and Gudgeons with nets of silk and hooks of gold.
Jeremy 23.
What is the chafe to the wheat, says the Lord, by the Prophet? What is the
shadow to the body? the body to the soul? Math. 16.
frailty to eternity? What shall it advantage a man to win the whole world if
he leese his s^ule? or can any man save his soul that has God his enemy? or
can any man have God to be his friend, that does double with him? Be not
deceived: as God is called Amen, or True, in the Revelation, and calls
himself Truth in the 14. of John: Revel. 3. John 14. Psalm. 51. Iam. 1.
so he loves truth (or sincerity) in the inwards parts, Psalm 51. and without
truth he loves nothing that he does love. A doubling man, or a man with a
double heart ((...)) says Saint James, is unstable in all his ways, and can
such a one look for any thing at Gods hands? Let them look to it, whosoever
among us play fast and loose, and blow hot and cold with the Lord, making
bridges in the air, as the Comicall Poet says, and making flesh their arm,
but in their heart depart from the Lord, which the Prophet does so much cry out
against. Surely such wisdom is not from above, Iam. 3. Esaias 44.
but is earthly, sensual, and deuelish; and as truly as the reproach delivered
by the Prophet Esaias, chapter 44. in respect of their corrupt judgment is
verified in them, He feeds on ashes, a seduced heart has deceived him, so
that he cannot deliver his soul, and say, May not I err? So the Judgment
denounced by the same Prophet in another place, in respect of their worldly
policy, Esaias 50.11.
shall take hold of them, Behold, says he, you all kindle a fire, and are
compassed about with sparks; walk in the light of your fire, and in the
sparks that ye have kindled. This shall ye have of mine hand; ye shall lie
down in sorrow. As if he said, Your turning of devices shall it not be as the
Potters clay? shall it not break and crimble between your fingers? Take
counsel as long as you will, it shall not stand; make a decree, it shall not
prosper, says the Lord Almighty. (...), Evil courses will not pros. per.
Homer Odys.
says the heathen man. He that sows the wind, shall reap the whirlwind,
let him be sure of it. And let so much be spoken against glorying in wisdom,
either rightly so called, or falsely so termed. Let us consider now of the
second thing that we are forbidden to boast of, to wit, strength. Nor the
strong man glory in his strength. There have been many strong men in all ages;
Cael. Rodig. lib. 7. cap. 57.
strong of arm, as that Polydamas that caught a wild Bull by one of his hinder
legs, and held him by the force of his arm, for all that the Bull could do:
and that Pulio (mentioned by Dio) that threw stone at a Towne-wall besieged by
Germanicus, Dio in Augusto.
with such might, that the battlement which he hit, and he which was upon it,
came tumbling down; which made them that held the Town, through wonderment at
his strength, Trebell. Po^^i^.
to yield it up; strong of hand, as that Marius (one of the thirty Tyrants)
that would turn aside a Wayne with one of his fingers; and that Polonian of
late in the days of Stephen Buthor, that would knap a horse-shoo asunder (were
it never so hard) between his hands; strong of arm, and hand, and body, and
heart, and all, as that Aristomenes mentioned by Pliny, Pliny.
who slew three hundred Lacedaemonians in fight in one day; and that Aurelian
(then or shortly after Emperor) of whom they made this song, Mill, mill,
mill viuat, qui mill, mill occidit, Vopis^us.
Let him live thousands (of years or months) who slew thousands of enemies.
These were famous men in their generations, and no doubt but they were
miraculously admired at by them that lived in their times; yet for all that,
neither were others to have gloryed in them, nor they in themselves. Not others
to glory in them, because Saint Paul says, Let no man rejoice or glory in men,
((...)) 1. Cor. 3. And again, 1. Cor. 3.
Let him that glories, glory in the Lord, 1. Cor. 10. Not themselves to glory
in themselves, 1. C^r. 10.
because strength is not to be compared to wisdom, and therefore wisdom
being debarred from boasting (as you heard already,) strength ought much more.
That strength comes short of wisdom, Solomon shows, both by plain words,
and by an example* by plain words, as when he says, Ecclesiast. 9. verse 16.
Then said I, Ecclesiast. 9.
Better is wisdom then strength. By an example, as in the same Chapter, verse
14. A little City and few men in it, and a great King came against it, and
compassed it about, and built Forts against it, and there was found therein a
poor and wise man, and he delivered the City by his wisdom, etc. Thus
Solomon: Nature also has taught as much, both in plain words, and by
examples: In plain words, as Musaeus, Musaeus.
(...), Wisdom or slight is always better then strength. By an example, as
Sertorius for example; he caused a couple of horses to be brought before him,
the one fat and fleshy, the other a lean carrion Jade; also a couple of
Soldiers, the one lusty and strong, the other a silly sickly fellow: to the
lean horse he put the strong man, and he going roughly to work, and thinking
to do the deed with dead strength, haled, and pulled, and tired himself, and
was a laughing-stocke to the beholders: but the weak fellow using some
cunning, for all his weakness did the feate, and went away with the applause.
Wisdom therefore is better then strength, and therefore this is one strong
reason, why strength should not be boasted of, since wisdom is denied.
Another reason may be this; Strength of force, be it equal to the strength of
a Lion, or Elephant, yet it is but the stren gth of flesh nevertheless, and
all flesh is frail and subject to foil; whom one cannot overcome, many may;
whom sword cannot pierce, shot will; whom shot does not hit, sickness may
arrest; time surely, and death will be sure to make an end of. Now should a man
be proud of frailty, as of grass, of vapor, of smoke, of a shadow, of a tale
that is told, etc. whereto the whole life of man and his glory, and
consequently, his strength and vigor are compared. An horse is but a race, they
say: and so the strongest man upon earth is but the push of a Pike, and the
clap of a Pistol. Iudic. 9.
Were not Abimelech, and Pyrrhus, those most valiant Princes, each of them
killed by the hand of a woman? Was not Totilas that noble Conqueror, that had
vanquished Rome, which vanquished the whole world, was not he, I say, overcome
and slain by Narses, an Eunuch, a semiuir? What should I stand any longer upon
this? 1. Cor. 1.
God has chosen, as the foolish things of the world, to confound the wise; So
the weak things of the world, many times to confound the strong. And this may
be a third reason against glorying in strength, because God himself does many
times set himself against the mighty. Xenophon himself saw so much, and says
thus, God, as it would seem, takes a pleasure, (...), that is, To exalt the
base, Xenoph. (...). lib. 6.
and to pull down the mighty. And why so? Truly, not of envy to their
greatness, (as it is written of Tiberius or Caligula) that he caused a goodly
tall man, called Colossus for his stature and strength, of mere envy to his
personage, to fight, after he had done his Law, till he was tired and slain:
and as it is likewise recorded of Soliman, (in our fathers memory) that having
a great German brought prisoner to him, of very envy, and both to the German
nation, he caused his Dwarf, a very Pigmey, to take this German in hand,
(being a Giant to look to) and to hacke him and hew him, (being bound to his
hand) and to have many courses at him, (as if a child were set to thwite a tree
asunder) and at length with much ado to get him down and so to poach him in
and kill him. O no! God is of no such nature, as he says himself in Esaias,
Anger is not in me, So it may be said most truly of him, Esaias chap. 27.
Envy is not in him. No, he enuieth no good quality that is in man, which is
His own gift, neither does he hate any that he has made and redeemed, but
loves all, and would have us to love one another. Neither are the great and
mighty ones confounded and brought down by reason of their folly, or for want
of judgment, whereby they give advantage oftentimes to their enemies, (albeit
I am not ignorant, that Synesius, that ancient and learned Bishop, Synesius ep.
103.
says, that strength and prudence seldom whiles concur: but he
understands, I think, enormous strength in a huge vast body, otherwise his
speech is not justifiable) for many strong have been exceeding crafty withal,
as Aristomenes of old (of whom I spoke ere while) and George Castriot of late
(in comparison) of whom it is written, that they had the strength of a Lion,
and the wiliness of a Fox. But here is the quarrel, and this makes God an
enemy very often to the strong and mighty, because by their strength and power,
they think to bear out, and maintain whatsoever bad person, and whatsoever
bad cause, and bear down, and to crush, and to tread under foot, the most
righteous of the Land that stand in their way. This does nettle God and provoke
him to displeasure. Id in summa fortuna aequius, Tacit. lib. 15.
quod validius. Let me have might, and I have right enough. Sua retinere
priuatae domus, (says Tiridates in the same place of Tacitus) De alienis
certare regialaus. You would have me to be content with mine own; Why? it is
for base-spirited men, for Peasants, for Boores to seek but their own;
Gentlemen and mighty men, they will law, and fight for that which is another
man's. O demens, Iuuenal. Satyr. 6.
ita seruus hom^ est? says one in Iuuenal. You would have me to use my servant
well. Ah fool, is my man a man, is my Tenant my neighbor, is my neighbor my
brother? Does Naboth refuse to sell his Vineyard to Achab, to King Achab? I
will help thee to it for nothing, says Iezabel. 1 King. 21.
Does the Senate deny my Master the Consulship? Hic ensis dabit: This sword
shall help him to it, said aesars Soldier. These be the same (...), Hesiod.
(as the Poet calls them) which will have the Law in their own hands; they
lean upon their swords, and their right hand must right them, whether it be
right or no. Ovid. 5. Trist.
Nec Leges metuunt, fed cedit viribus aequum, Moestaque victrici iura sub ense
iacent. Thus they covet fields, and take them by violence, and houses, and take
them away, so they oppress a man and his house, even a man and his heritage.
Mich. 2. And thus as the Wilde-Asse is the Lions prey in the wilderness,
Sirach 13. And as Basil says upon Hexameron, (...): Most fishes do eat one
another, Basil. Homil. 7. in Hexaemeron.
and the less is the food of the greater: so it is too true, that in too many
places, the weaker and the simpler sort of men, are a prey unto the great and
mighty ones, and these eat up Gods people, as a man would eat bre^d, as it is
in the Psalm. But what says Basil in the same place? Take heed, says he,
(thou oppressor of the poor, thou cruel hard-hearted man) lest the same end
betide thee, that does bef all those great devouring fishes, namely to be
caught thy self by the hook, or in the net, etc. Indeed, as for the comfort
of the needy, and the deepe-sighing of the poor, the Lord says, That he will
up himself, and set at liberty him whom the wicked has ^nared: So for the
confusion of the unmerciful Cormorant, Psalm. 12.
he threatens thus by Job, He has devoured substance, Job 20.
and he shall vomit it, for God shall draw it out of his belly. And by the
Prophet Esaias, Woe unto thee that spoylest, and wast not spoiled, etc. When thou
ceasest to spoil, thou shall be spoiled. Esaias 33.
There is no Prince that can be saved by the multitude of an Host, neither any
mighty man delivered by much strength. Be you never so strong, O ye mighty,
yet He that dwells in the Heavens, is stronger then you; be you never so
well lined, or backed, or guarded, yet He that sits between the Cherubins,
is better appointed. Therefore trust not in your own strength, much less in
wrong and robbery; make not your selves horns by your own power; there is no
power, there is no force, there is no puissance that can deliver from wrath, in
the day of wrath, the children of wrath; that is to say, them that hale down
Gods vengeance upon them by their unmercifulness. This might be easily
vouched by sundry examples, but the time being so far spent, it is time to come
to the third special thing that we are forbidden to glory in, to wit, Riches.
Nor the rich man glory in his riches. As I gave this for one reason, why
strength should not be gloried in, because it is not to be compared to
wisdom; which I had proved before, might not be allowed to boast: So I may
assign this for one cause, why riches should not be boasted of, because they
are not comparable to strength, which even now I excluded from glorying. For if
the more excellent cannot be allowed his liberty, the inferior cannot require
it by any reason. And the Prophet seems to use the method of (...), and to
exclude the better at the first, that, that which is worse, might with less
ado be remooved, or rather with none at all. If you doubt whether riches be
worse, or less to be esteemed then strength, you may be persuaded hereby, for
that riches do toll-in enemies, but strength does repel them from entering, and
also expel them, if happily they be entered; also riches do make the theife
more ventrous, but very seldom do they make the true man more hardy. That
riches do toll and draw in enemies, it is evident by all Stories. For what
brought the first Conqueror into this Island of Britain, but the Pearls of
Britain, as Suetonius reports? What brought the Galls into Italy at the
first, Su^tonius. Plutarch, in Camillo.
but the Wines of Italy, as Plutarch witnesses? So what brought the
Carthaginians into Spain, the Graecians, and Romans, one after another into
Asia the less, but the riches of Asia, the gold and silver of Spain? So what
brought the Turks over into Thracia, and after into Hungary, but the fertility
of Thracia, the golden and silver Mines of Hungary? On the contrary side, what
makes the Tartars ever to invade, and never to be invaded, but because they
have no wealth that others should covet after, and their neighbors have
wealth, which their teeth do fall a watering for? This for public invasions
and robberies. As for private spoilings and pillage, the learned know what Q.
Aurelius gate, in the days of Sylla, by his Grange that lay commodious to some
great one; for love of the same he was attainted, and killed among them that
were to be put to death: whereupon he cried out, when he saw his name in the
paper, Fundus Alba^us me perdidit: Out alas, it is my land that I have at Alba,
and not any offense that I have done, that is the cause of my death. Pl^nius
ii. 37. cap. 6.
So Pliny writes of one Nonius a Senator, that he was likewise proscribed, and
condemned to dye by Antony the Tri^muir, for none other crime, but because he
had a precious stone of a very great value, which Antony or some of his
followers had a very great mind to. So Isocrates, speaking of the times, when
the Athenians were oppressed by Tyrants (the Officers that the Lacedaemonians
had set over them, as I remember) in his Oration against Euthunus, says, that
in those days (...): It was more dangerous to have any wealth, then to commit
whatsoever offense. I have told you already what Naboth gat by his Vineyard,
and could tell you what one Ta^rus mentioned by Tacitus gat by his Garden, even
an untimely, Tacit. lib. 12.
and a bloody death. Pernicious therefore you see riches are many times to the
owners, and therefore small cause why they should be boasted of; let this be
one reason. Another this, They be not lasting nor permanent, but soon fleet
away, and are gone. They may be compared to May-flowres, which yield a pleasant
savor for a few weeks, and then before we are aware, their beauty is gone.
Nay, like to Jonah his Gourd, Jonah. 4.
which yielded him content and delight, as it were this morning, and by the
next day it was worme-bitten, and withered. Nay, like the same small creatures
called (...), which in one and the same day are engendered, do grow to
perfection, decay, and dye. Indeed Euripides says; (...): Riches be not
lasting, but Ephemerous, they last but for a day. And Solomon before him:
Riches do take them to their wings as an Eagle, Proverb* 23.
and flee into the air. Who ever would have thought that Job from such wealth,
could have fallen upon the sudden into such misery? Who ever would have
thought, that King Dionysius must be feign to play the Schoolmasters, and to
teach petties before he dye, to get his living? Who ever would have thought
that King Perses son and heir must be glad to learn an occupation, and to
play the Blacke-smith, to relieve his necessity? Who would have thought, that
the Emperor Charles the Gross could want necessaries before he dyed? That the
Emperor Henry the fourth, (that victorious Emperor that had fought fifty two
pitched battles) could fall into that extremity, Helmold.
as to be a Petitioner for a Prebend in the Church of Spira, to maintain him
in his old age? Briefly, that King Giliner (before them,) that potent King of
the Vandals, could be so low brought, as to be forced to entreat his friend to
send him an Harp, a sponge, and a loaf of bread, (as Procopius writes,) an
Harp to solace himself somewhat in his misery; a sponge, to help to dry up
his tears, Procopius.
and a loaf of bread, to satisfy his hungry soul. What certainety then is
there in worldly wealth; when Kings and Potentates be so easily stripped of it,
and left as naked as my nail? Yet for all that, earthly-minded men as we are,
we will still be myring of ourselves in the mucke and pelf of this world,
though we be no better then Beetles in so doing, as Basil says; and we will
trust in uncertain riches, and not in the living God; though Saint Paul charge
us not to do so; 1. Tim. 6. Psalm
and if riches increase, we will set our hearts upon them, though the Psalmist
forbids us so to do: and lastly, we will be brag of that which we have,
and make our boast thereof; though the Prophet in my Text do expressly
disallow it; and though my self have proved that we have no more hold of our
wealth, then if we had an Eele by the tail. Well, as these be strong reasons
why the rich should not glory in his riches, because they tempt thieves and
enemies, and because they are of no certainety; so there is a third reason as
weighty as any of those, and that is, because they do not make us any whit the
better: for can any man boast with any probability of that which he cannot say
that he is the better for? Now thus it is, Augustine. ad Probam.
Talibus bonis non fiunt homines boni, sed aliunde boni facti, been vtendo
faciunt vt ista sint bona, as Augustine says: You call them goods, but I tell
you, says he, By such goods men be not made good, but being made good
otherwise, by using them well, they make them to be good: So Augustine. And as
for bettering of men, it is too true, that Asdrubal Haedeus says in Liuy,
Liuius.
Raro simul hominibus bona fortuna, bonaque men's datur: Goods and goodness do
seldom whiles meet together. For who is there, Bernard 2. de considerat.
except it be one amongst a thousand, Cui praesens felicitas si arrisit* non
irrisit, as Bernard speaks, but if the world came upon him, he will be
besotted by the world. Therefore Thucydides records it as a strange thing in
the men of Chius, that they were sober for all their prosperity; (...).
Thucidid. lib. 8. Euagrius.
And Euagrius ascribes this for a special praise to Mauritius the Emperor,
that in his prosperity, he retained his ancient piety. In our natural bodies
it is thus, the more fat, the less blood in the veins, and consequently the
fewer spirits; and so in our fields, abundance of wet breeds abundance of
Tares; and consequently, great scarcity of corn. And is it not so with our
souls? The more of Gods blessing, and wealth, the more weeds of vanity, and
carnality; and the more rich to the world, the less righteous to God commonly.
Apuleius.
What meant Apuleius to say, that Vbi vber, ib^ tuber; but to signify that
pride and arrogance are companions to plenty? And what made Solomon to pray
against fullness, but to show, that as they must have good brains, Proverb. 30.
that will carry much drink, so they must have extraordinary souls, that will
not be overcome with the world? Psalm. 30.
Did not David himself in his prosperity say, that he should never be removed?
say, or speak unadvisedly? Nay, did he not do lewdly, and wickedly, defiling
himself with his neighbors wife, and embruing his hands in his seruitours
blood, thus adding murder to adultery? Did he attempt any such thing in the
days of want, and adversity? No, no, in his necessity he sought the Lord, and
gate himself unto his God right early, and offered unto him the sacrifice of
righteousness, etc. And yet we grudge, and repine, if we do not swim in
wealth; when wealth, through the corruption of our nature, does dull us and
taint us, and make us unapt to every good work. Again, we shun poverty, as
we would do a Serpent, nay, as the gates of hell: yet poverty, through the
blessing of God, does kindle devotion, and kill sin in us, even as
Worme-wood, or the like bitter things do kill Moths or worms. This the time
will not permit me to stand any longer upon; and therefore, I come at once to
the second verse, and will end the same in a word or two. Let him that
glories, glory in this, that he understands, and knows me. Man's wisdom,
strength, and riches, are vain, and not to be boasted of: this much Jeremy
has told us already, and I have proved unto you by many reasons. But now, if
you would know what is the thing wherein we may take true comfort, and whereof
we may safely glory, the same is none other thing but piety or godliness, the
true knowledge of God, the true serving of God. This has the promise of this
life, 1. Tim. 4.
and of that which is to come: this we ought to labor for, day and night, that
we may attain, and having attained, we may rejoice with joy unspeakable and
glorious. This our Savior Christ does warrant us to do by his own example,
Luke 10. Who there is said, To have rejoiced in the Spirit on our behalf, Luke
10.21.
because we h^d our minds illuminated to understand those things that belong to
the Kingdom of God, and our salvation. Even, as elsewhere he defines the
happiness of man to consist herein, namely, To know God, John 17.
the only true God, and wh^m he has sent, Jesus Christ. Agreeably whereunto
Augustine says, Infelix homo qui scit illa omnia, Te autem nescit: August. 5.
Confess. cap. 3.
beatus autem qui Te s^it, etiam si illa nesciat, etc. Unhappy is the man that
knows all those things, (all secular learning) if he know not Thee; but happy
is he that knows Thee, although he be ignorant of the rest. But he that
knows Thee, and the rest too, is neuer-a-whit the more blessed, for the
the other things sake, but for Thee only; if knowing Thee, he glorify Thee as
God. So Augustine. The knowledge of God therefore, that is the one thing that
is necessary; that makes a Christian, that lifts us up unto God, that
coupleth us unto him, that justifies, that saves, that works all in all.
Now, by knowledge, I understand, and the Prophet in my Text understands not a
bare apprehension or sense of the mind, that there is a Divine power, greater
and mightier then all; for so much the most barbarous Heathen were not without:
They could say, D^us videt omnia, Deo commendo, etc. as Tertullian shows:
yea, as Saint James says, The very Devils believe, Tertull de testimonio
animae. James 2. Clem. Alexandr. 5. stromat.
and tremble, (they have a kind of belief, therefore they have knowledge)
butalso a consent, ((...), as Clemens Alexandrin. calls it) and persuasion of
the heart, touching both the Providence of God, that he works all in all, and
all for the best to them that love him: also, and especially touching his
mercy, that he will grant pardon to the penitent, even to them that crave it
for his Sons sake: and lastly, touching his bounty, that he will
everlastingly reward as many as are his, even as many as believe in his Name.
This is that saving knowledge which the world knows not, neither is it
revealed by flesh and blood, but by the Spirit of our Father which is in
heaven. This is that knowledge, whereof the Prophet Esaias speaks: By his
knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many: for he shall bear their
iniquities. Esaias 53. Math. 13.
This is that knowledge, That precious treasure, which so soon as a (wise) man
finds, for joy thereof he departs and sells all that he has, and buyeth
the field. Briefly, this is that knowledge, in comparison whereof, Saint Paul
counted all things loss, Philip. 3.
even dung, that he might know Christ, and the virtue of his resurrection, and
the fellowship of his afflictions, and be made conformable to his death. To
conclude, this is that knowledge, which whosoever seeks, is Wise; whosoever
gets, is Rich; whosoever keeps, is Strong; nay, virtuous, nay, happy, nay,
twice happy; happy in this world he is by faith, and happy in the world to come
he shall be by fruition. This knowledge the Lord vouchsafe to engraffe in them
that want it, and increase in them that have it, and make fruitful in all, to
the purging of our consciences in this life, and the saving of our souls in
the Day of the Lord Jesus. To whom with the Father, and the blessed Spirit* be
all honor and glory. Amen.

A SERMON UPON THE SIXTH OF JOHN. THE SECOND SERMON.
JOHN 6. Verse. 67.68, 69, 70. Jesus therefore said unto the Twelve, Will ye
also go away ((...)?) Simon Peter then (or therefore (...)) answered him,
Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou have the words of everlasting life. And we
have believed and known, ( Hebraism, for we do believe and know) that thou
art the Christ, the Son of the living God. Have not I chosen you Twelve, and
one of you is a Devil?


NOthing morevncertaine then the minds of the multitude, you cannot tell where
to have them; nothing more unconstant then their minds and hearts, you cannot
tell when you have them; nothing more ungrateful or a worse esteemer of men's
deserts, you cannot make account of any recompense ftom them: humorous,
clamorous, vnrespectiue; these have been their proper adjuncts. Look but upon
two or three examples, Regium est, cum been feceris, male audire, (It was the
complaint of a great King) that is, It is the Fate of Kings, to be rewarded
with evil speeches, for their good deseruings. (...); It was said of another
King, Agamemnon deserved well of the Graecians, but he was rewarded with bands,
or cruel death for his labor. Neither have Gods people been free from these
faults. None e uer more faithful in Gods house then Moses, none deeper in Gods
Book, none more graced with miracles, none more careful of the peoples good,
etc. Yet if any fear of hunger, or thirst, or enemies, etc. do assail them,
presently they are ready to return into Egypt, and to that end to elect
another Captain in place of Moses (as you may see in Exodus, and the Book of
Numbers,) so great interest had he in them. I skip over Samuel, David, Jeremy,
and other Kings, and Prophets, and righteous men. Come we to Saint Paul and his
Galatians: his I call them, because he had begotten them in the Gospel, and as
a Nurse cherishes her children, so was he tender among them: but when he came
to reap fruit from them, he found that he reckoned without his Host, and so
was disappointed of his hope. At the first, I grant, they received him as an
Angel of God, even as Christ Ie^us, they were ready to pull out their own
eyes, and to give them to him, if they would do him good; but after they had
harkened once to seducers, which turned them away from the simplicity of the
Gospel, then was Saint Paul no longer a Father unto them, but an enemy, and in
stead of plucking out their own eyes, they seemed forward enough to pull out
Saint Paul's, to do their false apostles pleasure; so great hold had he of
them. Neither did they better entreat the Lord of the house, Christ Jesus
himself; for these were but his servants. It is true, the Father said, They
will reverence my Son; and indeed so he well deserved, for he went about
doing good, and healing all that were possessed of Devils, or visited with any
other sickness, for God was with him. He spoke so divinely as never man spoke,
his enemies being witnesses, yea the people wondered at the gracious words that
proceeded out of his mouth, and flocked betimes to hear him, and hung as it
were upon his shoulders. Thus Christ might seem to say of them; My beloved is
mine, and I am hers, I have married her to my self in righteousness,
judgment and mercy. But all this was but Hony-moone, or as the hasty Summer
fruits; within a while they became rotten and corrupt, and forgate their first
love. Nay, for a word spoken, which that they did not understand, was their
own fault only, they gave him the back, and became Apostates. Look a little
higher upon the 51. verse, and so downward. Because Christ said, that he was
the Living Bread that came down from Heaven: And, Except ye eat of the flesh
of the Son of man, and drink of his blood, you have no life in you: Hereupon
grows a quarrel, and such a quarrel, as will not be taken up by any
Apology or mediation, but they must needs part; yet all Laws, and common
reason also will allow a man to interpret his own meaning, and when he
professes that he speaks figuratively, and spiritually, he ought not to be
taken properly and carnally. When Christ affirms and auerreth, that the words
that he speaks, are Spirit and life, that is, are spiritually to be taken,
and then they will give life, (as Augustine full well expounds, Spiritualiter
intelligenda sunt. A^gust.
Intellexisti spiritualiter Spiritus and vita sunt? Intellexisti carnaliter?
E^iam sic illa Spiritus and vitae sunt, sed tibi non sunt: Have thou understood
them spiritually? Then they be Spirit and life. Have thou understood them
carnally? Even so also they be Spirit and life, but to thee they be not.)
Should not this content indifferent men, though neither himself, nor others
had spoken so before? But now it has been an usual thing with Christ, by a
kind of Anagoge, to deduce matters from the current carnal ^ense, to an
heavenly understanding; and therefore with more equity may he be allowed here.
You know, Math. 12. when one said to him, Behold, thy mother and thy brethren
stand without* Math 1^.
desiring to speak with thee; He answered and said, Who is my mother, and who
are my brethren? And stretching out his hand upon his Disciples, he said,
Behold my mother and my brethren; for he that shall do the will of my Father
which is in heaven, he is my brother, sister, and mother. Thus Christ. Now I
ask, Was Christ ashamed of his kindred? By no means; for he taught others to
honor father and mother, and not to turn away their eyes from their own
flesh; therefore himself would not be found defective in that duty. But this
is that that Tertullian says, Hoc dicto vsus est ad excutiendam importunitatem
ab opere reuocantium; That is, By this saying, he would meet with, and shake
off their importunity or unseasonableness, that withdrew him from his work;
and therefore I say, that he denies that simply in show, which he denies not
but in comparison indeed; namely, that if any hinder him in his heavenly
vocation, he would not take him for his kinsman. So John 4. John 4
My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work. Had
he no other meat at any time? Yes, he did hunger and thirst, and eat and
drink as other men do; but in comparison of this, he cared not for the other,
this was meat and drink to him. So the Prophet Esaias, Is not this the fasting
that I have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, Esaias chap 58.
to take off the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, etc. To
deal thy bread to the hungry? etc. There was another bodily fasting, (or
pinching of the belly) but that was nothing to this spiritual One. So another
Prophet, Rent your hearts, Joel
and not your garments; And another, Circumcise the foreskin of your hearts,
etc. Neither do the Scriptures only use to speak thus, but ordinary wise men
also, whether they were in the Church or out of the Church. What, do thou
mean to angle for Trowtes, and Gudgeons, or the like? Thy angling is Castles,
and Towers, and Forts, etc. said Cleopatra to Marcus Antonius. Do you ask me
where be my Jewels? My Jewels are my husband and his triumphs, said Phocions
wife. Do you ask me where be mine ornaments? My ornaments be my two sons,
whom I have brought up in virtue and learning, said the mother of the Gracchi.
Do you ask me where be my treasures? My treasures be my friends, said
Constantius, the father of Constantine. Briefly, do you ask me where be my
hands? Eusebius.
My hands are the poor, the blind, and the lame, whom I keep of alms, said
Amadeus. Lastly, do you ask what is the Romans their science or occupation?
I confess, (says the Prince of Latin Poets) Others can paint, and carue, and
play the Orators, and play the Astronomers artificially, but, Tu regere Imperio
populos Roman memento, etc. Hae tibi erunt Arts, etc. Thine Astronomy, and
thine Oratory, and thy caruing and painting, etc. must be to keep in obedience
Nations, and to be good to them that live in obedience; and as for the proud
and refractary, to keep them down; this must be thy Art. Even thus you hear
that our Savior is not singular in his phrase in this 6. of John, touching
Eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood, but that the same in Analogy is used
elsewhere by himself, and every where by others. And to say the truth, why
should our Savior be thought to speak more properly and naturally, when he
says to us, You must eat the Flesh of the Son of man, and drink his Blood;
then when he says of himself, My meat is to do the will of Him that sent
me, etc? Yet of the former speech, our Adversaries the Romanists take hold of,
as did also the Capernaites before them, and to the later they take no
exception. It is certain that it was Scandalum acceptum, non datum; our
Savior spoke none otherwise then he might do; but these men took it
otherwise then they ought to do. And who took it in ill fashion? The Text
says, Many of his Disciples when they heard this, said, This is an
heardsaying, who may abide it? Yea further, that Many went back and walked no
more with him, ver. 66. If the vulgar Gnain Haarets, had cauilled with a few of
the better sort only, or if they had kept their dislike to themselves, or if
they had contained themselves within words, it had bin another matter, (Mortui
non mordent: so words be but wind, Verba dum sunt, and so Muti non mordent.)
But now, for his own Disciples to do it, and not a few of them, but many, and
not within themselves, but to utter it openly, and to proceed from words to
deeds, and (de facto) to fall from him; as it made their sin the more
sinful, so it might make Christ's Passion the more passionate, though all his
passions were sanctified, and always without sin. Well: after much preparation
and ridding of the way, (all necessary for the clearing of the occasion) we are
come at the length to the Text it self; Wherein note with me three things: A
question, An answer, and A reply. The Question, and Reply, are moved by our
Savior, the Answer by Peter. The Question is tentatory, [Will ^ou also go
away?] I have deserved better of you. The Answer is partly indignatory, [
Lord, to whom shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life.] (He seemed
to take it ill, that their fidelity was questioned;) pa rtly Protestatory, [
We believe and know that thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.]
Lastly, the Reply is Expostulatory, Have I not chosen you twelve, and one of
you is a Devil? As if he said, Ye are not all sound at the heart, ye are not
all the men that you would be taken for. For the first, namely, the Question.
As all have not faith, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2 Thessalonians. 3.
So all have not continuance in the faith. You ran well, who did let you,
that you did not obey the truth? Gal. 5. and chapter 3. Galat. 5. Galat. 3.
Are you so foolish, that after you have begun in the spirit, you will end in
the flesh? So it is, No man is crowned, except he strive lawfully, that is,
except he hold out a conqueror to the end. And, No man putting his hand to the
plough and looking back, Luke ^.
is meet for the Kingdom of God. Therefore the Grecians significantly call
end and perfection by one and the same word. And Cyprian speaks sensibly,
Quicquid ante finem fuerit, gradus est, Cyp^i. de simplic. Fraelator.
quo ad fastigium salutis ascenditur, non terminus quo iam culminis summa
teneatur; That is, Whatsoever is before the end, it is a step, whereby we clime
to the top of salvation, but it is not the uppermost griece, whereby the
highest point of the top maybe taken hold of. A man may be tumbled down from
the ladder, as well when he is within a round or two of the top, as when he is
in the midst, or below the midst: and a man may make shipwreck, when he is
within a ken of land, as well as when he is a thousand miles off. What had it
profited Peter, to have escaped the first and second watch, if they had stuck
at the Iron-gate, and had not passed through that also? And what did it benefit
Samson, to have withstood and eluded Delilahs temptation three several times,
when in the fourth he gave ground and was overcome? Who makes account of land
Oats that shead before the Harvest? or of fruit, be it Apple or Pear, that
falls from the tree before it be ripe? If you hear these things, happy are ye
if ye do them, says Christ; and if you receive the Word once with gladness,
happy are ye, say I, if you continue in liking of it. It is not an ordinary or
light sin to fall from the Grace of Christ, neither was it a small fault of
these Disciples, having been once enlightened, and tasted of the good gift of
God, to forsake Christ in the open field, and to turn to him the back and not
the face. No marvel therefore, if Christ seem so to wonder as he does, at
their backsliding; and if he be so careful to admonish the twelve, that they
follow not their steps; but be warned by their falls: Will ye also g^e away?
As if he said, Though Israel sin, yet let not Judah transgress: You are they
that I have framed and fashioned for my se^fe, the graffe of mine own setting,
the shaft of mine own Quiver, that I may be glorified: therefore though all
should be offended because of me, yet be not you offended; though all should
go back, yet be not you as they that withdraw themselves unto perdition; for
surely your punishment should be so much the heavier, by how much Gods mercies
in so calling and trusting you have been the greater. To this effect our
Savior. Now here a couple of questions may be demanded; the one touching our
Savior himself, the other touching his Elect. Christ demands of them what
their mind was? does not this somewhat question his omniscience? Again he
asks them, whether they would forsake him? does not this call in question the
stablenes of Gods counsel touching the Elect? These be the two questions which
I will answer in a word or two. Touching the first: It is certain, that as
the Father has life in himself, and light, and wisdom, and knowledge: so he
gives his Son to have the same in him, nay he has the same of himself as he
is God. No want in the Godhead may be imagined, nor degrees of having, but all
is perfect and at once, yea and from the beginning. He therefore being Jehovah,
and Shaddai, all-being, and euerbeing, all-sufficient, and euer-sufficient, may
not be thought to have asked this question, to be better informed for his own
part: for he knows all, and needed not that any should testify of man, for
he knew what was in man, John 2. John 12.
John 2. But as in the 12. of John, Christ says, This voice came not for my
sake, but for yours. So may we say of Christ's words in my Text, that they were
not uttered for himself, but for us. It was good that the world should be
satisfied concerning the resolution of the Apostles to follow Christ,
whatsoever came of it, for their honor, for our example, for the glory of God,
in giving such gifts unto men. Therefore does the Lord bring forth their
righteousness as the morning, and causes their faith to break forth into
confession. They believed, and therefore did they speak; We also, if we
believe, we will speak, and will not be ashamed of him before men, lest he
also be ashamed of us, before his Father which is in heaven. It is worth the
remembering, Plutarch de Isid. and Is^r^^.
that Plutarch in his book of Isis and Osiris, writes of the Peach, namely,
that the Egyptians of all fruit, did make choice of that, to consecrate it to
their great Goddess, for this cause, because the fruit thereof (...), is like
to ones heart, (...), that is, the leaf to the tongue. Indeed when the heart
and the tongue go together, then the harmony is sweet, and the service
pleasing both to God and man. Even as Saint Paul sets down the perfitnesse
of our duty, Rom 10.
and consequently of our happiness; With the heart man believes unto
righteousness, with the mouth he confesses unto salvation. This therefore may
seem to be a special cause why Christ demands of the twelve, whether they
would play the Turne-coats, as some others did, namely, to draw forth their
confession and profession of their faith. As for the other doubt; Whether the
Elect can fall away? the same will easily be cleared, if we agree upon the
terms of Elect, and falling away, namely, if we understand by Elect, such as
are chosen according to the purpose of grace, unto an inheritance immortal,
undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in heaven for them; and by falling
away, an utter departing from the fellowship of the Saints, and an utter
renouncing of the truth revealed. The truly Elect cannot so utterly become
cast-awayes. If then man and the world, and the Devil were stronger then God,
then the gifts and calling of God had repentance; then Christ should not love
to the end whom he loves; yea, then some should be able to take them out of
the Fathers hand. All which points, and twenty more to this purpose, are
directly contrary to Gods Word, which cannot lie. Therefore we conclude that a
man truly Elect, cannot thoroughly perish. I grant, Saul and Judas were Elect or
chosen, but it was to an office, not to the Kingdom of glory. Peter and others
fell away, but it was for a time, not finally, they wauered and staggered, and
felt some eclipse in their faith, but the same was never extinguished nor
rooted up. Christ prayed for Peter, and not for him only, but for as many as
should believe in his Name, John 17. that their faith should not fail; And can
Satan or all the power of hell prevail against Christ's prayer?
Praedestinatorum nemo cum Diabolo peribit, August. 13. de Trinit. cap. 16.
nemo vsque ad mortem sub Diaboli potestate remanebit: None of the predestinate
shall perish with the Devil, none (of them) shall remain under the Devils
power, even unto death, as Saint Augustine speaks. And in his book De
Catechizandis rudibus, Cap. 11. ^erusalem shall be delivered, and none of her
shall perish, for he that perished, was not (a Citizen) of her. Thus he. He
learned it of Saint John. They went out from us, but were not of us, etc. Let
us end this point with another testimony of Austin more pregnant and plain
then either of them. August. de Correp. and great. ca. 7.
Horum (he speaks of the Elect) si quisquam perit, fallitur Deus, sed nemo
eorum fuerit, quia non fallitur Deus; Horum si quisquam perit, vitio humano
vincitur Deus: sed nemo eorum fuerit, quia nulla re vincitur Deus: that is, if
any of the Elect perish, God is deceived, but none of them perishes, because
God is not deceived: if any of them perish, God is overcome by man's fault (or
naughtiness:) but none of them perishes, because God is overcome of nothing.
Well, having thus untied the two knots or doubts that might seem to entangle
the Text, let us return to the same again, and see what further we may learn
out of it, [Will ye also go away?] Plutarch writes of Brutus, that this was a
great content, and comfort to him at his end, that though he had Crebra
transfugia of the common sort, Plutarch.
many of them forsook him, and turned to the enemy, yet none of his friends or
near ones forsook him. On the other side it must needs be a great corrasiue
to Caesar's heart, that Labienus, that had done him so worthy service against
the Galls nine or ten years together, left him in the quarrel between him
and Pompey, and took Pompeys part. I have nourished and brought up children,
and they to rebel against me, this cuts my gall, says God in effect in Esaias.
Esaias.
What, my son that came out of mine own bowels, to miniken the matter against
me? nay, to make head against me? This is such a matter, as would make a man
exclaim. Be astonished, O heavens, and blush, O earth. (...), What, thou my
son, Sueton. in Iul. Caesar.
said one to his near one? He made resistance against others, says the story,
but when he saw his own natural to draw upon him, then he was weary of his
life, then he desired to live no longer. Therefore herein appears Christ's
magnanimity, that he was not danted for the perfidiousnes of the run-awayes,
but all the while he had them that were of best note, to stick unto him, he
reckoned not for the Apostasy of others. Let us be of the same mind
(Beloved.) Suppose all should cowre down cowardly, save three hundred; nay,
suppose that all should worship the Image that Nabuchadnezzar of Rome puts
up, save three; nay, suppose that all should bow their knees to Baal, or
worship the golden Calfe, save Elias and Moses, should this make us to go
away? Nay, greater is he that is in us, then he that is in the world, says our
Savior; And more there be which be with us, then they that be against us,
said Elizeus, and saw Elizeus. It is all one with God, to save with few or with
many: and so it is all one with God to justify with few or with many. Do you
not see (says Chrysostom, Chrysostom. Hom. 26. ad pop. Antioch.
) that it is better to have one precious stone, then to have many halfe-penies?
that it is better to have one eye whole, then that the same one being dazeled,
to have much fault in the hole? to have one sound sheep, then to have ten
thousand scabbed ones? Quid mihi cum multitudine? What have I to do with the
multitude? etc. So before him Cyprian, Non attendas numerum illorum: melior est
enim vnus timens, Cyprian. li. 1. ep. 3.
quam mill filij; impij;: Never regard their (great) number; for better is one
devout man, then a thousand wicked ones. When one told a Lacedemonian, that the
Persians would shoot so many arrows at them, that they would take from them
the light of the Sun: Then, said he, we will fight in the shadow; Nos ergo in
vmbra dimicabimus. When Constantius told Liberius, that he was no body, in
comparison of all the World, that had condemned Athanasius; Liberius told the
Emperor again, (...): The Word of faith is nevertheless the Word of faith,
though I be alone. Indeed we are taught by the Prophet Esaias, Chapter 8. Esaias
8.12.
Say not you a conspiracy, to whom this people says a conspiracy, but
sanctify the Lord of Hosts. And by Moses before him, Exodus 23.
Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil; For why? They are transported
many times rather by passion then by reason, and if one lead the way, they
follow on like sheep that want understanding, and stay not till they come to a
downfall, nor then neither. Take for example the Ephesians, Acts 19.
Demetrius blows the coals, and presently the whole City is upon a light
fire, yea, and upon an vproare too, one cries one thing, and some another; and
the assembly being out of order, the more part knew not why they were come
together. And the case standing thus many times with the multitude, should any
wise man pin his faith upon their sleeves, and hand over head do whatsoever
he sees them to do, or shun whatsoever he sees them to forsake? Will you
go away, because many that have been Disciples do go away? Alas, beloved,
the Camp never wants Turne-coates, nor the Commonweal Traitors, nor a
Society false brethren, nor the Church of Christ, hollow-hearted Christians.
There go from us to them, and they turn from them to us: these things ebb
and flow, and be as changeable as the Moon. In this confusion of things, what
is to be done? In war, the straggling or staggering Soldiers resort to their
Standard and Colors, and call to mind their watchword; also in Peace they
hearken to the Proclamation, and view the same also, whether it be
authentically warranted; If they find either the hand to be counterfeited, or
the seal to be the seal of an usurper, or him that pretends to be his
fellow, to fail in the watchword, then they flee from him, and will not abide
with him, lest they fall into the same danger of Law. So should it be also in
this hurly-burley and difference, who are true subjects and Soldiers, who not?
who good Citizens, who bad? Antichrists fauorits pretend a Proclamation as well
as Christ's, also they would be counted as faithful Soldiers, as whosoever is
most faithful: should not their voice be marked, their Commission perused,
their watchword called for? By their fruits ye shall know them, says
Christ, that is, by their Doctrine, shows Vincentius Lirinensis, Vincent
Lirinen.
(not so much by their conversation:) for howsoever they will go about to make
it good by the sentences of the Law of God, yet they will be found to breathe
forth Nouitiu^n virus; New poison, and to open (and vent forth) profane
novelties. Bid them pronounce Shibboleth, and they will pronounce Sibboleth;
bid them speak the Language of Canaan, they will utter half the Language of
Canaan, and half the language of Ashdod. For example; Be not the Scriptures
the rule of our faith, the direction of our steps, etc? Yes, they will grant
after a sort, they be a rule, but not adaequata regula, there are other rules
besides, namely, Traditions. But Christ says, Search the Scriptures, for in
them you think you have eternal life, and they are they that testify of me.
Search the Scriptures. He does not say, Search or enquire after Traditions. The
Scriptures testify of me. Why does not He send them to something else, if any
thing else were to be trusted? Surely, that which Tertullian says of the
Apostles, that if either they knew not all things themselves, or knowing, did
not teach others, they subjected Christ to reproof, that sent forth his
Apostles either minus instructos, aut parum simplices, either not sufficiently
instructed, or not such plain dealers as they ought to have bin. This, I say,
may seem justly to be objected to Christ, even primarily, namely, if there
were any other means (worth the talking of) whereby we might learn Christ,
and consequently attain to eternal life, any other besides the Scriptures,
then Christ in not revealing the same, nec^ssarily bewrays either want of
knowledge, or want of charity, (want of knowledge, if he were not acquainted
with the same; want of charity, if he would not impart the same:) but now both
these imputations ought to be as far from the Son of God, as heaven is
distant from the earth, yea, and from hell too. Therefore we are to rest upon
the Scriptures, and hold them to be sufficient witnesses of Christ, even
without tradition. O, but though he do not send us to Tradition, or to the
report of Fathers in that place, Math. 23.
yet he does elsewhere, as Math. 23. The Scribes and Pharisees sit ever upon
Moses Chair: all therefore whatsoever they say unto you, keep, and do, but
according to their works do not. The Successor of Moses his doctrine must be
obeyed, much more then, the Successor of the Apostles. I answer first to them,
then to their allegation. To them thus, namely, that in 1. Peter 5. they are
content to understand by Babylon, Rome, to gather thence, that Peter sat
there; not marking how deeply they wound themselves. If Rome were called by
that name in that Epistle, why should it not be as well understood so in the
Revelation? and then the great whore, which was to make all the world drunk
with the Cup of her fornications? So here to get some privilege to their
Chair, and to the Chair of their fathers, they will needs have themselves the
successors of the Scribes, and Pharisees, even those that contradicted the Son
of God, and at the last crucified him. Like fathers, like children. Secondly,
to the Allegation I answer with Origin (alleged by their Aquinas,) Omnia quae
dicunt nobis ex Lege intelligentes sensum Legis, Origin.
etc. All that they say unto us out of the Law, understanding the sense of the
Law, (that is, understanding it rightly,) that we must do. Otherwise if they
do, (...), if they preach another Gospel but that which we have received from
the Apostles, (who committed the same they taught to writing, to be theground
and pillar of the Church, as Irenaeus says) he is to be accursed, Irenaeus
though he be an Angel from heaven. And that the Pharisees were not simply to
be followed for all the Chair, it is manifest hereby, that Christ, Math. 16.
warns his Disciples to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, that is, of the
(false) doctrine of the Pharisees. Math. 16.
The Pharisees therefore had their leaven: then all was not sweet bread that
came from them: the people then were bound to taste and discern their
Doctrine, whether it were agreeable to the Scripture, and if not, to cast it
away. And indeed, if an Angels Doctrine is not simply to be admitted without
trial* Gal. 5
Gal. 1. is the Pharisees their Doctrine, (either former Pharisees or later,)
because of a Chair and succession, without question to be embraced? Suspecta
est Lex quae se probari non vult, says Tertullian. Tertull. Chrysostom.
And, Non Cathedra faci^ Sacerdotem, sed Sacerdos Cathedram, says Chrysostom:
Therefore if ye [ go away,] for these Facing-cardes of multitudes or Chair,
unhappy are ye. Hearken we rather to Chrysostom, in the 2. to Timothy, Hom.
2. Tholem. in 2. Tim Hom. 2.
If one pervert the Doctrine of the faith, obey him not, though he be an
Angel, but if he teach those things that be right, then mark not his life,
but his words. And to Cyril his rule, (...), Mark not what is now done, but
mark what is written. [ Will ye also go away?] O, but many wise, Cyrill
Catechis.
and learned, and great ones fall from your cause daily, Ergo. I answer first
with Tertullian, Some build their ruin, says he, hereupon. Quare illa vel
ille fidelissimi, Tertull. de praescript. aduers. Haeretic.
prudentissimi and vsitatissimi in Ecclesia in illam partem transierunt. Why
such a woman, or such a man, being most prudent and faithful, and famous in
the Church, went the other way, took part with the other side. Quis hoc
dicens, non ipse sibi respondit, neque fideles, neque prudentes, neque vsitatos
aestimandos, quos Haereses potuerint demutare? Who speaking so, has not made
himself answer, to wit, that they are not to be reckoned, either for
faithful, or for wise, or for famous, whom Heresies could alter, etc? What
then says he further? If Bishop, or Deacon, or Widow, or Virgin, or Doctor,
yea, or Martyr also shall swerve, (slipped) from the rule, therefore shall
Heresies go for truth? Veritatem videbuntur obtinere? Ex personis probamus
fidem, an ex fide personas? Be we (says he) to try faith by persons, or are we
not rather to try persons by faith? Thus Tertullian, and thus is my first
answer. Secondly, I answer, that if a score were made of such as have fallen
away from either side, and we should have a several skinker of their men, to
fill unto our men, as the old Poet says, (...). Many, and many a one, (even
ten for one) should want a skinker. I grant, at the first it was thus, as the
Pharisees said of our Savior, John 7.
John 7. Does any of the Rulers, or Pharisees believe in him? But this people
which know not the Law, are cursed. And, Not many wise, not many noble, not
many mighty, are called, etc. For the beginning of all things are rude and
weak, and the Sun must have a time to overcome the night, and to get above
our Horizon. And were the Children of Israel delivered out of the bondage of
Egypt, or of Babylon, either in a year or two? But when it was once brought to
light, and had once audience granted, did it ever want favorers? nay, did it
not get ground over Popery, even, as Christianity did over Gentilisme, till
they thought there was no way to keep it down, but only by cruelty? The
Egyptians took this course in Egypt; so did the Paynims in the Primitive time
of the Church: and as these could not prevail, no more could the Romanists.
Let me tell you a Story. Pyrrhus assayed to corrupt Fabricius with gold: when
that would not serve the turn, then he caused to be presented before him, a
terrible huge Elephant, thinking that such a beast would have cooled his
courage. But Fabricius never startled at the matter, but remained Fabri^ius
still, that is, vndauntable, and immovable; Neither did thy gold taynt me
yesterday, nor yet does thy Beast scarre me to day: Thus Fabricius. There have
thousands of such Fabricij been found amongst our men, that have counted
rebuke for Christ's sake greater riches, then the treasures of Egypt, yea, and
that chose rather to offer their bodies to be sacrificed in fire at a stake,
then with betraying the Truth, to retain their old honors and pleasures, or
to have new heaped upon them. They also (our Adversaries, I mean) talk now of
their sufferings, of the loss of their goods, of their imprisonments, yea, and
of the Martyring of some of their Priests, etc. And this their Factors make a
motive, to persuade some to go away, and to justify them that stand out, and
continue Recusants. But Stephen cease not to be a true Martyr, for all that
the Blasphemer in L^uiticus, and Achan in Iosuah were stoned as well as he:
neither were Empedocles before Christ's time, or Peregrinus after Christ's time,
ever the near to be Martyrs, for all that they passed through the fire, and
were offered as it were therein, as well as Polycarpe, and many other godly men
and women, in the Primitive time. -Sit fas liceatque perire Poetis Inuitum qui
seruat idem facit occidenti. If they will* needs entangle themselves with those
hampers, that are made against practisers against the State, who can help
them, who will almost pity them? Do their States, nay, do their Popes allow
Priests to be practisers against the^? No, nor Bishops, nor Patriarchs, nor
Cardinals neither. Did not the Florentines hang by the neck the Archbishop of
Piso, for conspiring against the two Medices? Did not Urban the sixth drown
Cardinals by sackefuls, for practicing against him, with the Antipope? Did not
Eugenius the fourth commit to Ward (in the Castle of Sancto Angelo,) yea, and
there execute John Coructan, the Patriarch of Aquileium, for the like offense?
Did Leo the tenth, after him, spare Cardinal Petruccius, (that I speak
nothing of Cardinal Adrian,) by whose special means he had been made Pope,
when he went about to poison him? No: nor Pius the fourth, he did not spare
Cardinal Carafta (his predecessors Nephew) to whom he was most bound for the
Papacy. Did not Saint Peter long agone rule it both to them and us? Let none
suffer as an evil doer, or as a busie-body in other men's matters. And Austin
after him, and out of him, Aug. Epist. 167.
Martyrs veros non facit poena sed causa: It is not the punishment, it is the
cause that makes a true Martyr. For our parts, we say unto them, Optatus lib.
3.
as Optatus does to their like; Nulli dictum est, Nega Deum. Nulli dictum est,
Incende Testamentum. Nulli dictum est, Aut Thus pone, aut Basilicas destrue.
^stae enim res solent Martyria generare. That is, To none of them has it been
said, Deny God. To none of them has it been said, Burn the New Testament. To
none has it been said, Offer incense, or throw down Churches, for these
things are wont to engender Martyrdomes. Thus Optatus, lib. 3. And I pray you,
is not our cause like to Optatus his, and theirs to the Parmenians? When have
our Magistrates urged any of them that have been sent from Rome (much less
Recusants) to deny God, except they make him of Rome to be their God? Nay, both
they and we do exhort them with all instance, to turn from that vanity, and
to trust in the living God. Cursed be he that trusts in man, and makes flesh
his arm. So, When do we urge them to burn the Bible, or any part of the
Bible? Nay, this has been their fault, (and sticks to them for infamy, like
the Leprosy of Gehezi) To set fire upon the translated Bibles wheresoever they
could find them, and to burn them by hundreds on an heap; yet the worst
translation (made by our men,) is founder, and more agreeable to the Original,
then the Translation of the Seventy: and yet the Apostles themselves suffered
the same, nay, used the same, (as is evident to the Learned:) so far were
they from defacing it. To be short, When and where have our men forced them,
yea, or persuaded either, to put Incense upon the Altar, or to throw down
Churches? Nay, it is their proper guise; even now in the time of the Gospel
(when shadows and carnal worship should cease,) to perfume their Altar, and
their vestiments, and many things that I know not, nor care to learn, and it
has been their ordinary practice, where they have been the stronger, to
destroy not only Churches, but also as many as have been assembled in them to
hear Gods Word, and to receive the Sacrament, even bloudily and butcherly,
with a rage that reached up to heaven. Witness the Massacres that they made at
Vassey, at Merindol, and Cabrias, in Piemont, in Calabria, and where not? So
that we have great cause to flee from them, (not only to go away,) and they
no cause to flee from us, who never thirsted after their blood, nor drew it but
constrained, and in our defense. But to what purpose all this? Since they whom
it concerns are not here, and them that are here, it does not concern; yet
as our Savior made full account, that some of his Auditors would relate unto
Herod what opinion he held of him, and therefore said unto them, Go ye, and
tell that Fox: So we are content, that they take information by some of you,
that we maintain, and are instant, that there is cruelty in their side, and
not in ours, and a good cause with us, and not with them; and therefore that
there is cause why they should return to us, and no cause in the world why we
should turn to them. And let so much be spoken of the Question. It follows,
[Simon Peter therefore answered him, Lord, to whom shall we go? thou have the
words of everlasting life. And we have believed and known (for we do believe
and know, Heb.) that thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.] In this
answer Saint Peter does two things; First, he denies flatly, that he or his
fellow Apostles have any such meaning. Then he brings reasons of their
constant adhering to him. The denial is set forth by way of Interrogation for
more vehemence sake, and contains in it a reason drawn from the excellency
of Christ before other teachers, Lord, to whom shall we go? meaning there was
no Master worth the thinking of, in comparison to him, and therefore that they
were far from any such purpose. The reasons drawn from the excellency of
Christ, are two. The one, from the excellency of his Doctrine, [ Thou have the
words of everlasting life;] the other, from the excellency of his person, [
Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.] Our heart and conscience
tells us so much, therefore we are not men, but devils, if we forsake thee.
To this effect is Saint Peter's answer in the name of his fellows. Let us take
the words before us in order as they lie, and first, speak of the
Interrogation. Simon Peter therefore answered him, saying, Lord, to whom shall
we go? The first thing that we are to learn out of these words, is this,
namely, That truth, and a good cause, has always some to maintain it. The
Disciples fell away, yea, many of the Disciples fell away, yea, they fell away
so, that they came no more at our Savior, as the Text has it: but yet he was
not left without witness, he had the Apostles to bear record to him, and to
stand for him. So the High Priests and the Elders, yea, and the whole multitude
of the Jews cried out against him, and would not otherwise be satisfied, then
with his death; but Joseph of Arimathea, a Counselor, a just man, and a good,
consented not to their plots and practices, Luke 23. So Obadiah was not carried
away with the stream of the time, to kill Gods Prophets, and those that
worshipped the Lord with holy worship, but hid them in Caves, and provided for
them, though it were with the jeopardy of his head. So Ruben, 1. Kings 18.
though he had sinned before a great sin, and had highly offended God
thereby, and his father too, yet in this, no question, he pleased both, that he
dissented from his brethrens bloody design, to murder their bother Joseph,
Genes. 37.
and both dissuaded them, and delivered him. The like example of constancy and
magnanimity appeared in Caleb, and Iosuah, Numb. 14. who opposed themselves,
not only to their fellows being ten to two, but also to the whole
Congregation of the Children of Israel, being an hundred thousand to one:
against all they stood boldly, for the maintenance of Gods glory, in the power
of his might, and the truth of his promise, saying, Rebel not against the
Lord, neither fear ye the people of the Land, Numb. 14.9.
for they are but bread for us, their shield is departed from them, and the
Lord is with us, fear them not. Thus they; and this was counted to them for
righteousness unto all posterity for euer-more. Yea, that God that prospered
the Midwiues of Egypt, for not subscribing to the bloody decree of Pharaoh, and
his Counselors, did also highly advance these his servants, not only bringing
them into the Land of Promise, the place of rest where they would be, but also
making one of them, General Captain over his people, an^ giving him admirable
victories, and the other also a great man, and a mighty, and of such
vigorousnesse in his extreme old age, that he confesses, that he was as lusty
at eighty five years of age, as he was at forty, and as sufficient for
managing matters of war, or matters of peace, as you may see, Ioshuah 14.
Thus there is a reward with the Lord, and a special reward for them that
cleave fast unto the Lord, Ioshuah.
and do sanctify him, both in their hearts, and in their tongues, as Peter
does in my Text, and will not be carried away by the example of the multitude,
to think or say as they do. But on the contrary side, you know in the Psalm
they are condemned, Psalm 50.
who seeing a Thief, run with him, and are partakers with the Adulterers.
Yea Saul, though he threw never a stone at Saint Stephen, yet, because he kept
the clothes of them that stoned him, he may be reckoned among the persecutors.
Yea, Moses himself, that Saint of the Lord, at other times so zealous, so
faithful, so courageous, yet, because at the waters of Meribah he did not
sanctify the Lord, and rebuke the people for their rebellion, with that edge
and resolution, as he ought to have done, is told plainly by God himself,
that he should not enter into the Land of Promise, see it he should, but put
his foot in it he should not. See the 20. Chapter of Numbers, and the 32. of
Deuteronomy. Let us consider of these things, Beloved, It is a fearful thing
to fall into the hands of the living God: It is a dangerous thing to deal
remissely in his business, who is jealous of his service, and requires the
whole man. If this were done to Moses, a green Tree, what shall be done to a
dry? And if Moses were condemned, because he was not so hot as he should have
been, do they think to escape that are key-cold? This I say, because some
think, that they make Religion beholding to them, and God their debtor for
ever, if they do not fall away from it as well as others, and if they do not
openly blaspheme, and rail upon it, though in the mean time they speak never
a word for it. But, as God said to Moses, I will make thee a greater Nation and
a mightier then these, though all these should be brought to naught: And as
Christ said in the Gospel, I tell you the truth, that if these hold their
peace, the stones shall speak; So we may write upon it, that God is both able,
and willing to defend his Truth, howsoever many shall agree to betray it, and
rather then he will leave it vnmaintained, he will open the mouths of the
dumb, and the children that are yet unborn, shall praise the Lord. In the
mean time, as it is said in Genesis, The Nation to whom they shall be in
bondage, will I judge, says God: And in the Gospel, Woe be to that man by
whom offenses shall come, and especially, Woe be to the man by whom the Son
of man shall be betrayed: So let these men-pleasers, and place-pleasers know,
that as they are ashamed to confess Christ before men, so he will not be
pleased to confess them before his Father which is in heaven. Gordius the
Martyr was of that mind: for being exhorted by a friend of his, to keep his
conscience to himself, and not to profess it, made answer (as Basil writes)
that the Truth is not only betrayed of them that do (plainly) forsake it,
but of them also that will not publicly confess it. Fulgentius was of the
same mind, Nec immerito talis seruus and abijcitur and punitur, etc. Such a
servant (says he,) is worthily rejected and punished, because by one and the
same silence, he establishes error, who being forestalled by error or time,
does not, by means of his silence, vouch and maintain the Truth: Even as,
further says he, he that does not establish Gods glory, does euacuate it; and
he that does not refute and ward the blow of dishonor from God, does no less
then heap it upon him. Why? my Brethren, our cause is good, it is Gods, we
have proved it so to be in hundreds of discourses; the times are favorable, we
have the Bridegroom with us, why then should any man's heart fail him? o vere
Phrygiae neque enim Phryges, (...). They that be in pace Cerui, (I inuert
Tertullians words) will they be in praelio Leones? will they be as valiant as
the Lion in the day of battle, when the wicked compass them about at their
heels, and draw them before Rulers, yea, and peradventure to a fiery trial,
that show themselves as fearful as the Dear in the days of peace, in Alcyon
days? They fear where no fear is, says the Psalmist, the shadow of the
mountains makes these to fear, says one, in the book of Judges. By the Art
of dissembling many think they have great advantage. The Protestant takes
them for theirs, for their coming to Church; The Romanist theirs, because they
speak never a word against them: so they gain on both sides. Wherefore if
they should be any thing busy (so they call sincere dealing,) then they should
leese such a Gentleman's custom, and such a Gentlewomans favor, etc. Thus the
love of man casts out the love of God, and the fear of man casts out the
fear of God. But where is Elias, even he himself, said Elizeus? Where is
Brutus? I would thou were alive, Brutus: it was once written under his statue.
We may say, Where is Peter, and his spirit? He confesses in my Text, and
denies not, but says plainly, that there was none worth the looking after
but Christ, nor no Doctrine worth the harkening after but his. It was a great
blot to Osius of Corduba his reputation, (that had been a faithful Confessor
in the days of persecution,) that following the sway, he was seen to be
present, and an abettor in the Conuenticles of the Arrians; and so those other
Bishops did themselves most hurt, that deserved the imputation of Nazianzen,
(...): All saving a few, followed the time. On the other side Paphnutius is
much renowned in Story, for withstanding the greatest part of the Council of
Nice in a cause of truth, wherein he also prevailed. And so in these last
perilous times, Vergerius the Italian, and Dalthius the Hungarian, and Fricius
the Polonian, excellent learned men, and great Statists, and two of them
Orators, from great Princes deserved no less honor, though they had not so
good success, (for Trent Conuenticle would not be like Nice Council,) in
manfufully proposing, and defending many points of Christian Religion, even as
they are taught and urged by us. They learned it of the Prophet: I will speak
of thy testimonies before Kings, and will not be ashamed. Or of Saint Peter in
my Text, who answered boldly, and cared not who heard him, that Christ was to
be followed, and he only. Let us also (Beloved,) be followers of Saint Peter
in this point, and let this be our first note, or lesson, To be resolute.
[Peter answered and said.] The next note is like to it, namely, That we be
forward, yea and foremost too in a good cause. As Peter does not strain
courtesy, nor pause to see whether any other would speak, and ease him of his
labor, but as though the weight of it lay upon his shoulders, he discharges
himself of it valiantly and hardily. The Lord loves a cheerful giver, says
Saint Paul, and so, The Lord loves a forward Confessor, say I. Thou come to
see me the last of all my friends, says Octauius to Tully, in Appium. And 2.
Sam. 19. David reproves the Elders of Judah, for that they were behind to
bring the King again to his house: he means, that they were hindmost and
lag. On the other side, Shimei, that had abused David so villanously for words,
that no man was ever abused worse by any, for he called him man of blood, and
man of Belial: yet because he was the first of the house of Joseph, that came
down to meet him after his restitution to his Kingly Estate, David thought
himself bound to pardon him, and so assured him of his life by an oath. So
much it imports a man, what he does well, to do quickly, and to do it
betimes; then there is thank with God, th^n it is accepted of man. Even as
David sets forth his forwardness, saying, I made haste, and prolonged not
the time to keep thy righteous judgments: and Saint Paul his, When it pleased
God to reveal his Son in me, immediately I communicated not with flesh and
blood, but went about that work. And James and John being called, Math. 4.
forsook their ship and their father forthwith, and followed Christ: And Luke
19. Zacheus being bid to come down from a tree, came down in haste, and
received him. Now, as this haste and forwardness is necessary, and to be used
by all, so especially by them that are Ringleaders, and Captains of the
flock. In their countenance there is hope and despair; in their courage there
is life and death. If L. Martius had not bestirred himself, and showed an
uncontrollable quick resolution, and an vndauntable fiery courageousnesse,
after the overthrow given to the two Scipio's, all had been lost in Spain,
the name of a Roman had been no more in remembrance. This one example (for
hundreds) for matters of war. So if Nasica had not presently, upon the
hurly-burly stirred by the Gracchi, objected himself as a Bulwark against
their seditious complotments, the Commonweal had been drencht in the gulf
of sedition, out of which it would hardly have popped up: for the hearts of the
valourous would have failed them for fear, and the hearts of the turbulent
would have been strengthened. Thus one example out of hundreds for matters of
peace. So if Saint Peter, upon the revolt of so many Disciples, and staggering
peradventure of some of the Apostles, had hanged the wing, as they speak, or
let fall his Crest, who does know, but that many by his example, would have
been drawn away to object cowardice, or amazed distraction? Therefore blessed
be God, that gave such strength unto him, for by his strength, many were
confirmed. Let us think of this (Beloved) specially, we that are, or should be
men in Christ, let us reprove them that cannot abide wholesome Doctrine, and
let us confute such, (upon occasion and modesty, and in order) as are
contrary-minded, and teach contrary to the truth, that is, the Scriptures; For
the Scriptures are true, and whatsouer is repugnant to the same, is false-hood.
Let us not draw back and say, Why does not such a one speak? and why does not
such a one? but rather as in a common fire, let every man bring his bucket of
water to quench it; let every one presently put his hand to the work, and
help to bear another burden, and then he shall be blessed in his work. This
is my second note, That not only we profess boldly, but also that we do it
presently. The third note shall be shorter then the second* namely, that we be
charitable. What in Gods name, (might one say,) what means Saint Peter to be
so liberal to undertake for others? He knew what himself would do, but he
did not know what others meant. Cato refused to undertake for Catulus his
honesty, (and none of better note for virtue then Catulus,) Cato therefore was
a wise man. Ier^. 17.
So Jeremy says, The heart is deceitful and wicked above all things, who can
know it? So Saint Paul, What man knows the things of man, but the spirit of
man that is in him? Paul was an Apostle as well as he. How then could Saint
Peter say boldly, To whom shall we go but unto thee? He should rather have
said, To whom shall I go? To make the matter short, I answer in a word, that
Saint Peter shows hereby his great charity, which thinks none evil; and
his brotherly love, which conceiteth another as himself. The better a man is,
the less evil he suspecteth to be in another; the worse a man is himself,
the more naught he suspecteth to be in another. It is written of Nero by
Suetonius, Suet^niu^.
that persuasissimum habuit, He was verily persuaded, that there was no
continent man upon the earth: What marvel? he was most vicious, and most
abominable himself. On the other side, Solon, that carried a natural heart to
his Parents, could not be induced to think, that there was any use of a Law to
be made against murderers of Fathers and Mothers. Na^ian. Epi. 27. Lege etiam
(...). in Julian. Guicciardin.
(...), as Nazianzen speaks, that which is free from naughtiness, is slower
to suspect naughtines. As it is written for example of Francis the first, that
carrying a generous mind himself, he thought he should be entreated with like
generousnesse by his enemy. As on the contrary side, the brethren of Joseph,
that had used cruelty themselves, were no sooner brought within their brothers
danger, specially their father being dead, but they said, It may be that Joseph
will hate us, Genesis 5^.
and will pay us again all the evil which we did unto him. Now St. Peter was
not like to these later bad ones, but to those former good ones, or rather
better then they. He knew whom he believed, and he knew that his own heart was
established, and his faith built upon the Rock Christ, and therefore thought,
that others would be as forward as he, and as firm as he. He never thought
that any of the Apostles would play the Traitor, or that Judas would be other
then Judas, that is, a Confessor. He knew peradventure that he was a Thief,
and bare the bag, etc. but yet who would not look for reformation under such
a Censor and Master? This made Peter to say not in the singular number, To whom
shall (I) go? but in the plural, To whom shall we? Let us be slow to anger,
slow to judge, swift to pity, swift to hope. Saint Paul hoped of the whole
Nation of the Jews, that in time they should be saved, Romans 11. And shall we
despair of any particular man, that he belongs to God, and that he may be
reclaimed? O no, let us teach, let us improve, let us admonish, let us rebuke
with all long suffering and gentleness, and then God will do that which
seems good in his eyes; he will in time give them grace to repent, that they
may escape out of the snares of the Devil, though presently they be led
captive of him after his will: they may be graffed in (says Saint Paul,) if
they abide not in unbelief, for God is able to graffe them again. Go thy
ways, says a Reverend man to Austins mother, for it cannot be, that Filius
tantarum lachrymarum pereat, That one that is so much prayed for should perish.
Peter excluded not Judas out of his Calendar of hope, no more should we do any
that comes about Christ. This is my third note. Fourthly, let me answer a
false gloss of the Rhemists, for they like briars take hold of our garment,
and hinder our proceeding to that which follows. When company (say they upon
this place,) draw us to revolt, let us say thus: Lord, whither, or to whom
shall we go, when we have forsaken thee? To Calvin, Luther, or such, and
forsake thee and thy Church, with the unfaithful multitude? etc. Touching
Calvin and Luther, I answer first, that though we do not glory in them, for
we are forbidden by the Apostle, 1. Cor. 3.21. to glory in men (whether it be
Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, etc.) Yet is there no cause why we should be
ashamed of them; for he that was least learned of the two, was more learned
then an hundred of their chiefest Prelates, take them one by one; and he that
was lest virtuous of the two, had more virtue in him, then forty of those
Prelates that might be named, put it all together. I know that they escaped not
the tongues of the wicked, nor the pens neither of them that were hired to
devise whatsoever slanders they could against them, (as also our Savior
himself was both traduced while he lived, and written against when he was
dead.) But if it be enough to accuse, who shall be innocent? and if professed
enemies and mercenaries, their evidence shall be admitted; what Naboth shall
not be condemned? This may content indiferent men, that they did not mure
themselves up in Cloisters, where Mendacia vuliu, st^g^tia pari^tibus
tegebantur, Where hypocrisy and secrecy made all whole: but in lu^e Reipub.
they did live, they were for fame, as Cities set upon an hill, that could not
be hid; they lived in famous Universities and Cities (the one Geneua, specially
commended for the government thereof by Bodin, no partial man:) themselue^
always in labors, (preaching or writing continually,) always attended,
always observed, and yet they had n^uer their names called in question for
disho^esty. Called in question? Nay, their lives were proposed by all that knew
them, for a pattern, for others to follow, and they found as many all their
life time, that did reverence them for their virtue, as did honor them for
their learning. And shall these men's names be cast in our teeth by way of
reproach, whom yet we never esteemed otherwise then for servants, not as Lords
over the house; nor yet as Lords over our faith, but as faithful and learned
men, by whose labors we have profit^d? Therefor, though we be not to build
our faith upon them, nor upon any other, but on the foundation of the Apostles
and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the head Cornerstone, yet there is
no cause (for all their twiting) why we should not honor them, showing
themselves to be friends of the Bride groom, and discerning the Bride-groomes
voice, rather then the very heads of their Church, yea the chief head and
Top-gallant of their Church, speaking like the Dragon, and uttering words of
blasphemy, which are not agreeable to the wholesome doctrine of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, revealed and set forth in his holy Word. But this we may
examine particularly in the Aetiologue following, namely, in these words: Thou
have the Words of everlasting life.] In the mean time out of the Interrogation
(which implies a denial and a refusing of other courses,) we have learned
thus much, namely, to profess Christ boldly, to profess him readily (and with
the foremost,) to profess him charitably, (not excluding others,) yea, and to
hearken to those worthy servants of God, whom he has raised up in these latter
days, for the clearing o^ the doctrine of the Truth, and the revealing of the
man of Sin, notwithstanding the disgraces and contumelies, which not the true
Church, but the Churchmen of Rhemes, and the Chaplains of Rome do throw upon
them. And let so much be spoken of these words, [ Simon Peter answered and
said, Lord to whom shall we go?] It follows, Thou have the words of
everlasting life. Which (because the hour is already spent,) I purpose not to
handle at this time. To God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, be
rendered all praise and thanksgiving from every one of us, now, and euer-more.
Amen.

A SERMON UPON THE SEVENTH OF ESAIAS. THE THIRD SERMON, Preached upon Christmas
day.
ESAIAS 7. verse 14. Behold, a Virgin (or the Virgin) shall conceive and bear a
Son, and she shall call his Name Immanuel.


WHEN Phaeton was to get up into the Suns Chariot, that is, (as it is
interpreted by the learned,) when he undertook to meddle with great matters,
and such as exceeded the reach of the common sort, he had a certain sacred
ointment given to him to preserve him from scorching and burning. (Tum pater
ora suisacro medicamiue nati con^igit and rapiosae fecit patientia flammae.)
The holy Lawgiver Moses writes, that when himself was to deliver unto the
people the Law of the Highest, he was first admitted to talk with God, and
withal his face was made to shine. And the Prophet Esaias witnesses, that
before he was to be sent to prophecy, he had his hips sared with a live coal
taken from the Altar. And the Evangelist likewisereporteth, that before the
Apostles and Elders joined in commission with them that were set on work about
the Gospel, to carry the same to the Gentiles, they had the gift of the H.
Ghost, shed upon them in the form of cloven tongues. So to be short, Simeon
Metaphrastes writes, that at such time as Saint John was busy in penning of
the Gospel, the holy Ghost made apparent signs of his presence by thundrings
and lightnings, 1 Cor. 12.
that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 12. then who can preach
worthily of Jesus, and of the doctrine of salvation, but by him? And if this
key of the Spirit be requisite for the opening of all points of doctrine: then
is it thrice necessary to reveal mysteries. Beloved, this point of doctrine
concerning the Incarnation, and Office of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, is
not only a mystery, but a mystery of mysteries, that is, a most deep and
hidden mystery, which the Patriarchs saw in a glass, and as it were in a
dark speaking; the Prophets searched after, the very Angels desired to behold.
And therefore not only we, that take upon us to unfold the same, have need to
pray with the Prophet David, Lord, open thou our lips, that our mouths may
show forth thy praise, and speak worthily of this high mystery, but also you
that are here present before God this day, to hear words from my mouth, ought
to pray with all manner of prayer, and with all instance, that he that took
away the scales from Paul's eyes, (and is called by Daniel, Dan. 12.
The Reuealer of Secrets) would so open the eyes of your understanding, that,
that which shall be delivered unto you, may not be as a book that is sealed or
clozed fast, but that you may know Christ, and comprehend him, for whose sake
you are also comprehended of him. This short Preface I thought good to make
unto you, in respect of the excellency and diuinenes^e of the Argument, or
Theme, undertaken by me, to stir up your godly devotion, that there may
spring up in you no root of profaneness, nor cold pang of weariness oppress
you, to make the Word unprofitable. For if they escaped not, that despised
Moses his Law, much less shall we escape, if we despise the Gospel, that is,
if we shall not reverently hear, and religiously lay up in our hearts, this
most gladsome tidings concerning Christ, manifesting of himself in the flesh,
to communicate himself unto us, and to draw us unto him. But let us come to
the glad tidings it self. Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, etc. Three notable
things, or rather wonderful, are contained in this short verse.

1. A wonderful Conception. 2. A wonderful Birth. 3. A wonderful Conjunction
of the Divine and humane nature in one person. A Virgin shall conceive.
This is the first of the wonders. A Virgin shall bear a Son. This is the
second. His name shall be called Immanuel, that is, G^d with us, because of the
assuming of our nature unto himself. This is the third. A Virgin shall
conceive. This truth is contradicted by two sorts of men, especially by the
wrangling Jew, and by the doubtful Infidel. The one says, It was not so,
the Prophet did not mean that she should be a Virgin that should be the
mother of Immanuel. The other says, It could not be, how can a Virgin
conceive, etc? These be the objections of the unhappy miscreants, the Jews,
the Gentiles, the Atheistical scorners, whom I will not answer diligently or
at large, lest I should seem too much to honor them, but I will confute them
briefly, that I may furnish you with some reasons against the day of battle;
against the time, I say, that your faith shall be shaken with such kind of
persons. To the Jew therefore this I say, That though we take no advantage of
the Etymon of the Word used by the Prophet (and yet as the Learned know, the
Hebrew tongue does excel all other tongues, in fitting the nature of things,
with proper and fit names,) yet forasmuch as the word signifies one that is
kept close and secret, who else but a Virgin can be meant? But to omit this
advantage, and to omit also the authority of the seventy Interpreters which
were Jews, and so translated it before this matter was in controversy, and
therefore not excepted against for partiality; Let us consider the matter it
self. Does not the Prophet (in Gods name) promise to show them a sign, (...)
that is, a prodigious and strange thing surpassing the course of nature? Origin.
Quale autem signum erat, adolescentulam non Virginem parere, says Origin
against C^lsus: What sign were that, what wonder were that, for a young woman
that lies with a man to conceive? This were a wonder not to be wondered at.
Therefore either the Prophet Esaias spoke absurdly, and called these things which
were not such, as though they were such (which was far from that wisdom and
eloquence that was in him,) or an extraordinary Conception, and which exceeded
the bounds of nature, and the experience of the world, is here signified. This
is enough to beat down the Jews, enough in this place: for if I should stand
to refute all their canils, I should seem to forg^t mine Auditory. To the
Infidels, that cry out, It is impossible that a Virgin should conceive, this I
answer, even as Christ did in the like case, That with men indeed it is
impossible, but with God all things are possible. Whatsoever God will, that he
does both in heaven and earth, or speak I this after the manner of the
Scripture, and says not Nature the same? Yes verily. (...). All things are
easy to God, etc. for if any thing were too hard for God, then he were not
God, but that which is too hard for him, should be God rather; since by reason,
he that is strongest and above all, he only deserves the name of God. It
remains therefore, that all things a^^ subject to God, subject to his
pleasure, subject to his motion; then Nature specially, then he may alter it as
it pleases him. Indeed, Beloved, though he has made a Law for all his
creatures; yet he has not made a Law for himself, he will be brought unto
subjection to none. He is and will remain Liberrimum agens, a most free Agent.
Therefore let no man say, (no Infidel, nor any whatsoever,) This is not wont
to be done, therefore it cannot be done. I do not see how it may be done,
therefore it is impossible: for surely he speaks rather madly then foolishly,
that speaks so; since there be infinite examples, and in all ages to the
contrary. Why? naturally we know the Lord has made the sands for bounds to the
Sea, and has appointed the same to check the billows thereof, etc. and yet
many alive have seen the same to range over its banks, and to carry away with
it whole Towns and Shires, etc. So naturally man only has the gift of speech
(and not presently after his birth, but he must stay a certain time,) but yet
when it pleases God to show a miracle, even Asses have spoken, and Oxen at the
Plowe, and a child in his mothers belly. I do not tell you fables, but
stories. So naturally Wheat does increase by sowing, first the blade, then the
stalk, then the ear, etc. but yet the Learned know, that it has not only
rained down wheat diverse times, but it has been found growing in the knee of
a child. So naturally it must be the hand of a man, and joined to the body that
must write, and he that will have bread, must have flower kneaded and baked;
and he that will have shields, must have the Smith to forge them; and he that
will have a well, must dig deep for it, etc. And yet, who knows not of the
fountain of water, that the dry iaw-bone of an Ass yielded to Samson? Of the
writing of the ten Commandments? And of that on the wall, before Belshasar,
without the hand of man? Of the feeding of Elias by Ravens, A^cil^^*
and of the same Manna which came down from heaven? Now shall any man be so
unreasonable, as to say, Because these and the like things cannot be done by
man, therefore they cannot be done by the higher powers? or, Because he never
saw the like done in all his life, therefore the like was not done in any age?
Then by the same reason, Because there are no knives in this Land made of other
matter then of metal, therefore I may deny, that in the Indies the savage
people make their knives of Flint stones, (as also the manner was in old time
among the Jews,) which yet they that have traveled thither, do most
constantly avouch, or because salt is not otherwise had among us, but by
boiling of bryne, therefore we may discredit such as have delivered it in
writing for a truth, that in diverse parts of Sicily, and elsewhere, they have
their salt for digging, even as we have stone, or cole. Or briefly, because
with us there i^ no water to be had, but from fountains or from brooks, or
from the like; therefore I will condemn it for a fable, that there should be
in one of the Canaries, a Tree of that miraculous virtue, that the very leaves
thereof be a Wellspring of water, yielding and pouring it down (as from a
conduit, nay, as from a great spout) in such abundance, that there is
sufficient for the Inhabitants and for all comers. For as in these matters, we
believe more then we have seen in our Country, upon the report of them that
have made trial thereof elsewhere, upon their report, I say, by word of
mouth; so why should we not as well believe their writings of old, that have
registered such strange and prodigious things done before time, though we in
our time have had no experience of the like? Thus much for answer to them that
are hardly brought to believe miracles: and so, that a Virgin should conceive,
except they could see the like done in their time. But now to answer them more
familiarly. What if without any miracle at all, even by the demonstration of
natural experiments, the same may be made probable; will they then relent and
give over their obstinacy? Surely as Tertullian thought good to demonstrate the
Resurrection, by the Phoenix, Tertull. de resurrect.

August. secundo de doct. Christian.


which repaireth himself by his ashes, and as Austine thought good to
demonstrate our Regeneration by the Snake, which casts his slough from year
to year: and as our Savior Christ himself borrowed an example from the wind,
to show the secret and invisible working of the holy Ghost: So if we shall take
upon us by familiar and natural examples, to show the possibility of a Maidens
conception, I hope it will be well enough taken, especially since I mean not
to stand upon it, but only to touch it, and not to enforce belief from the
incredulous, but to draw assent from the flexible. This therefore I say (which
yet is not my saying alone, but Origens and Basils, and Ambrose his too, for
the most part:) that in certain birds and fishes, and beasts, the Lord has
drawn, as it were, certain pictures and resemblances of this mystery, to
condemn the incredulity of the incredulous, and to make Faith more probable to
us. And what be those unreasonable creatures that conceive without the male?
Truly of foul, the Vultur, as Tertullian remembers, (besides the other
Authors which I named even now.) For fish, the Erythinus, as Pliny reports:
for beasts, certain Equae Hispanicae, remembered almost by every writer: also
for Insects, the Be. Now he that works these strange things in these
creatures, and by these creatures every year, could not he, or is it
improbable, that he should do the same once in mankind, and the same for the
salvation of mankind, especially, since both Prophecy did foretell it, and
Story does auow it to have been done? Thus as the Apostle became a ^^w to the
Jews, to win the Jews; and to them that were without Law, as though he had
been without Law himself, to win such; So to the unbeliever I have made
my-selfe, as it were an unbeliever; and leaving the authority of the
Scriptures, which are all-sufficient, have dealt only by natural experiments,
to prove, if by any means I might satisfy them. This dealing does not want
its warrant, as I have showed already, nor yet has it been void of fruit. For
Arn^bius and Lactantius, their Books have done good, though they reasoned but
from the light of Nature, and (that I may trouble you only with one example,)
Bartholomew Georgeniez writes, that disputing with a Turkish Professor, in the
year 1547. he made even the mystery of the Trinity seem probable, by this
rude comparison of the Sun, that has form and brightness, and heat in it,
and yet is but one, and made the Turk with admiration to exclaim, Allah,
Allah. Therefore all such shadowing out of mysteries is not utterly to be
rejected, if we hap to deal with such who care not for the Scriptures. A
Virgin shall conceive. You have heard first, that a Virgin must be here meant,
or else it is no sign or miracle. Secondly, that it is such a miracle, that
though it be above reason, yet is it not contrary to reason, and therefore the
more easy to be yielded unto by them, that have any reasonableness or equity
in them. Now let us see which kind of Virgin the Lord made choice of, to make
his Mother, for surely she did not choose him, but he chose her, as Christ said
to his Apostles, You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you. The Mother of
our Savior was to be a Virgin, that is no question, and for many causes too.
First, to fulfill this Prophecy, A Virgin shall conceive, and bear Immanuel.
Secondly, to fulfill these Types. The first Adam was made of the hands of God
of the earth vncorupted, vndelued, vnplaned. So the second Adam Christ, was to
be made by the finger of the holy Ghost, of the blood of a Virgin unstained,
and unpolluted. This may be esteemed for one Type. Another this: The Manna, and
the Water in the Wilderness (that I mean, which issued out of the rock,) was
made immediately by the hand of God, without the concurrence of any second
cause: So the true Manna which came down from heaven, and the true Water of
life, which whosoever drinks of by faith, shall never perish, Christ Jesus, I
mean, he was none otherwise to be conceived, but by Gods working. Other Types
might be alleged, as of Aarons Rod which blossomed without ma^s setting, or
watring; of the Gate mentioned by Ezechiel, whereat no man entered, etc. But the
former be sufficient, and therefore I will not trouble you with the latter. A
Virgin she ought to be, we hear, for the excellent Prophesies sake, and to
express the Types which were of it, and so no ^^ubt she was, as testify
Matthew and Luke, and as we are bound by our Creed to believe, Borne of the
Virgin Mary, etc. But what manner of Virgin was she? the fairest, the richest,
the noblest of all the daughters of the East? Alas, these things, though they
be much set by in the world, yet with God they be but vile, even as dongue. He
is not a respecter of persons, as the Apostle says; that is, he respects
not these outward things in any; he looks not upon the outward appearance,
neither upon the countenance, neither upon the height of ones stature, as God
says to Samuel; but if any fear God and work righteousness, he is accepted
of God, Act. 10. Act. 10.
To him will I look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and
trembles at my words, Esaias 66. He that loves me, Esaias 66. John 14.
shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, etc. John 14. These and the
like virtues do please the Lord a thousand times more then either beauty, or
wealth, or parentage, or friends, or the like: for if he had respected these,
he would have gone into the Kings Court, not unto Nazareth; to one that was
sued unto and wooed by Princes; not unto such a one as was thought but a fit
match for a Carpenter; briefly, to such a one as had Kings for her kinsmen, and
Queens for her kinswomen and her familiars, and withal great store of
men-seruants, and maid-seruants, great store of gold and silver; and not to one
that was destitute and utterly void of all these outward comforts, and which
could leave her Son none inheritance, no, not the breadth of a foot. Yet
behold here the good pleasure of the Lord, and his free election, happy unto
the blessed Virgin, most happy, but to the eyes of all the world, admirable.
This poor Maid so base in her own eyes, so little regarded in her
neighborhood, so generally obscure to all the world, was called to that
honor that never woman was called unto, nor shall be. For she was made of God
to kindle that Light within her, which enlightneth every one that comes into
the world; to conceive Him in her womb, that brought forth the whole world
with a word of his mouth; to give him nourishment^, who opens his hand, and
fills all things living with plenteousnesse; to move and carry him about, in
whom we all live, move, and have our being. In a word, she was made to bring
him forth, whose beginning was from everlasting, to swaddle and bind him, who
binds the earth together, that it can never be removed; to give him suck,
that gives her breath; to help him that must save her; to be his Nurse, and
Mother, that was her Father, and Creator, and Redeemer, yea, the Creator and
Redeemer of all the world. And was this (Beloved) a small thing, a small
dignity and preferment? and had not her cousin Elizabeth cause to say unto her,
Blessed art thou amongst women; and her self to rejoice with a spiritual
rejoicing, for that henceforth all generation ^ho^^d call her blessed? And why
this? Because of her outward endowments? No: for you have heard that these are
no inducements to make God to fancy any body. Or for her inward graces and
virtues? Indeed meekness, gentleness, humility, chastity, temperance, piety,
etc. (which same were found in the blessed Virgin* and did abound,) are such
things as God did never despise or abhor. Abhor? nay, they smell more sweetly
in the nostrils of the Highest, then ever did the Garment of Esau unto Isaac;
or then ever did the precious ointment of the Priest, that ran unto the
beard, even unto Aarons beard nay, Raach nichoach. Exodus 29. ver. 18.
then ever did the same Reach nichoach, the same Sacrifice, the same smell of
^est, wherewith the Lord showed himself well pleased, being offered by Noah.
Virtues therefore and good life, be well liked in all, and therefore in a
person so accepted with God, as was the blessed Virgin, they must needs have
been singularly well liked. But was it for the worth and merit of them, that
she was so advanced as she was? O no: for then man might boast of that which he
has received, which yet the Apostle denies that he may, 1. Cor. 4. Then flesh
might rejoice in Gods sight, 1. Cor. 4.
which yet St. Paul denies that it may, 1. Cor. 1. Then Election were of
works, which yet the Apostle proves to be of grace, 1. Cor. 1. Romans 11.
that is, free, and not of works, Romans 11. Yea then the blessed Virginshould
not have sung, My spirit rejoices in God my Savior, But, My spirit rejoices
in God my (debtor.) Then she should not have said, For he regarded (...), that
is, the low ^state (...), my virtue of humility, yea, and my other virtues.
Thirdly, then she should not have said, His mercy is over them that fear him,
(but, His Justice is toward them that obey him) thorowout all generations.
Fourthly, then the Angel should not have said, Fear not, Mary, for thou have
found favor with God, but, Triumph, Mary, for thou have had thy deserving.
Lastly, then the Church should not sing, as it does, at the end of that
Canticle and the rest, Glory be to the Father, to the Son, and to the holy
Ghost, but, Glory be to the blessed Virgin, and Invocation, and Offering, and
Pilgrimage, and whatsoever service may be named (...), and (...) too: for she
prepared her heart to grace, and so merited Ex congruo, and she used the grace
given as she ought to do, and so merited Ex condigno; And lastly, she observed
not only the Commandments of God, but also his Counsels, and so merited for
her self, and for others too, even for all them that will be her Beads-men.
Thus should their song be agreeable to their Doctrine, if they would deal
plainly, and if of the abundance of their heart, their mouth would speak.
And i^deed, so they have sung and taught in these later corrupt times; nor
soundly, but superstitiously, not superstitiously, but blasphemously. They have
made her their Adu^cate, their Spokeswoman, their Patroness: and is that the
worst? They have made her Gods Almner, Gods Steward, Gods Treasurer, which
contains in her the treasures of Wisdom, and Power, and Mercy, and deals
the same at her pleasure: was this the worst? They have made her the very door
by which we enter into Paradise, shut by Eve, opened by her; the very window
whereby God does look upon us with the eye of mercy; the very Ladder of Jacob,
whereby our devotion ought to ascend unto God, and his blessing; descend unto
us. Was this yet the worst? Tru^y no. But as it is said in Ezechiel, so may we
say, Behold greater abominations then these. For they were not content to make
her a Mediator for intercession, but also they make her the Media^resse of
Reconcilement and Propiti^tion, joining her in the Commission of Mercy and
Merit, with our Savior Christ, yea making her many times more merciful then
he. In the prayer of Anselmus, held for current, this is read: He that has
offended, let him cast himself (down) between them both: Pie Domine, parce
seruo matris tuae: pia Domina, parce seruo filij tui, etc. O Pitiful Lord, be
favorable to the servant of thy Mother: O pitiful Lady, be favorable to the
servant of thy Son. Dic mundi I^dex, cui parces* dic mundi Reconciliatrix,
quem reconciliabis: Tell us, thou Judge of the world, whom thou will spare;
tell us, thou Reconciliatresse of the world, whom thou will reconcile; if thou
Lord wilt condemn, and thou Lady wilt reject a poor man that confesses your
virtues lovingly, and his own sins mournefully. Th^s Anselmus most
blasphemously. And were they ashamed of this eu^ll in Queen Mary's days? Nay,
they were not ashamed for a^^ ^he light of the Gospel, that had shined before
unto them. ^or, even in their Primer setforth then by authority, they rely upon
the blessed Virgins merits, as we do upon our Savior, and ascribe unto her
the power and honor of saving, and defending, and delivering, etc. Shall I
recite unto the younger sort, a place or two? for they that are old, may
remember it themselves: In the third hour, thus they read: The dolorous
Passion of Christ's sweet Mother, bring us to the bliss of Almighty God the
Father. And in the sixth hour O blessed Lady, O singular Virgin in perfect
m^ekenesse, all other excelling, deliuervs from the bondage of sin, and make us
meek and chaste in living, make us ever pure life to ensue, guide us ever upon
^ur journey, that we beholding the face of Jesus, may joy with him in heaven
always. Thus in that place; and as bad in diverse others I have not showed you;
as that how they make the blessed Virgin many times more mercif^^l then our
Savior: and how, when Christ was resolved to destroy the world for their
sins, she being moved with pity, became suppliant unto him, and so turned
away his wrath, etc. But because I have other matters behind untouched, and the
comparison being so odious and sacrilegious as it is: Therefore I will forbear
by word of mouth to utter it, and refer them that care for such matters for
Doctrine, to Iacobus de Voragine, and the book called, Sermones Discipuli: and
for examples, to Vincentius and Antoninus, whereout they may have enough to
choke them. You have heard, (Wel-beloued) that it was of Gods mercy and
favor, and of his favor only, that the blessed Virgin was called to that
honor and dignity, to be the Mother of her Lord and our Lord; and therefore as
she most frankly and devoutly confessed so much; so we must beware, lest under
the color of honoring the Mother, (with other honor then of praise and
imitation, which is due unto her) we do not dishonor, and so offend the
Majesty of the Son, who is God blessed for ever. This I have touched the
rather, because many among us be not as yet purged from their former
superstition and Idolatries: but notwithstanding, that they have been
earnestly labored and exhorted, that they would return from their vain and
thankelesse wil-worships, to serve the true and living God (the Creator, of
whom are all things, and we of him; the Redeemer, in whom are all things, and
we in him: the holy Spirit, through whom are all things, and we through him:)
yet without commandment, without praise, without example of any that were
Godly, for certain hundreds of years after Christ: they will needs invoke
the blessed Virgin in their necessities and troubles, nay, put their trust in
her, in deifying a creature, (which Epiphanius does abhor,) and forsaking God
that bought them, by a spiritual kind of fornication, which the Scripture
does every where detest. Well, having spoken so much of the first part of
Christ's wonderful Conception, it is time we now come to the second, namely,
His wonderful Birth.

And bear a Son: Or rather brings forth a Son, ((...)) In which words
the Prophet signifies, that it should not go so hard with the mother, as it
did with those women which Hezekiah spoke of (though allegorically) The
children are come to the birth, 2. King^ 19.3.
and there is no strength to bring forth: Nor yet that the child should be so
unhappy, as Job wished himself to be in the 3. chapter of his book; Why dyed
I not in the birth? or why dyed I not when I came out of the womb? But rather
that it should go no worse with her, then it did with the Church and her
child, Esaias 66. Before she traveled, she brought forth, Esaias 66.
and before her pain came, she was delivered of a Man-child. And again, Shall
I cause to travel, and not bring forth? Shall I cause to bring forth, and
shall I be barren (says thy God?) As if he said, Forasmuch as it is I, and
none other that helps women in their ordinary travels, and gives them quick
speed, or slow speed, as it pleases Me; You may think with your selves,
whether it be an hard thing with Me, to cause the mother to bring forth
without pain, even while you will say, What Is this? Indeed among the strange
and wonderful things, that Bernard said, were in the Mother of Christ, these
were not the least, that she was Sine grauamine grauida, sine dolor puerpera,
her burden was not burdenous unto her, Bernard.
her travel was not painful. Hieronym. contr. Heluid.
Whereto agrees that saying of Hieronym against Heluidius, Nulla ibi
obstetrix, nulla multerum sedulitas intercessit, ipsa and mulier and obstetrix
fuit. She had no Midwife to help her, no Side-woman to assist her; she was
both Mother and Midwife too: and well she might be, bearing, and bringing
forth such a Child, as was free from original sin, (which you know is in
part the cause of women's travel,) nay, which sanctifies whatsoever is
sanctified, and of whose fullness, all do receive, even grace, for grace. This
is He which is prophesied of by our Prophet Esaias, chapter 9. Unto us a Child
is borne, and unto us a Son is given, and the Government is upon his
shoulders, and He shall call him Wonderful, Esaias 9.
Counselor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. This
is he, that was prophesied of by Jeremy: The days come, Jeremy 23.
that I will raise unto David a righteous Branch, and a King shall reign and
prosper, and in his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely*
and this is the name whereby they shall call him, The Lord of righteousness.
This is he that was promised Jacob, Genesis 49.
The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, until Shiloh come. And to Abraham,
and Adam before that; The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head;
Genesis 3.
In thy seed shall all generations of the earth be blessed. And to David, and
Symeon afterward: All Nations shall bless my Son, Psalm. 72.
and be blessed in him. Thou shall not see death, until thou have seen the
Lord Christ. Briefly this is He, that being appointed for the fall, Luk 2.26.
and vprising of Israel, for the gathering of the Gentiles, for the joy of the
whole earth, was, when the fullness of time came, made of a woman, borne under
the Law, that he might deliver us from the curse of the Law, that so we might
receive the adoption of sons. Will you understand a little more of his
nature? Being in the form of God, and thinking it no robbery to be equal with
God, he took upon him the shape of a servant, the substantial form, not the
accidental; there be his two natures, Divine and humane. Will you hear of his
Person, whether it be two, or one, (because of his natures?) The Word became
flesh and dwelt among us, (Here begin again his ^^o natures,) and we saw his
glory as the glory of the only begotten Son of God. Lo, Son he calls him, not
Sons, for all that he was called Word and flesh, that is, God and man. Will you
hear of his kindred, of the time of his coming, of his behavior, of his
miracles, of his Doctrine, of his doings and sufferings? and of the effects of
his doings and sufferings? The time was prophesied of by the Prophets; and by
the Evangelists he is set forth, to have been of the Lineage of David, in the
Town of David, under the government of a stranger, in great humility and
meekness, with powerful Doctrine, with great signs and wonders, with great
and wonderful obedience, even unto death; Finally, to have triumphed over
Principalities and Powers, and led Captivity captive; to have delivered man,
who for fear of death, was all his life time subject to bondage; to set at
peace by the blood of the Cross, both things in heaven, and things in earth;
In a word; He dyed for our sins, and rose again for our Justification. This
is the blessed Babe, of whom my Text occasioneth me to speak, and the memory
of whose Nativity we celebrate this day. But how do we celebrate it? We put on
our best apparel, that we do, and that we may do: but do we deck our
selves inwardly with lowliness of mind, with purity and integrity? etc. that
we should do. We draw near unto God with our lips, that we do, and that
we may do: but do we draw as near with our hearts, with hearty
thankesgiuings for Gods mercies in his Son, with hearty acknowledgement and
repentance for our sins and wickednesses? that we should do. We stand here
before the Preacher, as they that would be edified in their holy faith, and to
learn their duty: that we do many of (...), and that we ought to do all;
but do we care to carry any thing away* and to lay it up in our hearts, and
to ponder it in our minds, and to express it in our lives and conuersations?
that we should do, that is the thing that is necessary. So we will fare well,
as many as are able, and we will lade our tables with dishes, and have plenty
of wine and strong drinks, etc. but will we remember withal the affliction of
Joseph, Amos 6.
as it is in Amos? will we send unto them for whom nothing was prepared, as it
is in Ester? Ester 9.
that is, will we help and relieve them that have need of our comfort? then we
shall do well. Lastly, we will laugh and be merry, and rejoice, and shout* as
in the days of Harvest, as it is in Esaias; we will call for the Violl and the
Pipe, the merry Harp and the Lute, as it is in the Psalm; we will sit up
long, have many conferences with our neighbors, and many songs; and this we
will do, and this we may do. But, shall our songs be of the praises of the
Lord, and our talking of the most Highest? Shall our watchi^g be unto prayer,
not unto unthriftiness; our joy, in the holy Ghost, not in worldly vanities;
our pastime, a sober recreation, not wanton daliance, etc? Then we shall do
well, then we shall please God, then the Lord will say of us, as he did of
Jerusalem, Hephzi-bah, that is, My delight in her. Indeed, as the Apostle Saint
Paul calls us away from the Jewish observation of the Passe-ouer, 1. Cor. 5.
to a Christian and spiritual keeping thereof, not for a day, or a year
only, but thorowout our whole life, saying, Christ our Passe-ouer is
sacrificed for us, therefore let us keep the Feast, not in old leaven, neither
in the leaven of maliciousness and wickedness, but with the sweet bread of
sincerity and truth: So are we to be called upon (Beloved,) and waightily
charged in Gods name, (and so I do charge you,) that in this Feast, you beware
of all heathenish profanity, and all carnal looseness and intemperancie, and
as they that look for the coming of the Bridegroom, and are careful to
show forth the virtues of him that vouchsafed to be borne, and to become man
for their sakes, see that we walk in newness of life. The Gentiles indeed, at
this time of the year, celebrated diverse feasts in honor of their Idols, as
Saturnalia, Vacunalia, etc. wherein they allowed themselves, and their servants
too, (in one of them) all kinds of looseness and knavery. But the Apostle does
declare and testify unto us, that we henceforth should not walk as other
Gentiles, in vanities of their mind, and being strangers from the life of God,
through the ignorance that is in them. Tit. 2.11.
For the grace of God which brings salvation to all men, has appeared, and
commands that we should deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to walk
justly, and soberly, and godly, in this present world. They that sleep (says
Saint Paul elsewhere,) sleep in the night, 1 Thessalonians. 5.7.
and they that are drunk, are drunk in the night: but now we are the children
of the light, and of the day, and God has not called us to uncleanness, but
unto h^linesse. Therefore, it becomes us to cast away the works of
darkness, and to put on the armor of light, and as he that has called us,
is holy, so we to be holy in all manner of conversation. This know, that meat
and drink, and apparel, does not commend us to God, much less does sporting
or reu^lling, much less does chambring, or wantonness, gluttony, or drunkenness,
strife, or envying, or the like: but if any will be in Christ, he must be a
new creature; and if any will celebrate Christ's Nativity aright, he must put
off, concerning the conuersationin times past, the old man, which is corrupt
with the deceiuable lusts of error, and be renewed in the Spirit. Verily for
this cause Christ was borne, that we should be borne again, and he would be
borne again, that we might walk in newness of life. The conclusion is this,
that as Saint Peter says. It is sufficient for us to have spent the time past
of our life, after the lusts of the Gentiles, walking in wantonness, lusts,
drunkenness, etc. And as it is in Exodus, This month shall be unto you the
beginning of months, so we endeavor every one of us, even at this present, to
cast away the works of darkness, and to make an end of those things whereof
we have cause to be ashamed, and henceforth to follow righteousness and
holiness, and charity, and brotherly kindness, and love toward them that
call upon the Lord with assurance of heart. This is the feast of solemnity,
that the Lord requires, this will please the Lord better then thousands of
Rams, or ten thousand rivers of oil.

Let us now come to the Third general part, concerning the wonderful uniting
of two natures in Christ, and what comfort and fruit we may reap thereby. [
And she shall call his name Immanuel.] That we may speak in some order, and
so you remember the better what shall be spoken, this course we will take.
First, we will speak of the party that was to give the name, because it is
said here, She shall call, etc. Secondly, of the giving of the name, or
calling, She shall call. Thirdly, of the name it self, Immanuel, and what
mystery and Doctrine, and comfort is contained therein. The two first parts I
will dispatch very briefly. The last, which indeed is the very kernel, not
only of this Text, but also of the whole Scripture, I will dwell the longer
on, and even spend the chiefest part of the time that is allowed me for this
task. For the first, it may be demanded, why this honor should be atributed
to the mother to give the name to the Child, since Adam gave names unto all
creatures, and not Eve, (if she were then made?) And when Rachel took upon her
to call her second son Ben-oni, Gen 35 18.
her husband crossed it, saying, His name shall be called Ben-iamin. And to be
short, Elizabeth's naming of her son, was not yielded unto by her kinsfolk,
until they had known the fathers pleasure, who called for writing tables,
Luke 1.63.
and wrote, His name is John. This for examples. So for precepts, you know what
Saint Paul says to Timothy, I permit not a woman to usurp authority over the
man. And to the Corinthians, 1. Timoth. 2.
I will that you know, that Christ is the Head of every man, and the man is the
woman's head, etc. The preeminence therefore being in the man, and this being
accepted a matter of excellency and preeminence, to give the name, it would
seem that too much was given to the blessed Virgin, to have this given her. I
answer, That if it were a matter of preeminence indeed, and so much to be
reckoned of, as many wise gossips with us do make reckoning of it, striving
for the same at the Font, as they would do for the wall, or for an vpper-seat:
If (I say) the matter were of importance, and argued superiority, and so not to
be challenged by the women without the leave of the man, etc. Yet for all that,
since the ble^sed Virgin was conceived with child of the holy Ghost, and of
none other, and so not subject to man for her Child, it is no marvel nor no
wrong, that the whole honor (if it be any honor,) of naming the child, be
ascribed to her. For the rule that is in the Decretall is true, (being taken
out of Beda,) Quod non est licitum in Lege, necessitas facit licitum: Necessity
makes that lawful, which the Law dissalloweth, (as our Savior Christ
himself defends David, for eating the shewbread, in the extremity of his
hunger.) Forasmuch therefore, as the blessed Virgin was mother and father too,
as it were, for any earthly father that our Savior had, by good reason is this
honor ascribed to her, being the only earthly party that had interest in his
nature. And verily for this cause especially, do I think it to be said in my
Text, [ She shall call,] and not, He shall be called, or the like, to show the
miraculousnesse of Christ's Incarnation, as being to take nature of his moth^r
without a father. This point is not so weighty, and therefore I will not stand
longer upon it, lest I should seem to bestow in Lenticula vnguentum.

The second point was, of calling or naming, [ Shall call his name.] Here
likewise it may be demanded, Second point.
why the Prophet should tell the Jews, that the promised seed the Messi^h,
should be called Immanuel, that is to say, God with us; and not say plainly,
He shall be God and man both, since it is not so material, what, or how one is
called, but what he is. I answer, granting indeed, that with men it is so, they
be not always (...), their nature or disposition does not agree with their
name, neither to good nor to evil. It has been an observation of the Popes,
that none were worse, then they that called themselves by the most gracious
names, as that Urban, whom they called Turban, for his turbulent nature, and
for troubling the whole world; That Innocent, that they called Nocent, Non est
Innocentius, imo Nocens vere; That Benedict, whom they called Maledict, and A
re nomen habe, Benedic, Benefac, Benedicte, aut rem commuta, Maledic, Malefac,
Maledicte. This for Popes: The like writes Epiphanius of Noetus the Heretic,
^piphanius.
that like as we use to call our Dog (though he be but a Curre,) by the name of
Lion, and the Furies, Eumenidas, that is, gentle, by a kind of Antiphrasis,
etc. So (says he) this Heretic was called Noetus, that is, wise, when indeed
he was (...), a very fool, and senseless in matters of Faith. Thus
Epiphanius. But indeed, what should I bring you one example out of one writer,
when all writers in all ages do afford many? They were not all white, that were
called Albini, nor black, that were called Nigri, nor wise, that were called
Catones, or Catilines; nor little, that were called Pauli; nor faire-spoken,
that were called Aemylij, etc. Thus of Romans. So they were not all honorable,
that were called Cleons; nor the best, that were called Aristophanes; nor the
fairest, that were called Calliae, etc. Thus of the Grecians. So for the
Hebrews, Rehoboam, signifies an enlarger of the people, and he, you know, had
ten Tribes fallen away from him at a clap. So Absalon signifies a peaceable
father: and was there ever any more rebellious child, whom though his father
would have had to escape, yet vengeance (Gods vengeance) would not suffer him
to live? The like may be said of many others in the Scriptures. The like also
of many of our English names. They be not by and by crafty, that be called
Foxes; nor mild, that be called Doves; nor savage, that be called Wild; nor
foolish, that be called Geese; nor unthrifts, that be called, Careless. There
was a Careless, that was so careful of the Kingdom of God, that he chose
rather to be burnt at a stake, then to make shipwreck of his faith. And so
there was a Goose, ( Ioh Hus by name,) that made so so clear and sweet
confession of the Truth, that never Swanne in the world made a sweeter. On the
contrary side, there have been Constants, that have been unconstant, and
Hardings, that have been timorous; and Loves, that have been unloving, etc.
All which together does more then prove, that though Conueniunt rebus nomina
saepe suis, though men's names do express their natures many times, yet it is
not so always: they are given, being good, rather of wish, then of Prophecy,
and being bad, rather upon occasion, then for cause, and rather mockingly then
truly. Thus I grant it is with men and their names that they give; they be not
certain demonstrations, no, nor prob^ble arguments of the dispositions of any.
And why? Because man has no power of himself, neither to foresee what shall
betide his child, neither for wealth or woe, nor to instill virtue into him,
nor to reclaim him from vice. But it is not so with God; he is of another
insight in matters, and of another ability. The darkness hides not from him,
the darkness is as clear as the light, Psalm, 139. He declares the last
things from the beginning, Esaias 46. He saw Nathaniel under the Fig Tree, John
1. All things are naked and bare unto him, with whom we have to do, Hebr. 4.
Thus neither place, nor time, nor covering excludes Gods providence; no more
does any thing exclude his power, or hinder the executing of his purposes. When
Metellus a Tribune sought to cross Caesar in a determination that he had, Caesar
looking sternely upon him, bade him be quiet if he loved his life, and added
these words, that he could more easily put him to death, then speak the word.
Now if this be the power of a frail mortal Prince, that he can most easily
make good his word, even as easily do as speak: Then how can we without
sacrilege, without horrible sacrilege, rob God of this honor, being true
in his saying, and true in his calling? And so calling the Mediator Immanuel;
why should we doubt, but that it is as good as if he had said, The Son that
the Virgin shall conceive, shall be very Immanuel? Verily though man gives
names but at adventure, as the blind man casts his staff, yet Gods naming
does collate and bestow the gift or ability that is promised by the name, as
appears by the example of Abraham, the father of the Faithful, who together
with the name, received the assurance of being the father of many Nations,
according to the signification of the said name: As may appear also, and that
especially, by the name of our Savior in the Gospel, who does as truly save
the people from their sins, as he has the name of a Savior given unto him.
Well, hitherunto you have learned two things; The one why, it is said, She, the
mother shall give the name, namely, because the blessed Babe was to have none
other parent upon the earth, and therefore by reason, she the fittest, and
only fit to appoint the name. The other point is this, that it is nothing
derogatory to the truth of Christ's Deity, that it is said in my Text, He shall
be called Immanuel, and not said, He shall be Immanuel, since with God, to call
so, or to cause to be so, is all one, and so is it to be such indeed, or to be
called such.

Let us now come to the third and last place, to the name it self Immanuel.
What it signifies, you have heard me tell you more then once, and you may read
your selves, Mat. 1. Immanuel.
Therefore I stand not upon that; but this I will stand to, and do assure you,
that of all the names that are given to our Savior in the holy Scripture, none
does so fully and plainly express both his nature and Office, as does this.
He is called, I grant, Shiloh, the Branch, and a Child, and the Son of man:
but those show onley his humanity. So is he Jehovah, the Word, the Father of
Eternity, etc. but these show only his Deity* so is he Jesus, christ, and the
Counselor, and the Lamb of God, and our Passover, and Amen, etc. But these
show only his Office, or the end of his coming into the world. But now
Immanuel, it does show and express neither Christ's Deity only, nor his
humanity only, nor yet his Office only, but together with his Deity, his
humanity, and together with his humanity, his Deity, and together with both
natures, the identity of his person, and together with the unity of his Person,
and the diversity of his Natures, the whole sum and complement of his
Offices. In so much that as Saint Paul says, The whole Law is comprehended in
this one saying, Love thy neighbor as thy self: So we may say, The whole
Gospel is comprehended in this one word, Immanuel. And to the end that you may
be satisfied, that I offer no violence to the Word, nor seek to draw from it,
that which is not in it, do but consider with me the very Etymon or deriuation
of it. Does it not signify, as you have heard, even Grammatically, God with
us? Now in that this is delivered but by one name, what does this but imply,
that he is but one person? for if more persons had been here meant, more names
would have been here given. And in that he is called God, what does this prove
less then his Deity? And in that he is said to be with us, that is, in our
nature, what does it prove else, but the truth of his humanity? And lastly, in
that the whole name is given as a pledge of Gods favor and reconcilement
toward us, what other thing but the end of all his Offices, of Kingdom, of
Priesthood, of Prophecy, is expressed, and comprehended? Now therefore
(Beloved,) consider with your selves, whether this Word be worth your
consideration, and whether, if we stand longer upon it, we shall either
mis-spend the time, or abuse your patience? It is profitable (certes) nay,
necessary to salvation, that you be rightly persuaded concerning the Nature and
Office of our Savior Christ. For God has given us everlasting life, and this
life is in his Son, as Saint John says. And this is eternal Life, to know
Thee the only God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ, as Christ himself
says; And to know Christ, and the virtue of his Resurrection, and the
fellowship of his afflictions, etc. The same Saint Paul prefers before all
advantages whatsoever, Hieronym.
Phil. 3. And Hieronym, against the Luciferians, Quae est ista simplicitas,
nescire quod credas, etc? What simplicity is this, to believe you cannot tell
what? He believed simply, what did he believe? By which places you see, that as
the knowledge of Christ is required, if we mean to be acknowledged of his
Father; so this knowledge must not be a general conceit, or notice only that
there is such a one, and that some thing he has done: for so we shall shoot
but at an uncertain mark, and strive as they that beat the air, (as Saint
Paul says,) but we must know in particular, what great things he has done,
and from what abundant love he did it, and with what fierce enemies he
encountered in doing it, and for what kind of persons he did that which he did;
and lastly, in what miserable estate we had been, if he had not done it. And
is this so easy a faith, that it may be gotten with once opening of our eyes,
or conned by one stans pede in vno? or have we not need rather to search the
Scriptures, as Christ spoke, and to Take up and read, Take up and read, as
Augustine was admonished, and to attend to those things which the Preachers
teach us, as Lydia did to Paul's Doctrine? As I say, we are to give our
diligence, that we may be skillful in the whole book of God, in the whole
doctrine of our Salvation; so especially it shall behoue us to get by heart,
and have in a readiness such Sentences as do summarily and briefly contain
the mystery of Christ's Incarnation, and the chief benefits of his
Mediatorship. And such a place of Scripture is this that I have in hand, yea
such a word is this Immanuel; so rich, so effectual, so full of Doctrine, and
consolation, if you do not so much tell the syllables, as prize the weight,
and do not so much content your selves with the outward bark and rind, as
with the inward substance and pith. Consider therefore of it again, and
again, and mark me opening and unfolding of it. This therefore I say, that in
this word, is couched together both Christ's Nature, and his Office. His Natures
of two kinds, both Divine and humane, and yet but one Person: his Offices,
though diverse for functions, yet all tending to this one end, to set us at
peace with God, and to unite him unto us. [ he shall call his name Immanuel, or
God with us.] Now to prove unto you (Well-beloued,) that Christ is God, very
God, as Saint John speaks; God blessed for ever, as Saint Paul calls him; I
hold it superfluous before Christians, since not only the whole Scripture
being given by inspiration from God, does auow so much; The Law, the Prophets,
the Psalms, the Apostles, the Evangelists, etc. but also the Father himself,
the Word himself, and the holy Ghost himself, those three in heaven: and upon
earth, the works that he did, far exceeding the power of any creature, and
especially the raising himself from death the third day, together with the
bodies of many Saints that had slept longer. Thus as Aratus says of Jupiter,
Aratus.
(...): All streets are full of Jupiter, and markets, and the Sea, and Ports,
etc. So is it true of Christ and his Deity, that he has filled all places with
the glory thereof, and so the same needs not to be proved or demonstrated: no
more needs his humanity, whereof besides his birth and shape, and growing,
his hunger, his thirst, his faintness, and weariness, his fear and
shrinking, his stripes and buffetings, his reuilings, his cruel and bitter
death, and lastly his burying, be abundant witnesses. So be there also
evidences enough of the unity of his Person in two Natures, even in these two
places of Scripture, John 1. The Word became flesh, and dwelt among us, and we
saw the glory of him, etc. He does not say of them, though he were both God and
Man, Word and Flesh. And John 3. No man ascends into heaven, but he that
descended from heaven, the Son of man which is in heaven: he does not say
Sons, as of many, but Son, though he speak of such a manner of existence,
which is not incident to one nature. Christ therefore is but one, but his
Natures are two, Divine and Humane, both true, both perfect, yet inseperable,
and vnconfused; For neither has the Deity swallowed up the humanity (so
thought that wicked Heretic Eutyches,) neither has the humanity made a new
person from the Deity (as thought that vile miscreant Nestorius.) But
howsoever, according to his Deity, he be equal to his Father, invisible,
impassible, incircumscriptible, etc. and according to his humanity, he be like
to us, even of the same nature with us, corporal, visible, real, having flesh
and bone, and a reasonable soul as we have; yet as is truly taught by
Athanasius, He is not two, but one Christ: for if there were two, then the
Prophet should not have said in my Text, ( She shall call his name,) but, She
shall call their names. And the Apostle should not have said to Timothy, 1.
Timo. 2.5.
There is one Mediator between God and man, but, There are two Mediators, the
Son of Mary, and the Son of God, yea then he could not have said truly as
he does, that God was in Christ, and that God was manifested in the flesh, or
that the Princes crucified the Lord of glory: which places do most strongly
euince the Deity not to have been separated from the humanity, being once
assumed, (but in death,) nor the humanity to make an (...) of it self, but
both together, concurring in the person of (...), (which yet was a perfect
Person before he assumed our nature) to make up the Head of his Church, even
the Savior of his body, that is, the Savior of all that believe. Now having
spoken so much, which was contrary to my promise, and contrary to my meaning,
of the unspeakable union of two Natures in one Immanuel: let us consider a
little of the causes hereof, to wit, why God would descend into the world, and
become man? and then add something touching the use of the Doctrine, and so an
end. (For as touching his Offices, I have spoken of them out of another Text
upon pregnant occasion, and so I may do again upon the like.) Touching the
first, Augustine has a good speech, Tali auxilio and natura nostra indigebat
and causa, August. S^r. 53. de ^em^ore.
Our nature and our cause stood in need of such an help, Vt repararet genus
humanum, nec sine Maiestate posset humilitas, nec sine humilitate Maiestas,
that neither humility, or base estate could repair mankind, without a
Maiesticall, nor a Maiesticall estate, without an humble or base one. And why
so? Fulgentius will tell us, Fulgentius de I^carnat. Christ. cap. 8.
D^us verus and viuus, imo Deus veritas and vita, etc. God being true and
living, nay, truth and life it self; if he had not been true Man, could not
have tasted of death; and if he had not been true God, he had not overcome
death. Thus Fulgentius. Let this be one cause of the uniting of two natures in
one Mediator: as he must be man to taste of death, so he must be God withal
to overcome death. A second cause is rendered by Irenaeus, Irenaeus, lib 2.
Theodorit. Dialog. 2.
(and is to be found in Theodorit) (...)* etc. And he united man to God: for if
man had not overcome the enemy of man, the enemy had not been conquered
lawfully: and if God had not given Salvation, (...), we had not had it safely,
nor surely. He adds a little after; It became the Mediator of God and man, by
his neerenesse to both, to bring both into amity and agreement, as well to
offer up man unto God, as to make known God unto men. Thus Ireney; of whom you
have learned a second reason, and not only a second, but a third too. For as
this is one, The Devil must be overcome by that nature that had offended, and
so by man, and the recovered state of man must not be subject to change, (as
was his estate in Paradise,) and therefore to be settled by God; so this is
another, and a strong one too: He that will take upon him to reconcile two
(being so far at odds, as God and man were,) must participate in the nature
and disposition of them both, that so he may the better have access, and
reconcile them. Thus in effect Irenaeus. A fourth reason may be this, drawn
likewise from the Justice of God; There must have been some proportion
between the sin of Adam, and the satisfaction for the said sin. Now the
sin of Adam was of infinite guilt, in as much as it was committed against a
Person of infinite Majesty and glory, (for such a one is God,) therefore the
satisfaction must be of infinite price and value, which could not be performed
by bare man, whose work and meriting can be but finite. As therefore he was to
be man, that in that nature he might yield obedience and suffer: So he was to
be God, and was God indeed, that, to that nature he might yield efficacy, and
estimation to his suffering, and to his Sacrifice. These reasons be effectual
and good. There be also other reasons of this mystery, yielded by Anselmus and
others, but as it is said the 2. Sam. 23. Of Benaiah, that he was honorable
among thirty, but attained not unto the first three. So we say of those other
reasons, that they may have their place and their use, but nothing comparable
to the former, which we have heard, and therefore I will not trouble you with
them. Let us consider now in the last place, what use we may make of this
Doctrine, that we have such a Mediator, such an Immanuel. The use thereof is
manifold, but principally it sets before us Christ^ great love toward us;
And how great was that love? The Grecians commend Codrus highly, for that he
stripped himself of his Kingly Robes, and put on rags, to deliver his
Country from danger. So the Romans commend Brutus (Iunius Brutus,) for
concealing his prudence and worth, and taking upon him the gesture of an Idiot,
to set his Country at liberty. So our Stories talk much of a certain
Countess (as I remember) or a Lady, that yielded to great deformity and
debasement, to purchase the liberties of a certain City. And surely all these
and the like, (for many such examples may be produced) should have wrong
offered them, if their love toward their Country should not be acknowledged to
have been exceeding great, and if for the same they should not be extolled and
advanced. But yet, to say the truth, what comparison between the love of these
persons, and of our Immanuel? For these did, even what they did, for their
Countries which had deserved well of them, and so might challenge an interest
in them; but alas, what had mankind done for Christ: or what could it do to
move him to the least indignity for their sake? Again, these laid down only
such base stuff, (in comparison) and clothing, as would have been fretted by
the moth, or worn out in short time, etc. But Christ laid aside as it were,
and shifted himself ((...)) of his glorious Deity, wherein he might challenge
an equality with his Father without sacrilege. Philip. 2.6.
Lastly, these how high soever they should have held their heads for a season,
or what countenance soever of gravity or wisdom they should have set upon it,
yet by death they should have been brought low enough, and then necessarily
have left all; but now Christ might have retained that glory which he had with
his Father from the beginning, unto all Generations without impeachment, and
he needed not at all to have humbled himself; and therefore doing it
voluntarily, he did it the more lovingly. Thus by these circumstances of the
persons for whom, of the thing which, of the manner how, the Love of Christ
toward us, is not rhetorically amplified, but plainly demonstrated. Now
(Beloved) if Christ so loved us, if so exceedingly, so far beyond all
utterance or conceit of man, in that he vouchsafed to take upon him the form
of a servant, even our vile and contemptible nature, is he not to be loved
again for the same? Is not his Word to be embraced, his Commandments to be
observed, his benefits to be acknowledged, his saving health to be desired, and
to be longed after? The Prophet Jeremy is angry with the Jews, for saying they
were wise, Jeremy 8.8.
and yet rejected the Word of God, and therefore, (says he,) What wisdom is
in them? So Saint John Apocal. 3. is angry (in Christ's name,) with the Church
of Laodicea, for saying she was rich, and increased in goods, and had need of
nothing, when as she wanted the true riches, Jesus Christ. And do we think
that our Savior will not be angry with us, if we say we love him, and yet will
not do as he has bidden us? if (I say,) our Love be in word only, and not
in deed, and in truth? We think (alas,) that we be Lovers good enough, if we
can say, Lord, Lord; and, Christ was a good man, and did many goodly matters
for us, etc. But as the Prophet Malachy says, Offer this unto thy Prince, and
see if he will accept thy person; So say I, Offer this unto thy neighbor, and
see whether he will be content with such Love. I pray you was the Father in the
Gospel, well pleased with his Son, that refused to labor in his Vineyard,
because he had said, I will, Father? Or does Saint James allow that for
charitablenesse, if one say to his brother, Depart in peace, Warm your selves,
and fill your bellies, and yet gives them not those things that are needful
to the body? Even so the Love toward Christ, that is in the lips only, and
not in the heart; in profession only, and not in practice; in a show only,
and not in true obedience; it profits nothing at all, it is but as a sounding
brass, or as a tinkling Cymball. Therefore if we will not have Christ to come
against us quickly, for receiving so many blessings in vain, we are to
approve both our good acceptance by thankfulness, and our thankfulness by
Love, and our Love by obedience, and our obedience, by avoiding that which he
forbids, and ensuing that which he commands; And then he will say, O good
servants, nay, O good friends: (for we are his friends, if we do that which
he commands, as Saint John speaks,) nay, behold my brethren, and my
sisters; for whosoever shall do the will of the heavenly Father, Math. 12.
the same shall be Christ's brother, and sister, and mother. Thus much briefly,
concerning some part of our duty which we owe to our Immanuel, for vouchsafing
so to debase himself for us, and to take our nature. Now as the consideration
of the benefit should provoke our dutifulness, so may it also confirm our
hope in all dangers that shall beset us, whether bodily or spiritual. Many are
the dangers whereto Gods children are subject; from professed enemies, from
secret, from the air above, from the company about us, from evil humors
within us, etc. When we lie down, we know not whether we shall arise; when we
ride forth, we cannot tell whether we shall come home. When we send our
children abroad, we cannot tell whether we shall ever see them again; when
our cause is never so good, we cannot tell whether it will not be carried away
by false oaths, and indirect practices. Now what is our comfort herein? God is
with us, we will not care what man can do unto us: God is on our side, who
then can be against us? Who, or what can hu^t them, that Jesus Christ
vou^hsafed to be borne for, and has received into prot^ction? Does not his
very name teach us, that he is with us? Then to them that love God, and are
beloved of God, all things must work for the best, whether it be tribulation,
or anguish* famine, or poverty, or imprisonment, or loss of friends, Romans 8.
or loss of children, or loss of living, or whatsoever. In all these bodily
assaults, we shall be more then Conquerours: so shall we be also in the
spiritual. Our sins do threaten Gods vengeance upon us, our consciences do
accuse us, the Law contains matter of indictment against us, the Devil
follows the suite, all the creatures of God which we have abused, all the
calling of God which we have neglected, all the threatenings of God which we
have despised, etc. do witness against us: In a word, the Lord sits in his
Throne as an angry Judge. Hell opens her mouth wide, being ready to swallow
us up. The world forsakes us, our friends have no power to help us: what is
to be done in this case, what shift shall we make, what place of refuge shall
we fly unto? Only this is our comfort, that the Son of God became the Son of
man, to make us the Sons of God; vile he became, to exalt us; poor, to enrich
us; a slave, to enfranchise us; dead, to quicken us; miserable, to bless us;
lost (in the eyes of the world,) to ^aue us. Lastly, partaker of our nature, of
our infirmity, of our habitation, to advance us to his Kingdom and glory, that
is, to be unto us according to his name Immanuel, God with us. God to enlighten
us, God to help us, God to deliver us, God to save us. To him, with the
Father, and the holy Ghost, be all glory and honor, for ever and ever. Amen.

A SERMON UPON THE FIRST TO THE ROMANS. THE FOVRTH SERMON,
ROMANS 1. verse 16. For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is
the power of God to salvation to every one that believes, (...).
both to the Jew first, and to the Greek.


I AM a debtor (says Saint Paul) both to Greeks and Barbarians. Do you ask,
What Is that to the Romans, who are neither Greeks, nor Barbarians? Then I tell
you further, says he, I am a debtor to the wise and to the unwise, ((...),)
that is to say, to all: then I hope, to you: and in respect of this my debt, I
was as forward as a man might be, (yea, and yet I am,) to preach unto you among
the rest, the Gospel of Christ. For howsoever it be to the Jew a
stumbling-blocke, to the Greek ^oolishnesse; how soever the Jews call (...),
the Gospel; ^uen-gelion, that is, a Revelation of vanity, and the Greeks
traduce it for a Doctrine of nouelty, (May we not know what this new Doctrine
means?) yea for a Doctrine of Devils. (He seems to be a setter forth of
strange Devils, (...), Act. 17.) Briefly, Act. 17.
howsoever it be spoken against every where, nay, proceeded against by the
censure of the Church, and the sword of the Civil Magistrate, yet for all
that, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, it has been the joy of my
heart, and it shall be; I have professed and published it with my mouth, and
will ever: Come famine, come sword, come nakedness, come most exquisite
torment, nothing shall make me to pluck my hand from the Plowe, or repent me
of my calling. What if it does not profit some that hear it, because they do
not mingle it with faith? yet to other some, it is the good savor of life unto
life; what if some despise it, as they do the whole Counsel of God to their
destruction? yet other some receive it with much striving, and it is dearer to
them then gold, yea then much fine gold. It is indeed mighty in operation, and
effectual toward them that believe, yea, and to work faith in them, who
formerly did not believe, to incorporate them into the body of Christ, and to
save their souls in the D^y of the Lord Jesus.

This may suffice for the opening of the Coherence, and the plain and natural
meaning of the verse, wherein note with me two things: First, a constant
resolution in the Apostle, to hold on his course, (i am not ashamed, etc.)
Secondly, a ground or reason, of that his resolution, For it is the power of
God, etc.


The resolution is most godly, and the reason most sound: therefore the one to
be laid up in our understanding, the other in our heart, both to be so learned,
and practiced, that we become new men, and be changed into the same Image, as
the Apostle speaks. Seneca has a good speech and a sensible, Ali^^enta quae
accepimu^, Seneca Ep. 85.
quamdiu in sua qualitate perdurant, and solida innatant stomacho, onera sunt,
etc. The food or nutriment that we have taken, as long as it abides in its
own quality, and floteth whole (and indigested) upon the stomach, is a burden,
but when it is altered and changed from that which it was, then it strengthens
and turns into blood: In like sort (says he,) let us deal with those
lessons and instructions, that we receive for the nourishing and ripening of
our wits; let us not suffer them to continue whole and unaltered, but let us
concoct them and digest them, otherwise they will be for our memory only, and
not for our wit. To this effect he. And to the same purpose say I, Let us not
be like those filthy belly-gods, that swallow down their meat whole without
masticating, and pass away their drink without any concoction, as they
received it in. This is not to feed so on the word of God, that we may grow
thereby; no: but having once taken it into the stomach of our soul, by the
virtue attractiue, we must there heat it and cherish it by the virtue
retentiue: yea, as the veins of our Liver do not suffer the nutriment that
we have received, to abide still in the stomach, but do suck out of the
same, that which is wholesome, and convey it to the Liver by the veins,
whereof it is turned into blood: so it becomes a godly soul, not to suffer
any part of the Word which he hears, to pass away without fruit, but to
apply the same to his heart and conscience, and to make use of the same, both
for belief and sanctimony. But let us return to our Apostle; I am not
ashamed, etc. If any might lawfully be ashamed thereof, a man would think
Saint Paul might; for had he not been zealous of the traditions of the
Fathers? was he not a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee? did he not persecute
this way, even to the death? did he not make havoc of the Church of God? how
then could he without note of inconstancy, change his note, and sing a new
song? How could he go about to plant the Doctrine, which before he plucked up?
preach the faith which before he destroyed? Indeed if he had stood upon the
day of man, or upon man's judgment, if he had stood upon his credit in the
world, his reputation with his friends, his rising and advancement in dignity,
his pleasure, his profit: he might in some sort have smote upon his thigh, and
covered his face for sorrow and shame, that by giving his name to the Gospel,
he had stripped himself of all worldly comforts and advantages. But now Saint
Paul cared not for any of these things, neither was his life dear unto him, so
that he might fulfill his course. He was careful to please him that had
chosen him to be a Soldier, chosen him to his calling; and for other respects,
he stood not upon them, yea, the things that might have been vantage to him,
he counted them loss for Christ's sake, yea, he judged them to be dung, that he
might win Christ. This was the Apostles resolution: and was not the same a
godly one, and a wise, and to be imitated by us all? There are, and ever have
been some, who into what persuasion soever, Quasi tempestate delati sunt, they
have been carried by whatsoever wind of vanity or superstition of their
friends, or subtlety of seducers, the same they think themselves bound to
retain and maintain, even for constancy sake. Have I been so long of this
opinion, and now shall I change? what will men say? What foolish men say, it is
no matter, (...), Clemens Alexa^.
said Cleanthes, by the testimony of Clemens Alexandrinus, Fear not
vniudicious and impudent judgment of the multitude. And Saint Paul, I, if I
should please men, were not the servant of Jesus Christ: But now I will tell
you whose speeches you should fear: Fear them that show themselves to fear
God, and to have a right judgment in all things; that have their wits
exercised in the Word, and do prove what is the good will of God, and
acceptable and perfect; these men's verdict seems to be of great moment, and
to give light to that inquest that passes of life and death, truth, and error.
Therefore if those condemn you for altering of your course, I cannot blame you
to starkle; but now there is no such matter: wise men teach, and have ever
taught, that it is not so much to be enquired, How long, either he or our
Fathers have held an opinion, but, How consonant the same is to Gods revealed
will? That must be the Touchstone of our faith, and the Lodestone of our
persuasion. Quum nobis intenditis aver sionem a Religione priorum, Arnob. 2.
cont. Gent^s.
causam conuenit vt inspiciatis non factum, nec quid reliquerimus opponere, sed
secuti quid simus potissimum contueri, says Arnobius: When you object to us
our falling away from the Religion of our Elders, you ought to consider the
cause, and not the fact, not to tell us what we have left, but to mark what we
have followed. So he. There is a way that seems to be old, and yet it was but
lately found out in comparison. Again, there is a way that seems to be but
of yesterday, and yet it was but purged and renewed then, it was not then made.
What was Mishnah to M^rah, (...) to Deuteronomy? that is to say, the leaven of
the Scribes and Pharisees, to the sweet bread of Moses and the Prophets? yet for
all that, the same was dubbed with the honorable title of the Tradition of the
Elders, ( Math. 15.) yea, and equalled for esteem, with that which was known
and confessed to be the undoubted Word of God. On the contrary side, what more
ancient then the Doctrine of the Gospel, which has testimony from the Law and
the Prophets, yea, before the Law was written? yea, before the first Adam was
cast out of Paradise, Mark 1.
it was; yet for all that, we find, Mark 1. that all amazed, they asked, What
new Doctrine is this? Christ's own preaching was accused of nouelty: and so we
have heard already, how Saint Paul was accused to be a setter forth of new
Devils, or gods, (for the gods of the Gentiles were Devils,) and the word (...)
is (...), and signifies either a good Angel, or a bad,) and so in the
Primitive time, it was one of the ordinary objections of the Pagans* Why, your
Sect began but in the later time of the reign of Tiberius; was all the world
deceived till then? Had God no care of the people before, etc? To whom the
Fathers answered in those times, as Learned men do in our times. First, (...),
that is, Old Singers be not always true Singers. Callimachus.
And Austine, (or an ancient Writer bearing his name, August. Quaest. 114 ex
Vtroque t^stamento mi^tum.
) Per traducem antiquitatis commendatur fallacia, Falsehood (and guile,) is
(many times) commended through the Pipe (or devices) of antiquity. Secondly,
thatour Religion is wro^ged, when it is charged to be new; Non quod sequimur
nouum est, Arnobius.
sed nos sero didiscimus quidnam sequi oporteat and colere, etc. That which we
follow is not new, but we have learned but of late, what we ought tofollow
and worship, etc. Thirdly, Reuelatione sacta veritatis, cedat error verita^i,
etc. The truth being revealed, let error (how ancient soever,) give place to
truth. (So a Father in a Council holden under Cyprian in Carthage.) For as
Ambrose said against Symmachus; Ambros. cont. Sym.
Nulla aetas ad pe^ discendum ser a est, nullus pudor est ad meliora transire;
No age is too late to learn, it is no shame to proceed to the better. Saint
Peter was at the first of opinion, that it was unlawful for a lewe, to keep
company, or come to one of another Nation. So Act. 15. Act. 10. Act. 15.
Certain that were of the Sect of the Pharisees, (Nazarites,) believed,
thought, and taught, that we must be circumcised, and keep the Law of Moses,
even the Ceremonial Law, or else we cannot be saved. But afterward St. Peter
was let to understand, (and so were those believing Pharisees too,) that
Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision nothing, but Christ is all in all;
and as many as be in Christ, are delivered from the curse of the Law, and from
the bondage also. So Saint Paul, whilst he was in Iewishnesse, was most
zealous of the Traditions of the Fathers, and a most bitter enemy to the
Gospel; who but he? but after it pleased God, (who separated him from his
mothers womb, and called him by his grace,) to reueile his Son unto him, and
to make known to him the Doctrine of the Gospel, whereby he might save
himself, and those that heard him; did he once communicate with flesh and
blood? or did he as much as deliberate, whether a cancred and inueterate error
were to be forsaken and changed, for a new and saving truth? No, no: but
presently he joined himself to the true Church, howsoever he had scorned, nay,
detested it, and raged against it before; and chose rather to be a dore-keeper
in Gods house, then to be a great Rabby in the Synagogue of mis-beliefe. Thus
Saint Paul was not ashamed of the Gospel, for all the nouelty thereof, (as the
world counted nouelty.) No more let any of us be at this day for the like
imputation, Where was the Gospel before Luther, who lived within these hundred
years? or before the Bohemians, (of whom John Hus, and Hier^me of Prague were
chief,) who lived within these two hundred and sixty years at the most;
before Wickliff, who lived within these three hundred years at the most;
before the Waldenses, and Pauperes de Lugduno, who lived within these four
hundred at the most; before Henry of Tholous, who lived within these five
hundred years at the most; before Johannes Scotus, and Bertram, who lived
within these six or seven hundred years upward toward Christ's time, and of
five or six hundred years from Christ downward? Add these times together,
and then what great prescription, not only antiquity, can our adversaries
brag of? It is certain, that as God never left himself without witnesses
under the Law, no more did he under the Gospel; And as he raised up true
Prophets which opposed themselves to the false prophets, that brought in
damnable Doctrines; and (Keraim) Textuall, men that stuck to the Word written,
that withstood the Pharisees, which made void the Commandments of God with
their Traditions: So did he in these later corrupt times, (for in the first
four or five hundred years, we claim and can prove, that the learned, and
grauest writers, be, in the chief Controversies of Religion, wholly on our
side,) always stir up some that professed and maintained the truth that now
we stand upon, and by the like grounds out of the Word of God: and this we can
show out of our Adversaries writings, who you may be sure will not speak or
write the best of them. And have we then any cause to be ashamed of the
Gospel, which, howsoever it has been trodden down, yet it was not so in the
best times, and yet never so, but that God left himself still a remnant, that
could not be brought to bow the knees to Baal, or to worship the Beast? Now,
as we are not to be ashamed of it, neither for the falsely so called newness,
nor for that some of our selves were peradventure for a great while of another
persuasion: so ought we not chiefly for the holiness, pureness, and soundness
thereof. The Pharisees, and as many as were carnally-minded, would have Christ
to restore the temporal Kingdom to Israel, and to free them from the yoke of
the Romans: but now the Gospel assures us, that God has delivered us from
the power of darkness, and translated us into the Kingdom of his dear
Son, in whom we have redemption in his blood, even the forgiveness of
sins. And whether is more spiritual? The carnally-minded Jews would have
Jerusalem only to be the place, where men ought to worship, and the Tribe of
Leui only to be the Sacrificers, and the flesh of Bulls, and Goats, and
Lambs, and Rams to be the special Sacrifices: But now the Gospel teaches
us, that not in Jerusalem, nor in the Mountain, but the true worshippers
worship God in sincerity and truth, and that we are all become a Royal
Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar people to offer up spiritual
Sacrifices, (the Sacrifice of righteousness, the Sacrifice of a contrite
heart, the Sacrifice of thanksgiving, the Sacrifice of Alms,) acceptable to
God in Jesus Christ. And whether is more pure? The Pharisees and their Disciples
taught and believed, Josephus.
that man had Free Will, (witness Josephus,) to that which is good, as well as
to that which is bad: That if a man keep the more part of the Commandment,
though he transgress a few, yet he is righteous with God, witness Burgensis
in ^ac. cap. 2. add. 1. Burgens.
That if a man will be Chasid, that is, an holy man indeed, he must have
Ribbith letorah, he must supererogate, and do more then the Law has
prescribed, witness the Jewish books; briefly, that by Korban, by that which
they offer to their box, men might be discharged of their bounden duty to
their Parents; That by fasting twice a week, by using much washing, by Touch
not, Taste not, Handle not, etc. they were more just then others, witness the
Scribes. But now the wisdom of the Gospel speaks on this wise, touching
Free Will, No man comes to Christ, except the Father draw him; we are not
sufficient of our selves to think a good thought, as of our selves, etc.
Touching the keeping of the Law, that if a man will live thereby, he is a
debtor to abide in all the Commandments of God, to do them, that if a man
keep the whole Law, and fail in one, he is guilty of all, etc. Touching
works of Supererogation, and voluntary observation, that howsouer they have a
show of wisdom, yet for as much as they are after the Commandments and
doctrines of men, they do all perish with our using, Coloss. 2. For in vain
do they worship me, Coloss. 2. M^th. 15.
teaching for Doctrine men's precepts. Who can tell how often he offends? Lord,
purge me from my secret faults, says the Prophet. And will any dare to brag
of his good works, yea, that he has done more then he is bound, whereas in
many things we offend all, as says the Apostle? and, All our righteousness is
a as filthy clout, as the Prophet Esaias speaks. De nullo gloriandum, Esaias 1.
quia nostrum nihil est, says Saint Cyprian; and v^e laudabili vitae nostrae,
si remota misericordia consideretur, as excellently Augustine; and whether
Doctrine, I pray you, more sound, more sauouring of piety, more tending to
humility? Thus we have showed the excellency of the Gospel above all
Pharisaisme, and Iewishnesse, and therefore that there was no cause, why any in
those days should be ashamed of it. Shall I now let sink my speech, and enter
into a comparison between the Gospel and new Pharisaisme, (Popery, I mean?)
Beloved, I do not call sour, sweet, to adorn the Doctrine that by authority
is set forth within this Realm, with the title of the Doctrine of the Gospel;
neither do I call good evil, to liken our Adversaries positions to the
leaven, wherewith the Pharisees would have marred the relish of the Gospel
taught, and preached by our Savior and his Apostles: for we are able to prove,
that howsoever we be termed by them Nouatores, New-fanglers, such as have
forsaken the path of our Forefathers, and gone beyond the bounds which our
Elders have put, yet that we broach none other Doctrine, but that which we find
in the fountain of the Prophets and Apostles, which are the only authenticke
Penmen, and Registers of the holy Ghost; and that their Doctrine, howsoever
they would grace it with the gravity of Antiquity, yet it is no more ancient
then the Country and habitation of the Gibeonites was, far remote and distant
from the Land of Can^an, for all that they took to themselves old sacks, and
old bottles, and old shoes, etc. we are able so clearly to prove, that we
fear not any indifferent judgment. Let us take a short view of some of the
most material differences between them and us. The Supremacy of the Pope, is
an Article which they chiefly stand upon, him to be Christ's Vicar, Paramount,
Supereminent, and Universal, above all persons of the world; they make it a
matter of faith, his decisions to yield unto, as proceeding from irrefragable
authority; they make it a matter of conscience; his precepts simply to put in
execution, they import a flat breaking of the Commandment of God; they think
themselves tied in obedience, Lucan 1.1. ^ag. 22. Gloss. in decret. 1.1. tit.
7. Causa 17. quaest. 4.. Siqui^.
lussa sequi tam velle mihi quam posse necesse est, nec ciuis meus est, in quem
tua Classica Caesar audiero. Papa habet ^oeleste arbitrium. De iudicio summi
Pontificis alicui disputare non licet. What word for this? That which Nicholas
the third alleges De electione, cap. fundamenta in Sexto, and Leo distinct.
19. Their sound went into all the world, etc. And why? This makes rather
against them, then for them; for it is said, their sound, as of many, not his
sound, as of one, that is, Peter: But yet principally of Peter, that from him
as from a certain head, he might shead his gifts as it were into the whole
body. Thus the foresaid Ni^holas in the foresaid cap. Fundamenta. Beloved, that
Christ ascending up on high, gave gifts to men, and that of Christ's fullness
we receive grace for grace, I read, Ephesians. 4. and John 1. But that Saint Peter
should be the head, or the neck either, by which they should distill, Tertull.
I do not find, Scriptum esse doceat Hermogenis of ficina. Oh, but Christ
said not in vain, Feed my Sheep, feed my Lambs. O, but he said no more then
Saint Paul said to all the Elders of Ephesus, Feed the flock of Christ,
whereof the holy Ghost has made you overseers. But what feeding is meant? A
Civil rule and government, with the sword and Scepter, after the manner of
Princes? O no: Disce Sarculo tibi opus esse, non Sceptro, vt opus facias
Prophetae, Bern. 1. de consi.
said Bernard: Learn thou, that thou have need of a weeding hook, (or the
like tool,) and not of a Scepter, that thou may do the work of a Prophet.
Saint Paul says: We together are Gods Laborers, ye are Gods husbandry, and
Gods building. Whereby you may easily learn, how that place of Jeremy 1.
(whereof the Popes in the Sext, and Extrauagant, would take hold, but it
runs into their hands for their labor: I have set thee over the Kingdoms,
to pluck up and toroo^e out, and throw down, and to build,) is to be
understood; namely, not carnally by force of arms, or brachio seculari, for
when did the Prophet exercise any such authority? He denounced Gods judgments
against the impenitent Nations: but as for force, he used not any, or made head
against the least of Nabuchadnezzars Captains: his weapons therefore were not
carnal, no more then the Apostles were, yet mighty through God* to cast down
holds. What holds? Casting down imaginations, and every high thing that is
exalted against the knowledge of God, and bringing into subjection every
thought to the obedience of Christ: So does Lyra himself interpret that place
in Jeremy (Thou shall pluck up, and plant, and destroy, etc.) that is, Thou
shall denounce thatthey shall be destroyed. So does Ambrose interpret this later
of St. Paul, He brings into captivity every thought, while he does by reason
overcome the gaine-sayer, and induces him to the faith of Christ, etc. You see
therefore, that howsoever the Popes Supremacy be a Doctrine that sounds forth
from Rome, and is their Gospel, or gladsome tidings, yet it is not part of the
Gospel of Christ, whereof St. Paul was not ashamed; he would have bin ashamed
of this sauouring only of the pomp of this world, nay, exceeding the pomp of
the proudest Tyrant, and not of the humility of Jesus Christ, Not that we are
Lords of your faith, but helpers of your i^y, 2. Cor. 1. Then St. Paul
disclaimeth Sovereignty, even in spiritual matters; So does S. Peter, The
Elders I beseech, which am a fellow Elder. I beseech, I do not command, your
fellow Elder, Not your Lord or Sovereign. And for the obedience to the Civil
Magistrate, they are both plain. Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers, Romans 13. Every soul (...), etc. Though thou be an Apostle, Chrysostom.
though an Evangelist, etc. says ^hrysostome, (if an Apostle must be subject,
then he that calls himself Apostolic, much rather,) and 1. Pet. 2. Submit
your selves to all manner ordinance of man. Which if it be so, then to Kings,
as to the chiefest. Shall we cavil with Innocent III. and his Gloss, cap.
Solitae decret. sect. prim. That because it is said (Tanquam praecellenti,)
therefore that it is a similitude only of preeminency, and not preeminency
indeed, 1. Pet. 2.13.
that is to be understood? This indeed is an interpretation that they may be
ashamed of: for if Tanquam there, do signify a similitude only, and not a
truth, then in the next words, (Be subject to Rulers as sent of him,) Rulers
were not sent indeed, but as it were sent. Which is so shallow a shift, that it
is not worth the confuting. Of like moment is the other, which Innocent, and
the Gloss has in the same place, that it is a Counsel and not a Commandment
( for the Lords sake;) If we will supererogate, we may, but we are not bound*
Whereas it is evident to every one that has but half his eye open, that Saint
Peter has the same meaning that St. Paul, namely, to yield obedience, not only
for fear of man and of punishment, but also, and especially, for love toward
God, and for conscience sake. But I have stood ouerlong upon this point of the
Romish Gospel, touching the authority of the Bishop of that See, and touching
his shameless eluding of such places as make for the Princes Sovereignty. It
is well said by Optatus, Cum supra Imperatorem not sit nisi solus Deus, etc.
Optatus. 1.3.
Forasmuch as there is none above the Emperor, but only God, who made the
Emperor, while Donatus ex^olleth himself above the Emperor, he had now as it
were exceeded the bounds to esteem himself as God, and not as man, etc. Let
him of Rome think that of Optatus, to be spoken to himself: and so I leave
him for that matter. What if I should now enter upon an Antithesis, between
other points of the Romish Gospel, and the true Gospel of our Savior Christ,
should there not be matter of shame, and confusion ministered to our
Adversaries, and to us of glory and rejoicing? Their Doctrine of the Head of
the Church militant, you hear is carnal, while they rejoice in a thing of
naught, and make flesh their arm; also seditious, while they will have him to
be (...), to meddle out of his Dioces, and to have an Oar in every Princes
Boat. Now what is their Doctrine of the body it self, the Church? what of the
food thereof, the Word? what of the badges and seals thereof, the Sacraments?
what of the Keys thereof, the power of binding and loosing? what of the
exercise thereof, prayer and fasting? what of the life thereof, Faith in the
Son of God? what of the Iustifier and Savior thereof, Jesus Christ, and
that, with that one bloody Sacrifice of his body and blood once for all, etc?
As Tertullian says, (De praescript.) Ipsa Doctrina eorum cum Apostolica
comparata, Tertullian. de praescript.
ex diuer sitate and contrarietate suapronuntiabit, non Apostoli alicuius
authoris esse, neque Apostolici, etc. Their Doctrine it self being compared
with the Apostles Doctrine, by the diversity and contrariety thereon, will
pronounce that it came not from any Apostle, nor Apostolic man. So if we lust
to enter the comparison, we shall soon find how much their Doctrine
differs from the Gospel, and how agreeable ours is to it. We teach that
Christ's true Church, being his body, and a Communion of Saints, consists
only of such as belong to God; They, that it comprehends bad as well as
good, Reprobate, as well as Elect: They, that the visible Church is discerned
by multitudes, and succession of Bishops, etc. We, that it should be rather by
purity of Doctrine, and sincerity of ministering the Sacraments. Whether truer,
and more consonant to the Gospel of Christ? Does not our Savior teach, that
when he comes, he shall scarsely find faith in the earth? Where then be
multitudes, and the visibility thereof? Does not Saint Paul, that after his
departure, there should enter grievous Woolues? What reckoning then of
Succession? Male v^s pari^tum amor caepit, etc. Your love that you bear to the
walls (of the Church,) is but a bad love. You do evil to reverence the Church
by roofes and buildings, etc. Anne ambiguum est in ijs Antichristum esse
sessurum? Is there any doubt, but Antichrist will sit there? Montes mihi and
Spinae, and Lacus, and Carceres, and Voragines, tutiores sunt; i^ illis enim
Prophetae, aut manentes, aut demersi Dei Spiritu prophetabant: Mountains, and
Woods, and Lakes, and Prisons, and deep Caves, are safer for me, (I may more
safely have recourse to them for direction and safety,) for in them the
Prophets did either abide, or being drencht there, did prophecy. Thus Hilary
against Auxen^ius. Hilar. con. Aux.
As for the Word (the Food of the Church,) how many ways (blessed God!) do
they adulterate it, or make it unprofitable, and so make it no Gospel at all?
They equal their Traditions, (they call them the Apostles Traditions,) but
while they cannot show them in the writings of the Apostles, Non accipio quod
extra Scripturam de tuo infers, as Tertullian says,) with the written Word of
God. Tertullian*
(So does the Council of Trent,) yea, the Decretall Epistles of the Popes:
Inter Canonicas Scripturas Decretales Epistolae connumerantur. So has my
Gratian, did. 19. in the Title, and the Gloss also takes it so. I know not
whether they be ashamed of it, and have corrected it in the later Editions.
This is one way. Again, they keep it in an unknown tongue, as it were under
lock and key, or a book that is sealed; or if it be translated by Godly
Learned men, they storm as much as Alexander did, when he heard that
Aristotle's books, Aul. Gellius.
(wherein he would be only cunning) were published: nay as much as Herod was
troubled, and all Jerusalem with him, upon the news that Christ was borne, for
that now their Kingdom was near to an end. They pretend that it is not well
translated by our men, and therefore they are so much against it: but why do
not they translate it better? Why in their forty seven years of leisure (for
so many it is since they left their Country) have they set forth the New
Testament only, and that in such sort, as all men may plainly see, how much
against their hearts it is, that the people should have any knowledge of the
Word of God, whereby they might discover and reprove the falsehood of their
Doctrine? They that would not have a Lion, or an Elephant to stir, they
hudwinke them. They of Mitelene, when they would use their subjects like
slaves, and oppress them with tyranny, took order that they should not put
their sons to school, and that they might learn nothing, witness Aelianus.
The like practice Nahash the Ammonite attempted with them of Iabesh-Gilead,
Aelian. 1. Sam. 11.
That if they would have peace, they must buy it with their right eyes. If you
will have this applied, take the simplest of the people and make them applyers.
Their Kingdom is a Kingdom of darkness, (dumb Images for their Teachers,
dumb signs in the Mass, for their Preachers; dumb, or not-vnderstood
Service, for their devotion, etc.) And therefore without darkness, and
ignorance, it cannot be vpholden. Come we to the Doctrine of the Keys of the
Church. Christ delivered to Peter, and in him to all the Apostles, (as Origin,
Cyprian, Chrysostom, Augustine, and which not of the ancient Fathers do
teach?) the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven, not of the earth, not of any place
under the earth. They give authority to their Pope, to dispose of earthly
Kingdoms at his pleasure, and full Jurisdiction over Purgatory, which they
take to be under the earth. Christ teaches us to pray unto God for
forgiveness of sins, (Forgive us our trespasses.) They fall down before
their ghostly Father, and crave of him Absolution. Against the judgment of
Cyprian, Veniam peccatix, quae i^ D^minum commissa sunt, solus potest ille
largiri, Cyprian. Sermon. 5. de la^sis.
qui peccata nostra portauit, etc. He only can grant pardon to our sins,
which we have committed against the Lord, who only bare our sins. Against
the judgment of Hierome, who plainly teaches (in Math. 16.) That as the
Priest in the old Law did not make any clean or unclean, Hieronym.
but only showed in what case they were; So in the New, the Bishop, or Priest
does not bind such as are guilty, nor loose such as be faultlesse, but
according to his duty, he hears the varieties of offenses (or offenders,
Peccatorum,) he knows who is to be bound (to wit of God,) and who to be
loosed. Thus Hieronym. Briefly, Christ said to the Thief upon the Cross, and
in him, to all that are truly penitent, This day shall thou be with me in
Paradise: Thou shall be translated from death to life, and forthwith too,
without suffering any thing, any where after this life. They teach, that though
the sin be forgiven in the Sacrament of Penance, yet that the punishment must
be endured in Purgatory, if there be not satisfaction made, either here, by
giving of Alms, gadding in Pilgrimage, etc. or hence by the Priests Masses, or
by the Popes Pardons; provided, that both be well paid for. What is to make
merchandise of the Word of God? what to make merchandise of the souls of men,
if this be not? Neither is their doctrine sounder touching the exercise of the
Church, Prayer, and Invocation. Saint Paul says, that he had rather speak in
the Church five words with his understanding, that he might instruct others,
then a thousand with a strange tongue. Yea, Lyra himself, though he lived in a
most dark time, yet saw thus much, Si populus intelligat orationem Sacerdotis,
Lyra
melius reducitur in Deum, and deuotius respondet Amen, etc. If the people do
understand the prayer of the Priest, he is better reduced unto God, and does
more deuoutely answer Amen. What do our Adversaries? Do they that which is
better and more devout? No, they serve the people with Latin Service, which
they do no more understand, then they do the Turkish language: and so,
whether they bless them, or curse them; speak to them, or speak to God, they
cannot tell. Were it not all one, (for understanding and edifying,) to be in
Cyclops Cave, where (...), as in such a Church? Euri^id. in Cyclo^s.
This for the manner of their prayer. So for the object, Saint Paul would have
us to lift up pure hands to God, 1. Tim. 2. And our Savior, 1. Tim. 2.
whatsoever ye ask the Father in my Name, he will give it to you. And
Augustine, Quis andiuit aliquando fidelium stantem Sacerdotem ad Altar, etc.
Aug. 8. de Ciuit. Dei, cap. 27.
Who has heard at any time a Christian Priest standing at the Altar, etc. and
say in his prayer, O Peter, O Paul, O Cyprian, I offer unto thee a Sacrifice,
whereas in the Oratories dedicated to their memories, the offering is made to
God, who made them both men, and Martyrs? If no Sacrifice be to be offered,
then not the Sacrifice of prayer; if an outward or visible Sacrifice be not to
be offered to them, much less then an invisible and spiritual. But now how is
it with our Adversaries? As the Prophet vpbrayded the Jews, According to the
number of thy Cities, be thy gods, O Israel; So may we say to them, According
to the number of thy Provinces, nay of thy Towns, nay of thy Churches, nay of
thy Trades, nay of thy persons, be thy gods, thy Saints, thy Tutelares dij. God
the Father was shunned and abhorred, as one that dwelled in the light that no
man can have access unto; nay, as one that had Foenum in Cornu, and with whom
there was no dealing. God the Son was forgotten, as one that was gone into a
far Country, or that was asleep, and needed to be awaked (like Baal,) or
that was wearyed with hearing suites himself, and therefore, for his ease had
appointed certain Deputies under him, as Darius did, or certain Masters of
Requests, to report unto him the several suites of his subjects, as many
Christian Princes have; whereas for power, He is God, and can perfectly save
them that come to him themselves; and for will, He became man, and weak, and
was tempted, that He might be touched with a feeling of our infirmity. And for
credit with his Father* you know what is written, Math. 3. This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased. Therefore, as Saint Peter says, Lord, to whom
shall we go, thou have the words of everlasting life? This for the matter of
Doctrine and instruction; so for the matter of prayer and supplication, we may,
and ought to be of Augustines resolution, Tutius and incundius loquor ad meum
lesum, quam ad aliquem Sanctorum Spirituum Dei: August. de visit. mort. l. 2.
cap. 2.
I find it more safe and sweet, to speak unto my God, then to any of the
Saints of God. Now for the causes of our salvation, and the means thereof;
does the Scripture set down any other meritorious cause, then the Death, and
Passion of our Savior Christ? or any other mean, or instrument, to take hold
of the same, then Faith? God has given us eternal life in his Son, ( John 5.)
The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. 1. John 1. Act. 4.
Unto men there is no name given by which they may be saved, but only the Name
of Jesus Christ. The Scripture has concluded all under sin, Gal. 3.
that the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ should be given to them that
believe, Gal. 3. And to be short, As many as received him, to them he gave
power to be the sons of God, even them that beeleue in his Name, John 1. Thus
Christ is made to be the meritorious cause, to be the author and finisher of
our Justification, and Salvation, and Faith is made the isntrumental;
Therefore, if they like not of the Doctrine, we may say to them, as Constantine
did to Acetius, (...): That they were best to make a new Ladder to clime vpto
heaven by, Socrat. li. 2. and Suidas.
since the Ladder of Jacob will not serve the turn. Will you know how they
shift off such a cloud of Testimonies, and what is their doctrine? When they
are pressed with those places that do plainly make Christ to be the Alpha,
and Omega, the beginning and ending of our Salvation, etc. they grant he is so
in this sense, that he gives grace to men to work righteousness, and to
merit for themselves; but as for the imputing of Christ's righteousness unto us
believing, that they make a jest at, even as their forefathers the Heathen did,
Irridere fidem Christianorum and iocularibus facetijs lancinare, Arnobius.
as Arnobius says: yet Saint Paul says, Romans 5.19. As by the disobedience of
one man, many were made sinners; so by the obedience of One, many shall be made
righteous. How were we made sinners by one man's disobedience, that is, Adams?
Was not the same imputed to us, and laid to our charge, as if we had been
actual transgressors with Adam, and had bin in Paradise with him, and had
eaten of the forbidden fruit, as well as he? Even so we must have Christ's
obedience and sufferings imputed to us, as though we had suffered, and done as
much as the Law requires in our persons, or else we cannot be presented
blameles in Gods sight. Neither has this Doctrine seemed strange to the
Fathers; Pro delictis nostris ipse precatur, and delicta nostra, Augustine in
Psalm. 22.
sua delicta facit, vt Iustitiam suam nostram iustitiam faceret: He prays for
our offenses, and makes our offenses, to be his own offenses, that he might
make his righteousness to be our own righteousness. Thus ^ugustin. Bernard
also, that I trouble you with no more, was of the same mind: Cur non aliunde
iustitia, Bern. in Cant. Se^m. 23.
cum aliunde reatus? Why may not righteousness come from another, as well as
guiltiness comes from another? As if he said, Might the first Adams sin be
imputed to us, and may not the second Adams righteousness be imputed as well?
But to whom. The Scripture is so plain; God so loved the world, that he gave
his only begotten Son, John 3.16.
that as many as believed in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.
Ye are saved by grace through faith, and that, not of your selves, it is the
gift of God, not of works, lest any man should boast himself, Ephesians. 2.8, 9.
Ephesians. 2. In which words the Apostle does set down the two maine causes of
our Salvation; the first and efficient whereof, is grace, that is, the grace of
Christ; the second, faith, being the isntrumental, (...). He does not say,
(...), as if the quality inherent in us could merit any thing in the matter of
our Justification, without respect unto Christ, but excludes that together,
with all worth and works of ours. Not of works, says the Apostle, and
renders the reason, lest any man should boast; signifying, that because God
would bar all flesh from glorying in his sight, and have all the glory
himself therefore; therefore that works are wholly excluded from being causes
or instruments of our saving. But there must be an end of the former part of
our discourse, except we will have the later altogether untouched. Come we
therefore to the reason or ground of St. Paul's resolution. [ For it is the
power of God to salvation, to every one that believes, etc.] Every word of
this reasonisa reason; how strong therefore is the reason? I cannot be ashamed,
says S. Paul, of power, specially of such power as is Divine, specially of
such Divine power as saves, specially of such that saves not him that
meriteth, but him that believes, specially, such as saves not two or three
believers, but every one without exception. And such a thing is the Gospel,
therefore I cannot be ashamed of it. The major of whose Argument we will first
consider of briefly; and then we may insist upon the minor more at large.
Phocion, that worthy Athenian, being sent and employed by Chabrias, (then in
the chiefest office) to gather the tribute of the Ilanders, and with twenty
ships; made answer: That if he were sent to fight, the Navy was too small; if
to friends and companions, in waste; it was too great, one ship might serve the
turn. The like is written of Tigranes King of Armenia, that when he espied the
Roman Army containing not above eluen thousand of horse and foot, his being
of above 200000. he despised them in his heart, saying, If they come as
Ambassadors, they are too many; if as Soldiers, too few. So in the Book of
God, namely, 1. Reg. 20. When Benhadad, 1. Reg. 4.
that had so great an Army, that he vanted, saying, The gods do so and so unto
me, if the dust of Samaria be enough to all the people that follow me, for
every man an handful; and was otherwise, so puissant, that thirty two Kings
did help him; When he, (I say) saw the servants of the Princes, as it were a
forlorn Company embatteld against him, Whether they be come out for peace,
take them alive, or whether they be come out to fight, to take them alive. So
also Numb. 13. Numb. 13.
When the Spies that were sent out to search the Land of promise, made report
of it, that all the people that they saw there, were men of great stature,
even Giants, the sons of Anak, and that themselves were in comparison to
them, but as Grassehoppers, the whole Congregation lifted up their voice, and
cried, and wept all the night, they were so much abashed at the report of their
power. By which examples, (that I produce no more,) you may see, that as
opinion of power and strength makes the one part bold and courageous, so
feebleness, and weakness dismayeth and confounds the other. Thou art not
able to go and fight with yonder Philistine, (said Saul to David, 1. Sam. 17.)
For thou art a boy, and he is a man of war from his youth. So, lest any
should say to our Apostle, You threaten to come to the Romans, -- Rerum
Dominos gentemque togatam, and to bring your Gospel with you. Alas, what can
you do? what can it do? Your bodily presence is but weak, your speech rude,
your words but wind, nay distastefull, and unwelcome to all the world. Is it
not every where spoken against? Does any of the Rulers, Consuls, Tribunes,
Pretors, etc. believe on Christ, but only a few of the rascality, which know
not the Law? Lest any, I say, should say so, the Apostle answers for
himself, that he knows what he does, the Word that he brings, is not his
own, but His that sent him: the Gospel that he preaches, is not weak, but
mighty in operation, able to cast down strong holds, and whatsoever opposes
it self to it: It is power, and therefore what can it not do? Yea, it is the
power of God, that is, such a powerful Instrument, as whereto God promises a
blessing, and force for ever, therefore shall it stand out to the end. What if
the Romans be mighty? Yet he that dwells in the heavens, is mightier. What
if he be a strong man armed, that keeps the house? Yet when a stronger then
he comes, he will take away his armor wherein he trusted, and rifle him. If
God be on our side, Exodus 33.14.
if his presence go with us, as Moses said, we shall find all things work for
the best, to bring men to faith, and consequently to Salvation. Therefore says
Saint Paul, In nothing do I fear mine enemies, neither am I ashamed or weary
of the Gospel, it will have the preeminence, it will prevail in the end,
maugre all adverse power and policy. We see therefore, that the first part, or
major of Saint Paul's reason is firm, namely, that we are not to be ashamed
of that which is powerful. Now for the Minor or second part of the Argument,
namely, that the Gospel is the power of God. That, that I say, is no less
clear, it will many ways appear. First a pronunciatis. Saint Paul that could
not lie, having the seal of his Apostleship, and of infallible truth from the
holy Ghost, says it is so in my Text, therefore it is so, even a Divine power
and powerful Instrument, able to convert souls to God. Secondly, a genere:
The whole Scripture is given by inspiration from God, 2. Tim. 2.
and is profitable to teach, to improve, to correct, and to instruct in
righteousness, that the man of God may be absolute, etc. Which cannot be done
without the power and Word of the Lord, which (without exception,) is lively
and sharper then a two-edged sword. Then the Gospel which is a part of the
Word of God, Heb. 4.12.
that must be powerful. Thirdly, a fortiori, The Law that was given by Moses,
and written in tables of stone, that was powerful, it gave light to the blind,
wisdom to the simple, converted the soul, etc. Psalm. 19. Therefore the
Gospel, which was delivered by our Savior Christ, and had more precious
promises, and a greater largess of the holy Spirit, that must needs be
powerful. Fourthly, ab exemplo. Did not all wonder at the gracious words that
proceeded out of our Saviors mouth, when he interpreted to them the Gospel of
the Prophet Esaias? (for even before the Apostle* were borne, the Gospel was, it
was from the beginning.) Was there any of the Synagogue that could resist the
Spirit, whereby Saint Stephen spoke, for he was full, (and so was his
Doctrine,) of the holy Ghost, and of power? Does not Saint P^ul say, that if
all prophecy, (that is, preach and expound the Gospel,) and there come in one
that believes not, or is unlearned, he is rebuked of all men, and is judged of
all, and so the secrets of his heart are made manifest, and so he will fall
down on his face and worship God, and say plainly, that God is in you indeed,
1. Cor. 14? Lastly, Ab effectis, more plainly. As the lightning comes out of
theEast, and shines to the West, Math. 24. And as the Suns going forth is
from the end of heaven, and his compass unto the end of the same, and none hid
from the heat thereof, Psalm. 19. So the efficacy and working of the Gospel
was so sudden, and so wonderful, that Saint Paul could say for his part only,
that from Jerusalem round about unto Illyricum, he caused to abound the Gospel
of Christ, Romans 15. And for his time, that the Gospel was come unto all the
world, and was fruitful, even as it was among them. These wonderful effects
it wrought, even while the Apostles were alive: what marvel then, if shortly
after the faith was so generally spread, that Arnobius could say, Nationibus
sumus in cunctis; We Christians are in all Nations? Arnobius cont. Gentes.

Iustus Martyr. ad Diognet.


And an hundred years before him, Justin Martyr, (...), etc. That which the
soul is in the body, that we Christians are in the world; the soul is
scattered through all parts of the body, so are Christians in all Cities of the
world, etc. And between them both Tertullian in his book against the Jews,
Tertull. ad^. Iudae^s.
(that I speak of no more,) says, Even the Getulians, Moors, Spaniards,
Galls, and Britannorum inaccessa Romany l^ca, And the Britans Land, which the
Romans could not have any footing in, the Sarmatians also, Germans, and
Scythians, do believe in Christ, before whom the Gates of all Cities are
thrown open, and none are shut against him; before whom also the Iron locks
are broken, and the brazen Gates are opened, that is, the hearts of very many
that were holden fast locked by the Devil, are now unlocked by the faith of
Christ. Thus Tertullian. You see therefore how the Gospel did show it self
plainly to be the power of God by the hasty and general spreading of it. The
same may appear also by the strength of the forces, that it did overcome and
throw down. If it had had to do with Infants lately weaned from the breast,
that had received no former impression, that were not seasoned with this or
that liquor, it had been no mastery to have brought them to the faith of
Christ, who were not rooted or grounded in any other, nor could make resistance
to any persuasion, -- Argilla quiduis inuitaberis vda, says he. And no hard
matter for Turks to make our Christian children Mahumedists, when they snatch
them from their parents in their tender years, before they can discern
between good and evil; as it was no matter for the Spaniards to conquer the
naked Indians: Benzo, an Italian traveler, that had been long in those
Countries, reporting, that he durst be one of the twenty five that would fight
with ten thousand, nay, twenty thousand of them. Salmacida spolia sine sanguine
and sudore. But now to encounter not ignorance only, but error, not easily
taken out of a deep die; strong illusions of Satan,
long-continued-will-worship, generally-receiued superstition, Oracles,
enchantments, Idolatries, (and the same flourished over by wit and eloquence,
counte^anced by authority, strengthened by miracle, vpholden by Tyranny;) What
could this be less then the wisdom of God, and the power of God, who was
mighty in his Gospel, and through his Gospel, specially since it had to
wrestle not with flesh and blood only, but with Principalities, and Powers,
even with the whole Host of hell? When the Centurion saw the earthquake, and
the things that happened at our Saviors Passion, he confesses, saying, Truly
this was the Son of God. Nay, the Sorcerers, Exodus 8. when they saw the dust
turned into Lice upon Aarons smiting the ground, they readily acknowledged that
it was the finger of God. Nay, Protogenes (in Pliny,) upon the sight of one
small line drawn in his painting Table, Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 35. cap. 10.
s^pposed presently that Apelles was in Town; Therefore we cannot escape just
reprehension to (speak the least) if being compassed with such a cloud of
witnesses, and hearing such a volly of reasons, proving and demonstrating the
power of the Gospel, we shall not justify the assertion of Saint Paul, and
even as the people cried out upon proof that Helias made, The Lord, he is God,
The Lord, he is God: So we may exclaim, The Gospel is the power of God, It is
so, it is so. What are we to learn hereby, that the Gospel is the power of
God? Truly, we of the ministry thus much, that howsoever many times, when we
look upon the froward opposition that the world uses to make, and upon our
own wants, we begin to draw back with Moses, or to run away with Jonah, or
to forswear prophesying and preaching with Jeremy, etc. since we shall but
speak in the air, we shall labor in vain and for nothing. Who will believe
our report? To whom will the Arm of the Lord be revealed? Shall horses run
upon the rocks, or will men plow there with Oxen? Shall we go about to teach
them that do glory in ignorance? (Amant ignorare, cum alij gaudeant
cognouisse, Tertullian.
) to inform them that stop their ears, and are ready to run upon us, as they
did upon Stephen; in a word, to persuade them that protest they will not be
persuaded? What are we, that we should hope to do any good? men compassed
about with infirmities; men of great imperfections of conceit, of memory, of
utterance, of presence? Therefore, our instruments being but the instruments of
a foolish Shepherd, as the Prophet speaks, it were best for us to put up our
Pipes, and to hang our Harpes upon the Willowes, and to sit down under our
Gourds; as good to sit still, as to rise and fall. To whom, me thinks, I hear
the Lord make answer as he did to Peter, What God has cleansed, (has
sanctified to a special use,) do not thou call common; or as he does in
Esaias, Let not the Eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree; or as he does in Jeremy,
Is not my Word even like a fire, Esaias 56. Ie^em. 2^.
and like a hammer that breaks the stone? As if he said, Let them have hearts
as hard as a flint, yet the hammer may break them, at the least, the fire may
consume them. Finally, as he does by our Apostle in my Text, The Gospel it is
the power of God, believe that, and doubt not of success* What weapon or
instrument ever was too weak to effect Gods will, if he took it in hand? Was
not Aarons rod sufficient to work miracles in Egypt? and to overthrow Pharaoh
and his Host in the red Sea? Did not the walls of Jericho fall down at the
blowing of Rams horns? The Madianites murder every one his fellow, at the
clinking of the Pitchers? The great Giant falls groueling to the ground, by the
pat of a sling-stone? And surely, though we have this treasure in earthen
vessels, and the Gospel that we teach, be as contemptible as David's
sling-stone, yet, the Lord will do his work, his strange work, And bring to
pass his act, his strange act; He will do, I say, what he has appointed, by
the weakest means sometimes, Esaias 28.21.
that the excellency of the power might be of God, and not of man, and that
Israel may never say, Mine own hand has saved me. The same Confessor, that
undertook to dispute with the subtle Philosopher in Constantines time, (the
Story is in Ruffinus, Ruffinus and Sozomen.
and Sozomen,) was not the greatest Clerk, nay he seemed to know nothing else,
but Jesus Christ, and him crucified; yet by reciting the sum of his faith,
being agreeable to the Gospel, with great spirit and zeal, he so foiled and
grounded his Adversary, that he forced him to recant, and become a Christian.
So Simplicianus, and whosoever else, did persuade Victorinus, to take Gods
book, Augustine. 8. Confess.
and by name the Gospel in hand, were no body to him for learning, and
eloquence, (for he was most famous for the same,) yet in time, they so
prevailed with him, that they gate him to Church, and to be baptized in his old
age. So, (to come down to these last times at one leap,) The men of Merindol
and Cabrieres in Languedock; Annas Burges in Paris, in the days of Francis the
first, and Henry the second, Walter Myll in Scotland, (that I trouble you with
no more foreign examples, and abstain from domestique altogether,) were not
the subtillest and acutest disputants in those times, nay, some of them are
noted to have bin but plain men: yet such was the goodness of the cause, such
was the power of Gods grace, working with his Gospel, that by these men's
confessions of faith, partly uttered by word of mouth, partly read; very many
of those Doctors, that were employed against them, were converted to the truth,
and by most that were in the assemblies, the Lords Name was glorified. Now I
ask (Brethren,) is God a God of the Jews only, and not of the Gentiles also?
And he that was mighty through Peter, may not he be mighty through Paul? May
not he give a blessing to the Gospel preached now, as well as he did in former
times? Truly, as Saint Paul says, How know thou, O man, whether thou shall
save thy wife? and how know thou, O woman, whether thou shall save thy
husband? Nay, as David said to Saul, I have slain a Lion, and a Bear already,
and truly, this uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them. So we may
persuade our selves probably, nay, be resolved and out of doubt, that our
labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. Finally, but that the Lord will make
manifest the power of the Gospel, and add unto the Congregation daily such as
shall be saved. Therefore let us of the Ministry comfort our selves with these
words, and bestirre our selves against the day of Harvest. The people also are
to learn somewhat by this, (That the Gospel is called, The power of God,)
namely, that they do not resist this power, lest they hale down upon
themselves condemnation. You know what Laban and Bethuel said in a far meaner
case then the case of Salvation: This thing is proceeded of the Lord: We
cannot therefore say unto ye either evil or good. Genesis 24. Act. 5.39.
You know what Gamaliel said, Act. 5. If this work be of God, ye cannot
destroy it, lest ye be found fighters against God, (...). Hom. Il. (...).
Indeed (...), etc. It is hard kicking against the prick: and if thou have run
with the footmen, and they have wearyed thee* Ierem. 12.
how can thou match thy self with horses? If thou smart for disobeying the
Princes commandment, think thou to escape, if thou stand out against God?
It was the saying of a worthy Learned man, that the Orthodoxe Church is an
Anuill, that will rather break the hammer that beats upon it, then be broken
by it. And we may be bold to say of the Word of truth* the Gospel of our
Salvation, that it is of such power, as that same stone cut without hands, Dan.
2. which brake the Image all to pieces, so the silver and the gold became like
the chafe of the Summer flowers, etc. And the same stone became a great
mountain, and filled the earth. Darkness may cover the earth for a time, and
thick darkness the people: The true Professors also may be driven to the
wall for a season, and lie among the pots, as it is in the Psalm, but yet in
the end the day star will shine in men's he^rts, yea the Sun of righteousness
will arise above our Horizon, and then shall every man have praise of God; yea
then they shall be as the wings of the Dove which are covered with silver, and
their feathers with fine gold. There is no resisting the Lord or his power, he
is stronger then you; Gods will shall be done either by you, or upon you, as
Augustine says. If his Gospel prove not unto you to be the savor of life
unto life, then it will prove the savor of death unto death. Therefore let no
man any longer despise him that speaks, and brings unto him the Gospel;
for if they escaped not that despised him that spoke from earth, (that was the
Minister of the Law,) much less shall any of us escape, if we despise him
that speaks from heaven, that brings the more heavenly Doctrine. But some
man will say, If the Gospel be such power, even the power of God, how can it
be withstood? Why be there any Recusants? Why does it not enforce all to
embrace it? I answer with Nazianzen, Nazianz. Arnobius cont. Gentes.
(...), and with Arnobius 2. contra Gentes: Vis ergo est ista, non gratia, etc.
This were force, not grace, neither Princely liberality in God, but a kind of
childish and vain emulation to get the mastery, etc. And with Tertullian, in
Apologet. Nemo se ab inuito coli vellet, ne hom^ quidem: Tertull. in Apol.
There is not a man in the world, but he despises forced service. Indeed the
Lord did not commend Zipporah for circumcising her son, when she was thereto
forced. Neither yet Balaam, for staying his journey, when he was therefrom
let by his Angel. Thy people shall come willingly, Psalm 110. This is
thanke-worthy with God. Et hoc ipsum quod fit, rectum est, si sit voluntarium.
Nothing is just, but that which is voluntary: this is the common esteem even
of men. Therefore as Marius answered Silo Popedius, when he braued him, and
challenged him, saying, If thou be a worthy Captain, Marius, fight with me;
nay, if thou be a worthy Captain, make me to fight with thee against my will.
So may God seem to answer them that are so lusty with him, as to say, Show the
power of thy Gospel, Let it make me believe whether I will or no; Let it save
me whether I will or no: Nay, rather may God answer, Do thou show that it is
my honor to do so as thou requirest. Is it not enough that Gods wisdom does
reach from one end to another mightily, and disposes all things sweetly, or
commodiously ((...), Wisdom 8.1.
) Wisdom 8. That he teaches us more then the beasts of the field, as Job
says; That he has made us after his own Image, and instilled into us a
reasonable soul; That he gives his Word plenteously, great is the multitude
of the Preachers; In a word, that he stands at the door and knocks, Open to
me, my Love, my Dove, my vndefi^ed one, etc. What, would you have him to burst
open the doors, and come upon you by force? Indeed the Kingdom of heaven
suffers violence, and the violent take it by force: they that are violent,
and strive with might and maine to get it, they are commended: but when did God
thrust it upon any by force? No, he is debtor to none, and therefore will be
brought into subjection to none. Therefore let no man so think of the power of
the Gospel, as that he be wanting to himself, and look for extraordinary
illuminations and incitements, and think it is no matter how seldom he
hears it, but rather let him thus think of it, that it is a power
perswasiue, not compulsiue, alluring, not enforcing, and all that it does, it
does by the power of Gods Spirit, which must be begged of the Father, and by
most ardent prayer, and well used also, that it be not grieved; and fostered,
that it be not quenched. And let so much be spoken of the first attribute, that
is given to the Gospel in my Text, and what both Preacher and hearer ought to
learn thereby. Now the Apostle thinks it not enough to commend it by its
attribute, but sets down the worthy act, or efficacy thereof, namely, that
it saves. To the same purpose speaks Saint James, Receive with meeken^sse
the Word that is gr^ffed in you, which is able to save your soul. It is an Art
of Arts, (says Gregory) to rule souls; And surely it is an act of acts, a
work of works, to save souls. Is not the life more worth then meat, says
Christ? Is it to any purpose to win the whole world, and to lose his own
soul? No, God knows; yet such is our unhappiness, that we labor least for
that meat that endures to everlasting life, and care least to learn the skill
to save our souls. The Latin Orator complains, that there being so many
Professors of Philosophy in his time as they were, yet the most had rather
Dis^um audire quam Philosophum: And the Greek Orator he complains in his
time, they chose rather to hear (...)* a most vile Comedy, then most worthy
Sentences. But what speak I of natural men? The holy Prophet complains of
his Countrymen, the people of God, That they spent their m^ney, Esaias 55.2.
Ierem 2.
and not for bread, and their labor without being satisfied, Esaias 55. And so
does Jeremy, That they forsook God, the Fountain of living water, and dug
to themselves pits, broken pits that would hold no water, Jeremy 2. And so does
Saint Paul, that some were (...), Lovers of pleasure, 2. Tim. 3.4.
more then lovers of God. And our Savior, Luk 12. That some did treasure up to
themselves, and were rich, but not in God. If the Gospel had power to make us
rich, or noble, or mighty, or to get the upper hand of our Adversaries, or to
save, and preserve us from sickness, or misaduenturs, etc. then we would
hearken to it a little better, we would say, How beneficial are the feet of
them that bring glad tidings of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things?
We would hang upon the neck of the Preacher, as they did upon our Savior:
Yea, we would say with the woman of Samaria, Sir, Luke 19. John 4.
give me of that water, that I may not thirst: Or with them in the 6. of Saint
John, Lord, give us eue^ more this bread. Money, that is the thing that makes
a man, (said one:) while thou art poor, thou art no body. And Simonides by the
report of Theodorit, Th^odor. Therap. 11.
The best thing that a man can desire, is health, and the second thing is,
(...), to be well favored, or descended; the third, is to be rich. So that if
Piety, or knowledge of God will have any place, it must be cast at the Carts
tail, and come after these. This is the corrupt judgment of sinful flesh and
blood; though the holy Ghost do seriously inculcate meat for the belly, and
the belly for meat, and God shall destroy both. And again, No man's life
consists in the multitude of the things that he possesses: and, The fashion
of this world vanishes away: and to be short, That we have not here an abiding
City, but are to look for another. What account then shall we make of those
things which we are not sure of while we live here, and we are sure to leave
when we depart hence? A man's soul, that is himself, and that is true life,
not which lasts for a day or two, (Who will make account of the life of a
Summer Bird, nay, of a Summer flower, that is fresh to day, and to morrow cut
down?) but that which abides for ever. Therefore give me that Doctrine, let
me learn that which will save my soul, and that is the Gospel which we
preach unto you. Lac^tius in vita Socrat.
Socrates is thought to have brought Philosophy down from heaven, because he
trained men to the study of virtue, and to the reformation of their own lives,
without embusying themselves so much to find out the natural causes of things.
So Moses is commended to have been in special favor with God, for being
trusted with the Law, which is but a Schoolmasters to Christ; So John Baptist
is preferred to all the sons of men, for pointing to our Savior more
demonstratiuely then any other. But now in the Gospel we may behold Christ
with open face, yea, we may taste Christ, how good he is, yea, we may feel
and feed upon the virtue of his death, and the power of his resurrection, and
the fellowship of his afflictions, and even be changed into his Image, nay, be
made partakers of his Divine Nature, 2. Pet. 1. And consequently be saved;
Therefore, the Gospel, (that is, the Doctrine of our Salvation by Christ,)
should be our first study, and our last, our plaine-song, and our discant, it
should be all in all unto us. If the vessel be saved, though the wares be
spoiled with the Seawater, or cast over ship-boord, yet we may arrive unto the
haven, and there be in safety: So if the field be gotten by us, as Alexander
told Parmenio, our baggage and horses will be recovered again with advantage.
So if a tree be sound at the root, there is hope, that it will sprout forth,
notwithstanding it should be lopped and shred never so much; but now if it be
rotten at the root, then fare it well. In like manner if the soul be safe, if
it live by faith in the Son of God, if it fight the good fight of faith, and
win the field, all other losses are not to be reckoned of; we are more then
gainers, more then conquerours; but if the soul perish, (and it will perish,
except it be fed with the Word of the Gospel, and it will make shipwreck, if
Christ sit not at the Stern, and it will be overcome in the day of battle, if
Christ be not his Captain, his Savior, his deliverer,) then all the world is
gone with us, it had been good for us if we had never been borne. One thing
is necessary, says our Savior, Mary has chosen the better part: That is the
thing that will stick by us, even the favor of God, apprehended by faith in
the Gospel, when all the world besides can do us no good. What may I do to
be saved? That was the thing that the Jailer in the Acts was desirous to
learn, when he was affrighted with the earthquake, etc. Send men to Simon
Peter, he shall speak words unto thee, whereby both thou, and all thy
hous^hold shall be saved. That is the true wisdom and knowledge; that is the
true blessing and happiness, and without it nothing is worthy to be accounted
of. Therefore (Beloved) accept this, the greatest favor that God ever
vouchsafed you, that he has revealed his Son unto you in the Gospel,
whereby you may learn to live and believe in him, and be saved by him, even
saved perfectly, not only directed, (as the Pelagians taught,) not only
helped, as the Papists. The Gospel is the power of God unto Salvation, and no
less: but now, whom does it save, or how does it save? not by being tied about
the neck, or carried in the bosom for an (...), (as Sorcerers and silly
superstitious people have used the matter,) but being believed and embraced by
faith. If thou could believe, all things are possible to the believer, says
Christ. The Word did not profit some, because they did not mingle it with
faith, says the Apostle. Indeed the Gospel consists not in sound, but in
sense, not in hearing, but in believing. He that believes in the Son, has
everlasting life: he that obeys not the Son, shall not see life, but the
wrath of God abides on him. Whereby we see, that though faith be a free assent
and persuasion; assent to the truth of God, persuasion of his goodness toward
us in his Son: yet for all that, we are not free, nor at liberty, whether we
will believe, or no; no, for this is the work of God, (which he especially
requires,) that we believe on him whom he has sent; and except you believe,
surely you shall not be established; and he that believes not, is condemned
already, because he believes not in the Name of the onely-begotten Son of
God. Therefore, we must not forget, that the Apostle speaks here expressly,
and precisely, that the Gospel saves such as believe; them, and none other.
For what if a man reverence the utter side of the Bible, as if he were to
handle a heavenly thing, and care not for the contents thereof, (which fault
Chrysostom notes in some,) or do put it to their head, for the head-ake,
Chrysostom. hom. 2. in Math. Augusti. tract. 7. in Ioh.
as Augustine witnesses, that some did in his time; or do make as much of it
in outward semblance, as the Jews do of the book of the Law, which they give
a good sum of money to be preferred to the handling of, and do brag, that
they have handled of the Tree of life, for so they call it, Gnets hachaijm?
What, I say, if we have in singular esteem, the bark, the rind, the sheath,
the superficies of the Gospel, will that save you? No, no, as it makes no
matter how near we come to God with our lips, if our hearts be far off,
and as when the multitude thronged upon our Savior, yet one only, (a woman
that had faith) touched him; and as the most blessed Virgin her self was not
so blessed for bearing Christ in her womb, as for believing on him, as Saint
Augustine speaks. August. lib. de Sancta Virg^^it. cap. 3.
So if we mean to be saved by the Gospel, we must bring faith to the hearing
of it, to the reading of it, to the embracing of it, to the digesting of it;
and without it we shall but deceive our selves, claspe the air in stead of a
body, feed upon ashes in stead of bread, embrace a cloud in stead of Juno, as
Ixion did. Neither is Gods mercy in the Gospel the less free, because it
requires the duty of faith, (to come now to the third point of my
amplification,) for who will except against a man's charitablenesse, because he
says to the poor man that craves an alms, Reach thy hand, or hold open thy
lap? Or who will deny that God gave the Israelites victory against the
Medianites, because they brought Pitchers into the field, and light in the
Pitchers? Or that God did not feed them with bread from heaven, and water out
of the rock, for that they gathered the one, and brought vessels, (at the
least their mouths,) to receive the other? It is one thing to be the true
cause of a thing, the conduit-pipe, or fountain, another thing to bring a
bucket, nay, not so much as that, but to bring only a mouth or a hand to take
it. Indeed i^ God should say to us as Marius did to his Soldiers, I can help
you to water, but you must buy it with blood; or as Saul did to David, 1. Sam.
18. Thou shall have my daughter in marriage, but she must cost thee an hundred
foreskins of the Philistims; or as Caleb said to his men, Joshua 15. I will
bestow my daughter upon one of you, but he that will have her, must first win
Kiriath-Sepher, he must quit himself like a man, and fight valiantly; then it
were another matter; then might some say, The way of the Lord is righteous
only, it is not liberal, it is but hire for service, wages for merit: He
loved us, for we loved him first; does for us, for we did for him. But now when
he says unto us, Believe only, and the Lord will do great things for thy
soul: trust perfectly in the grace of God, that is brought unto thee in the
Gospel, and thou shall become a child of Abraham, an heir of God, and fellow
heir with Christ, even a vessel of Salvation; who can impeach or blemish Gods
bounty and liberality, with the least note of mercinarinesse? for he that
says, Believe the Gospel, and it will save thee, seems to say in effect no
more then this, He that has an ear to hear, let him hear, as it is in the
Gospel; or Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it; as it is in the Psalm; or
Wash thy self in Jordan and be clean, as it is in the holy Story. Now as this
makes much against our Adversaries that are merit-mongers: So it makes
nothing at all for Gospellers, that turn the grace of God into wantonness,
and think, that because they pretend a faith, that they may do all things,
and be excused for all things. This therefore shall be the twofold use of this
Circumstance, of the quality that ought to be in the persons to be saved by the
Gospel, both for confutation, that the Adversaries of our free justification,
by Christ preached in the Gospel, be proved to be false Teachers, deceitful
workmen, etc. And for reprehension, that if any man thinks he may use the
cloak of faith, for a color of unrighteousness, that he be unmasked. Which
points I cannot stand now to enlarge unto you, having already pressed upon your
patience, but will refer the handling thereof to some other time. To God the
Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, three Persons, but one
everlasting, and indivisible God, be ascribed all power, might, Majesty, and
Dominion, now, and for ever, Amen, Amen.

A SERMON UPON THE SECOND OF KINGS^ THE FIFTH SERMON.
2. KINGS 18.13. Moreover, in the foureteenth year of King Hezekiah,
Sennacherib, King of Asshur, came up against all the strong Cities of Judah,
and took them.


THE Prophet having declared in the four verses immediately going before my
Text, what grief King Hezekiah, and his faithful subjects had suffered, by
hearing what Gods enemies had done to their brethren, those of the ten Tribes,
in destroying their Country, burning their Cities, killing a great number of
them, and carrying away the remnant of them into captivity; and all this,
because oftheir wickedness and rebellion against God. Now here at the 13. verse,
he begins to show what, and how much they suffered in themselves; And what
was that? Surely they were not only afflicted with present evils, as of the
spoiling and sacking of most of their Towns, of the exhausting of their
Treasures, both profane and sacred, and with blasphemous reuilings of them and
of the true God, whom they worshipped, etc. but also with fear of future
evils, as namely, that the mother-Citie it self, the glory of that Kingdom,
Jerusalem, should be taken, their Temple destroyed, their King and Nobles led
away; their young men slain with the sword, their women abused, etc. And which
did most of all vex the soul of the righteous, that they that were so saucy
with God, as to blaspheme him before the victory, would, if they should
prevail, be hardened in their villainies, and say of a truth, that the Jews
worshipped a thing of naught. This is the sum of the evils mentioned in this
Chapter, and in part of the next; partly suffered indeed of the faithful,
partly suffered in fear, and expectation. Now what mercy the Lord showed them
in the end, and what confusion he brought upon their enemies, the same is
described toward the later end of the Chapter following. Let us now take the
Story in order as it lies; having thus beforehand pointed at the general
heads. The first thing that I note unto you, is, The continuance and progress
of troubles to the Church, noted in this word, [ Moreover.] Good Lord, might
one say, what a world is this? one depth calls on another, one misery in the
neck of another; Finis alterius mali, gradus est futuri, The end of one
mischief is a step to another, as Seneca says; Seneca. Sophocle^.
and (...), Labor brings labor unto labor, as it is in Sophocles. Why, no
sooner came Hezekiah to the Kingdom, but he must presently in hand with a
reformation; and what reformation? Surely not of slight matters, which might be
borne with, but of things which immediately concerned the glory of God: he was
to purge out Idolatry, which had taken deep root in the time of his wicked
father, and to settle an order for the right service of God, which for a long
time was decayed. This, and more he was to do, which purchased to him great
charges, great jarres, and great contradiction. Now he was no sooner out of
this, but his neighbors, nay his brethren according to the flesh, the
Israelites, are invaded by the common enemy. These he dare not help, lest
he should bring present mischief upon himself. Again, he must see them
perish before his eyes, though he knew that his own day was coming, and
after that the enemy had done with them, then he would have a saying to him.
This was bitter, even as bitter as death, but yet for all this, the wrath of
the Lord is not turned away, but his jealousy burns like fire, and catches
hold upon the Jews themselves. [ In the foureteenth year of Hezekiah,
Sennacherib came up against all the Cities of Judah, etc.] Lo, not long after
they had been the beholders of a Tragedy, they were made to be Actors, that
is, sufferers in it themselves. This is the image of man's life, yea, this is
the image of the afflicted state of the Church, here in this world. These
things have I spoken unto you, John 16.
says Christ, John 16. that in me ye mighht aue peace: (In him indeed the
Church has peace, that is, comfort of the Spirit, and assurance of their
reconcilement to God, according to that which Saint Paul has, Being justified
by faith, Romans 5.
we have peace with God, through Jesus christ our Lord, Romans 5.) In the world
ye shall have affliction; yea, affliction upon affliction, ^he^eof you shall
not know the morning, (as the Prophet says,) nor yet the evening. The Children
of Israel, when they had escaped the red Sea, and seen their enemies the
Egyptians dead, they thought all was cocke-sure, and therefore sang Epicinia,
songs of rejoicing for the victory. But what followed within a while? The Lord
stirred up another enemy against them, from out their bowels, as it were, which
was hunger, and this pinched them sorer, they thought, then the Egyptian. But
was this the last? No, after the hunger, came thirst, and this made them to
murmr as much as the former, and after the thirst, came fiery Serpents, and
fire, and Pestilence, and Amalekites, and Madianites, and what not? Thus has
it been with the Church, not only under the Law, but also under Christ; as it
might be easily declared unto you. Neither has it been better with the
several members thereof; they likewise have been made conformable to the
body, and to the Head. What a fight of temptations did Abraham endure? so
Jacob, so Joseph, so the Patriarchs, so the Prophets? Yea, and all they that
would live godly in Christ Jesus, though their sorrow in the end were turned to
joy, yet they wept and lamented first. Though they were brought at the length
to a wealthy place, yet they passed through fire and water first. And thus much
does Hierome, (I remember,) paint forth in the life of Paul the Eremite, and of
Hilarion, whether they were Stories or fables. Hieron. in vita Pauli Eremitae.
Anthony is directed to seek out one more perfect then himself, that is, as I
interpret it, the true and perfect way which brings a man to happiness: but
what meets he by the way, what obstacles must he encounter with? First, a
Hippocentaure: This is, Tyranny: secondly, a Satyr, this is, voluptuousness*
thirdly, a shee-Wolfe, this is, hunger and thirst lastly, the scorching of the
Sun, and the pricking of bushes, and the cragginesse of clefts, and the
wastnesse of a wilderness, whereby are meant all kinds of crosses, and
bitternesses. This in the life of Paul. So in the life of Hilarion, he tells
that to the said Hilarion were presented many fearful things, which he was
forced to hear and see; roarings of Lions, Idem in vit. Hilarionis.
and the noise of an Army, and a Charet of fire coming upon him, and Wolves,
and Foxes, and Sword-players, and wicked women, and I cannot tell what. These
and the like be the exercises of a Christian Soldier: and from all these he is
delivered in the end, howsoever he be tried with them for a season, if need so
require. Well, you hear how, as it was said of Hezekiah, [Moreouer,] more
troubles in the midst of his Reign, besides those which he suffered in the
beginning and upward, more and more; so it may be said of all the Children of
God, They are troubled on every side from time to time, fightings without,
fears within: And therefore, if we would be counted children, there is no
cause that we should count it for a strange thing, if the like temptation take
hold on us. But I may not stand so long upon every circumstance. The next thing
that I will come unto, shall be the person of Sennacherib, and his acts
mentioned in the Text. [ He came up against all the strong Cities of Judah,
and took them.] What, did he take all, every one? No, for then Lachish being
a City of Judah had been taken, which yet he was in besieging himself; yea,
and then too Jerusalem had been taken before it was besieged by them whom he
sent. But by All, is meant in this place, a great many, as it is also in diverse
other places of the Scripture. All the Cattle of Egypt dyed, Exodus 9. and yet
Pharaoh had a great number of horses to chase the Children of Israel with. So,
John 3. He to whom thou bear witness, behold, he baptizeth, and all men
come unto him. All; that is, an exceeding great number: otherwise if you will
understand it, De singulis generum, What place in the world is so great, that
it could contain the hundredth part of the comers? I will spend no more time
in opening the litterall sense. For the moral sense, or that which may be
picked out for our instruction, thus we may profit by the example of
Sennacherib.

First, he and his Soldiers may teach us, what a dangerous thing it is for any
people to entertain strangers into their Land, to help them against their
enemies, and to fight their battles for them. They that do so, commonly pull
more upon them with one hand, then they can put off with both. They may come in
readily for your pleasure, but they will not go forth so easily. The men of
Judah in Ahaz his time, thought they had dealt politickly, to get the Assyrians
to take their part against the Israelites, and those others that fought against
them; but what says the Oracle of God, 2. Chron. 28. verse 20. Tiglath
Pilnesser, King of Ashur, came unto Ahaz, but he troubled him, and did not
strengthen him, yea, though Ahaz gave him great gifts, yet it helped him not.
Why, might one say, Tiglath Pilnesser invaded the enemies of Ahaz, both them of
Israel, and them of Aram, and made a great slaughter of their people, and a
great spoil of their Countries; therefore it would seem that he strengthened
him greatly, in thus revenging him of his enemies, and weakening of their
forces. Thus indeed it would seem at the first blush, and to a simple man, but
the Prophet, as a man of another kind of reach, had a respect unto the end, and
to the mischief that came thereby. For the Assyrians tasting by this means
the goodness of the Land, and the weakness of the people, thought both that
the Country was too good a Country for circumcised ones, and the people
unworthy to enjoy their liberty, and therefore sought by all means, and from
time to time, to bring them under their yoke. Thus profitable was Ahaz to his
Country, by hyring of the Assyrians. And surely in like sort have they sped,
and in like sort have they benefited their Country, whosoever have sought in
any age, either to defend themselves, or to revenge themselves by strange
forces. I cannot tell whether it be worth while to bring forth examples,
because they be so common, as that which is most common. Lege Crom^rum lib.
11.185.
The Britans hired the Saxons against the Picts, and Scots: how sped they?
After that the Saxons had served the Britans turn a while, they served their
own turn of the Britans themselves. The Sultan of Persia hired the Turks
against the Caliph of Babylon: what became of it? Well, by their means the
Caliph is overcome: but is the Sultan ever a whit the near? No, out of the
drying pan, he fell into the fire, and was overcome by those Turks himself,
whom he had hired. So who made them Lords of Constantinople? Did not the
Emperor of Constantinople himself, who hired them against the Bulgarians? Who
of Hungary, in our own time? Did not John the Vayuod of Transiluania, who
labored them against the Austrians? Let us pass to another Country. It was
thought high policy, forsooth, by certain of the Roman Emperors, to
entertain the Goths in service, that so they might be secured from other
Barbarians: but were the Goths content to become stipendaries? No, they picked
a quarrel to sack Rome it self, and ceased not till they became Lords of the
greatest part of Italy. Well, the Goths are insolent, and cannot be endured:
therefore the Longobards must be sent for: but did the Longobards remain
faithful to them? No: after they had helped them to beat the Goths, they
turned them also out of their possessions, and called the Land by their own
name: So the Longobards also they became Tyrants, as it was conceived, and
therefore the French must be sent for; but were they set at full liberty by
them? No; they changed only their Lord, they were not delivered from a Lord;
nay, in stead of one Lord, they had two: the Emperor, and the Pope; the one
over their heads, the other at their elbowes. Should I run this course, and
tell you how the French were served by the Normans; the Spaniards, by the
Moors; the Moors or Africans, by the Arabians, etc. I might hold you too
long. In a word, the danger of strangers is confessed by all, whom folly or
private respects has not blinded. For indeed if either of these be in a man,
then the case is altered. He that is unwise, thinks that he may stop a
stream with his foot, as well as h^ may let it in; and that cold water is good
in the fit of an hot Ague, because it eases for the present time; and that
Usury is a good thing, because his turn is served for the time, by that which
he took to interest. But tell me, how you will like of it, when the day of
payment comes? then you will cry out upon the Usurer as fast, and complain,
that you were eaten up of him. So is every Nation that seeks not to God for
help, nor stirs up it self to valiantness, nor is desirous to be trained
in feats of war, but trust unto strangers. They that are gotten for money,
will also forsake you for money; and when you shall have most need of them,
then they will call for their pay, or impudently bid you adieu. I could tell
you of diverse Princes, that by these means have been deceived and undone,
even at the instant when they were to join battle with their enemies; But let
us return to the stranger Sennacherib and the Assyrians. You hear how we may
profit hereby, that the Jews were so plagued by them, whom before, I warrant
you, they honored, as their best deserving friends. Let this be the first thing
that we note in the person of Sennacherib. The second thing shall be his
ambitious covetousness. My Text says, Sennacherib King of Ashur, came up
against all the strong Cities of Judah and took them. Why, might one say, did
his Ancestors leave him nothing to do at home, that he must find himself some
work abroad? As though it were not as busy a piece of work, yea, and as
honorable too, to establish well, that which was gotten to his hands, as to get
more? or was that Kingdom that came to him by inheritance, too straight and
too little, that he must seek a larger to maintain his estate? (as Philip
said to his son, Aliud tibi R^gnum quaerendum est, Macedonia iam non capit.)
Why, the Kingdom of the Assyrians was in those days the mightiest Monarchy
that was in the world, and verily a great part of the East were tributary to
them, how then could they be destitute of possessions and rents? We see
therefore, that it was neither want of work, nor want of wealth. What was it
then? Mary, this is that, that the Prophet Hacacuk said, Chapter 2. The proud
man is as he that transgresses by wine, he enlarges his desire as hell, and
is as death, and cannot be satisfied. What, should you tell him how much he
has? All the while there is any thing which he has not, he thinks himself
a poor man. Does not the fire catch faggot upon faggot, nay, whatsoever fuel
it may reach unto, and is never weary? Such is Ambition, does not the Wolf,
P^ini. Hist. not. ^i. S cap. 22.
(as Pliny writes,) forget the meat before him, if he do but once look
back? and does he not seek for a new prey, as though he had had nothing?
This is Coue^ousnesse. Indeed, as He that desires silver, shall not be
satisfied with silver, Eccles. 5. So he that desires Dominion, shall not be
satisfied with Dominion. Julius Caesar got so many victories as none did before
him, or since; and yet it is written of him, that, that which he had done, he
thought of as only the foundation, as it were, and the beginning of the
glorious frame that he would rear. The Romans could not endure to have their
desires bounded out by the Ocean, but needs they would have a sight of this
Island. Nor Alexander coetent himself with the whole World; but thought it was
too little for him. Aestuat infoelix angusto limite mundi. What marvel then,
if the Assyrians, Iuuenal.
and by name Sennacherib, were not content with his hereditarie Kingdoms, but
would needs add Judah to them? for you hear how this desire is usual, and
even as it were natural. It is true, that Henry the last French King, having
but a couple of Crowns of Polony, and France; the one in title, the other in
hand, seemed to have been fully content with them, and therefore he gave for
his Symboll of Posie, Manet vltima coelo, the last remains in heaven. Howbeit
if you mark the Posie a little better, you will confess, that it contains
not that modesty or contentedness indeed, that it promises at the first
sight, or bears show of. For he does not say, Manet altera coelo, the other
next Kingdom is in heaven, but the last is in heaven, not barring himself
from the accepting of more, if they should be offered, or might be gotten. But
well fare the Spaniard for dealing plainly, for he proclaims on the
housetop, nay, in the ears of all the world, his insatiable Ambition, with
his Plus vltra. Howbeit, He that sets bounds to the Sea, and says, Hitherto
shall thou go, and no further; and, Here shall it stay thy proud waves; the
same holds all the Tyrants of the earth in a chain, and will not suffer them
to go one inch beyond his appointment, to do the least point of their own
will. Thou could have no power against me, except it were given thee from
above, said Christ to Pilate. And Sennacherib did not stir a foot out of
doors, before God in his secret counsel, did send him against that people of
his wrath, as it is to be seen, Esaias 10. Esaias 10*
Therefore let us not fear the Axe, nor the Saw, nor the Rod, nor the Staff,
I mean either the French, or the Spaniard, not whosoever, that are but
instruments, (and truly but dead instruments too for execution, except God say
unto them, Destroy:) but I will tell you whom you shall Fear: fear Him that
takes away courage from the valiant, and agility from the swift, and authority
from the honorable, and wisdom from the wise, etc. Fear him that casts
confusion upon Princes, and lifts up the simple from the dust, and teaches
the hand to war, and the fingers to fight, the Lord of Hosts is his Name.
Him let us fear and study to make on our side, and then we need not care what
man can do unto us. Sennacherib was not only the Lords sword, as all wicked
Tyrants be, Psalm 17.12. but also a sharp sword: for so his Name signifies,
and so his edge, and his malice declared. But yet what of that? The Lord that
dwells in the heavens, was sharper: He it is, that has the power of life and
death, kills and no man saves, 2. Chron. 14.
saves and no man kills. It is all one with God, to save with many or with
few: and so it is all one with God, to destroy with many, or with few; yea, and
to destroy many or few, stronger or weaker. The Learned know what was sung to
Maximinus, that barbarous man-queller, Elephas grandis est, and occidi^ur: Leo
fortis est, and occiditur, etc. The Elephant is a great beast, yet is he
slain: the Lion is a stout beast, yet he is slain too, etc. And therefore as
David says, He that delivered me from the paw of the Lion, and from the paw of
the Bear, He shall deliver me from the hand of the Philistine; So may we ^ay,
So may we say; The Lord that hitherto has taken our part against them that
rose up against us; he also will stand by us still, and will not deliver us
over for a prey unto their teeth. But enough of the second note. The 3. and
last note from the person of Sennacherib, shall be this: Sennacherib menaceth
the Land of Judah with an huge Army, and there reuelleth, and burns, and
spoileth, while there is any thing to spoil. Thus he shows himself to be an
enemy, and exercises all kind of hostility. But where were the Heralds or
Ambassadors that were sent to demand satisfaction for the wrongs that Hezekiah
had done, if he had done any? Why did he not observe the Law of Arms, namely,
to denounce war, and to send defiance before he invaded them with fire and
sword? Indeed in the Law it is written, Deuteronomy. 20. When thou come near to a
City to fight against it, thou shall offer it peace, etc. Also lest you should
say, that this was a written Law only, and proper to the Jews; The Romans
themselves, who were without the Law written, yea, and without God himself,
they in their better times were so far from oppressing any upon the sudden,
without sending them defiance, that as Dionysius and Liuy write, they did not
make war upon them, before the Herald Fecialis, having brought unto the
Romans the answer of their en^mies, did return back unto the enemies
Country, and there in the presence of diverse, cast a Spear into it, in token
of defiance. This solemnity and this conscience the Romans learned of Nature,
and therefore the Assyrians could not plead ignorance, except they would
smother the light that was in them. Tacitus.
Howbeit, as Tacitus says, In summa fortuna id aequius est quod validius: In
high estate he that has strength on his side, he has right. And as one said
unto a man that alleged Law for himself, Ius mihi obiectas gladio accincto?
Do thou tell me of the Law, that have the sword in my hand? So this Tyrant
Sennacherib and his people, made no reckoning of honesty, or honor, or Law of
Arms, so that they might wreake their anger upon the Jews, and bring them
into subjection to them, quo iure, quaque iniuria, either honorably, or
dishonourably, they cared not. So Caracalla, when he had no help to prevail
against the Parthians by force, he pretended that he was a suitor to marry the
Kings daughter, and meant nothing but peace* nay, the greatest friendship that
might be. But when he had thus bleared their eyes, and saw his opportunity, he
then compassed a great number of them with his Army, and slew them without
pity or mercy. But the Romans gained nothing by this; for when afterward they
fell into the Parthians and Persians hands, they cried quittance with them to
the full, and taking the Emperor of the Romans prisoner, they used him in the
vilest manner that might be, making him to serve their Princes turn for a
footstool, as often as he should get up upon his horse. Thus much the Romans
degenerating got by their falsehood. Now for these men that professed not God,
nor knew him, thus to distaine themselves with unjust and perfidious practices,
it was no marvel; (for who will look for other then evil fruit from an evil
tree, and filthy water from an unclean fountain, etc?) But now for them who
glory in the Law, and trust in God (in outward show) and say, that they are
Catholics, and that all others are Heretics, and the Synagogue of Satan;
for them to seek to surprise Christian Commonweals, which are at league with
them, without proclaiming war first, nay, at such time to intertaine us with
an hope of peace, when their Armado was now lanched, nay, advanced forward,
nay, upon our coasts almost; this was such a feate, as posterity, which will
judge of things incorruptly, and render to every Prince the honor that he
deserves; posterity, I say, if there shall be any posterity, will record, not
among the stratagems of noble Warriors, but amongst the attempts of
false-dissembling Tyrants. For mine own part, I rest upon Tullies judgment,
Nemo qui fortitudinis gloriam consecutus est, etc. Dishonest craft is not the
way to attain the honor of Knighthood: and I honor from my heart, the
disposition of those elder Romans mentioned by Liuy, who when certain
commended those Ambassadors, Liu. dec. 4. lib. 2.
whom they had sent into Macedonia, for deceiving the King thereof under an
hope of peace, greatly misliked this new policy of theirs, alleging, that
their Ancestors achieved their conquests not by craft, but by prowess, and
were wont to give t^eir enemies warning, what they should trust to. Thus
whilst there was either love of fame, or fear of shame, or spark of virtue
in men's hearts, they denounced wars, before they waged War, and if there
had been any friendship between the parties, they solemnly renounced the
same. But now in this weak old age of the world, where the Lions skin will not
reach, there they itch it with the Fox skin, and nothing seems dishonest that
will serve their turn; nay, as children are deceived with huckle-bones, or
with Puppets, so many seek to circumuent Princes under pretenses. This is the
new Divinity that our enemies have learned, and this they and we may thank the
Jesuits and the Council of Trent for: the Council of Trent, as being the
broachers; the Jesuits, as the practizers. The Council of Trent, they defined,
that whosoever would not receive their Decrees, had forfeited their Kingdoms,
ipso facto, and might lawfully be invaded by whomsoever. The Jesuits, they grin
like a Dog, and go about the City, as it is in the Psalm, nay, like the
Enemy of mankind, mentioned in the 1. of Job, they compass the earth round
about, Job 1.
and buzze into men's ears, that keeping of faith out of the Church of Rome, is
not faithfulness, but perfidiousnesse. Thus they. Howbeit, as Tertullian said
of one that excused his running away, Tertull.
by Vir fugiens iterum pugnabit, one said so (I grant, says Tertullian) but he
was a cowardly runne-away himself. So may it be said truly, that he that would
not have faith or promise to be kept to a man of a contrary Religion, is a man
void of faith himself. For if it be not necessary to keep our promise, (made
in the name of God, and by swearing by him,) then it is not lawful to make any
such promise. Otherwise, in that we swear, we show our selves to be afraid of
him to whom we swear, that is of man; but in violating the same oath, we show
our selves not to be afraid of Him by whom we swear, that is, God himself.
This by the way to their Doctrine and practice, who are moved with no
conscience to invade them, whom they hold to be out of their faith, not only
without defiance sending, but even against a League solemnly made. And let so
much be noted from the example and person of Sennacherib the Inuader. First,
what a dangerous thing it is to draw strangers into a Land: Then, how
insatiable a thing Ambition is. Lastly, what a violent thing it is. Now, let us
come to the person that was invaded, Hezekiah by name, and see how we may
profit by him. [ In the foureteenth year of Hezekiah.] So my Text. This
Hezekiah (wel-beloued) was not an ordinary man, but comparable to any of the
Kings of Judah that were before him, or after him. If Piety be to be respected,
He did uprightly in the sight of the Lord, according to all that David his
father had done, verse 3. If Zeal, He took away the high places, and brake
the Images, and cut down the groves, etc. verse 4. If Faith and assurance, He
trusted in the Lord God of Israel, and was peerless in that respect, verse 5.
Further, if Constancy and perseverance, He claue to the Lord, and departed not
from him, etc. verse 6. Finally, if valiant acts, and good success in war;
The Lord was with him in all that he took in hand, and he got a famous victory
of the Philistims his bordering enemies, verse 7, 8. This manner of Prince was
Hezekiah, so religious, so zealous, so faithful, so virtuous, so constant, so
valiant, so successful. And who would have thought, that he being so precious
in Gods eyes, should have been so much honored in the world, and having
deserved so well of his own subjects, should for the same have been no less
beloved and regarded of his neighbor Princes? Indeed it pleases God many
times to reward virtue, and specially piety, with such reverence from men, that
either for fear or for love, they are suffered to enjoy their own quietly. So
Solomon had peace forty years together almost round about him on every side,
and Judah and Israel dwelt without fear, every man under his Vine, and under
his Fig Tree, all the days of Solomon, 1. Reg. 4. So Abimelech King of the
Philistims, 1. Reg. 4.
came to Isaak a private man and a stranger, and desired to enter into a League
with him, Genesis 26. Genes. 26.
We saw certainly (says he) that the Lord was with thee, and we thought thus,
Let there be now an oath between us, thou shall do us no hurt, as we have not
touched thee, etc. So Jacob, though he had greatly offended Laban his uncle,
and Esau his brother, yet the Lord so wrought for him, by mollifying the hearts
of the other, that they durst not, not only do him hurt, but not so much as
speak a rough word unto him. This is that, that Solomon says in the
Proverbs, Proverbs 16.
When a ma^s ways please the Lord, he makes his very enemies to be his
friends. And which Satan enuyed to Job, Does Job fear God for naught? Job 1.
Have thou not made a hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that
he has on every side? Howbeit, though it spiteth the Devil to the heart, to
see the faithful, specially faithful Princes, to be guarded and protected by
God, and to be regarded, and reverenced in the world, yet for all that, the
Lord vouchsafes them that grace many times. As the example of Constantine (at
the first stablishing of the Gospel,) proves; To whom the King of Persia,
nay, most of the barbarous Kings of those days, (as Eusebius shewth) sent
presents, and desired his friendship. As the example of Frederick, surnamed
the Wise, Eusebius li. 4. ca. 7. De vita Constan.
and Frederick surnamed the Confessor, Dukes of Saxony, in the time of
restoring the Gospel in those later times, (that I may not name Gostaue of
Sweathland, and the free Cities of Germany, to whom the Lord showed such mercy,
that they were suffered without trouble almost, to build a Temple for the Lord
as it were, I mean to enact Laws for the true service of God, and for the
abolishing of Superstition,) do abundantly declare. It is very true therefore,
that as God has made many hills so high, that there is no wind to be felt upon
the top of them; and some stones so hard, (as the Adamant,) that they will not
be broken with any hammer; and some trees also so fat, and so oily (as the
Bay Tree,) that the Winter storms have little power on them, though they make
the most trees besides to let fall their leaves, So there have been some in
the world so graced, and privileged by God, that even those things which do
usually strike through other men, (Envy and Malice, I mean,) have had no power
to enter upon them at all. They have been placed by God (...), out of
gunneshot under his own wings, as it were, and under his feathers, they have
not been confounded, neither of the Pestilence that walks in the darkness,
(this is secret Envy,) neither of the Plague that destroys at noonday, this
is open and professed Malice. Lo thus have some been blessed, that feared the
Lord, not only they had favor with their own people, but also they have
been awed of their very enemies. Some have been so blessed, some few -- pauci
quos aequus amauit Jupiter, atque ardens euexit ad ether a virtus, says the
Poet. Some few that have been extraordinarily tendered by God, and which have
been mirrors of all virtue and goodness. Howbeit, that you may not think the
worse of our Hezekiah, nor derogate from the perfection of his virtues hereby,
for that he was invaded by Sennacherib, and not suffered to live in peace: You
are to understand, that as in natural and artificial workings, it is not
enough, that the Agent have virtue and vigor in it, but the patient also, or
that which it should work upon, must be rightly disposed and capable of the
working: as for example: How long would it be before you could mould Iron, or
make mortar of sand, or make a piece of dadocke-wood to flame, etc? So likewise
for the price and estimation of virtue, it is not enough, that there be
excellency in the doer, but there must be some inclination and affection to it
in the beholder or witness. In the great battle that was fought between the
Romans and the Parthians, wherein there were so many thousands of the Romans
so miserably slain, there were twenty Roman Soldiers, (as Plutarch writes)
that fought so valiantly, Plutarch.
and laid about them so manfully, that their enemies that had been able to
hacke them in pieces, suffered them to escape through the midst of them. How
so? The Parthians were valiant men themselves, and therefore, no marvel if
they honored valor in other men. On the contrary side, Proculus, a goodly
tall man, that had gotten the victory of as many as encountered him, striking
them down one after another, Caligula did not suffer to escape alive, but
commanded him to be slain. Why so? Caligula was a cowardly wretch himself,
and therefore enuyed the opinion, and mark of manhood in whomsoever it was
eminent. So Xenocrates (as the same Plutarch writes in the life of Phocion,)
was of that reverend estimation and credit, Plutarch.
for his wonderful gravity, that they who knew him, thought that it was
impossible for any to be so carried away of his passions, but even by the sight
of him, he should find an alteration in his mind, yea, and show some blushing
too in his countenance. This impression he wrought in others, but yet when he
came to Antipater, with other Ambassadors, to weigh him to equity and
clemency, he could not get as much as a good morrow from him, or that he should
take him by the hand. Why so? Antipater was a wicked man, the Story says, and
being not virtuous himself, he had not learned to know virtue in others.
Hereupon it is found true, that was said of the ancient Philosopher, that honor
is a matter of courtesy, and rather in honorante, then in honorato; And which
a learned man of late days has written, Quidam laudem merentur, quidam
habent, as though it were not always given to whom it is due, but others that
do not deserve it, will go away with it sometimes. You see therefore that it
is not a certain rule to judge of men's worth by their renown. For although
Wisdom, and so Virtue and Piety, be justified of her children, that is, of
them that be wise, virtuous, and godly; yet for all that, with them that are
wicked, it is not of that price, but contrariwise despised, scorned, abhorred.
No marvel then, if Hezechiah were not esteemed of Sennacherib, according to
his virtuous acts, all the while Sennacherib was so bad a man as he was; first,
an Idolater, then proud, then covetous, then crafty, then puffed up with
success of his wars elsewhere, etc. For the contrary were rather to be
marvelled at, if darkness could abide light, sour sweet, or evil good. The
same is to be said to those that are tempted thus, to think in their hearts,
Why, if our Prince were so peerless a Lady as we make her, so godly* so wise,
so just, so clement* also, if the reformation which she has wrought, were
according to the Word of God, as it is pretended, then surely the Lord would
have caused the fear of her to be upon all the Nations round about us, and no
man should be so hardy or so malicious as to assail us all the time of her
government. Answer as the truth is, and as has been partly showed already,
that God sometimes for the comfort of his weak ones, and that his bounty may
be the more sensibly felt, even with carnal hands, does grant peace and
quietness to his Church, and restrain the hearts of Tyrants, so that they
have neither power nor heart to do any evil to his Sanctuary. Howbeit, this
comes by privilege, and is not ordinary. Again, for some certain time it
is granted, but not for ones life. Solomon indeed had peace round about for the
greatest part of his reign: but had David likewise? No, he had both his hands
full all the days of his life; and yet who comparable to David? So Hezechiah a
great part of his reign was free from any invasion by the enemy, and though
his neighbors Lands were on a fire, yet in his own he felt no loss: but did
he remain in that security? No: about the midst of his reign, he was
brought in ieopardy of his Estate by the Assyrians, who could not keep in any
longer the malice that boiled in their breasts. But some man will say, Yet by
your leave, Hezechiah was to blame, so to provoke Sennacherib as he did, a
Prince of far greater puissance and strength then himself; for did he not
deny him his tribute, and so bring upon himself and his people an unnecessary
war? Indeed if it were so, Hezechiah was much to blame, and Sennacherib was
before him, not only for strength of Forces, but also for goodness of cause,
and therefore a very evil match made. But (wel-beloued,) judge nothing before
the time, but judge with righteous judgment, and as David says, Psalm 40. so
say I, Psalm. 40.
Blessed is he that judges wisely of the poor or afflicted, whom God has
visited. In the 53. of Esaias, the godly confess their fault, for judging Christ
to have been plagued and smitten of God for his own sins. Esaias 53.
And in the 9. of John, the Apostles are told their fault, for that they could
no sooner see a blind man (one that was borne blind,) but they must presently
ask, Master, who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was borne blind?
The like reproach does belong unto us, if we take the like course of
mis-iudging, either of Hezechiah, or of them that be in like case with
Hezechiah. Hezechiah did not pay him tribute. Why? Because he did owe him none;
for if he had owed any, then he had sinned in not rendering it; according to
that of the Apostle, Romans 13. Give to all men their duty, Tribute to whom
Tribute, Custom, to whom ye owe Custom. Now that he did not sin therein,
may appear, not only by the silence of the Prophet Esaias, who in all
likelihood, would have persuaded him to have submitted himself to the King of
Ashur, as well as Jeremy afterward persuaded Sedechia, to yield to the King of
Babylon; but also by the very order of the Text, here in this 18. Chap. of the
second of Kings: For if you look upon the 7. verse of that Chap. there you
shall see, that it is reckoned amongst his (...), among his good deeds, his
worthy acts; that he rebelled against the King of Ashur, and served him not.
Now that it is called rebellion, let no man be offended thereat, or think that
he has warrant thereby to condemn Hezechiah. For it is not called so,
because the Lord did so esteem it, but because Sennacherib would have it so
reputed. As in the 43. of Genesis it is said, The Egyptians might not eat bread
wih the Hebrews, Genes. 43.
for that was an abomination to the Egyptians. It was not so indeed, it did not
defile them at all, but yet the Egyptians counted it so, and therefore so it is
called. So then, because Hezechiah will not fall down before Sennacherib, and
suffer him to go over him, and tread upon him, because he will not enthrall
his Land unto him, and lay upon the neck of his subjects such a yoke, as
neither they nor their posterity should be able to bear, Hinc illae lachrymae,
hereupon Hezechiah is a Rebel, and deserves to be persecuted with fire and
sword. And is not her Majesty's cause the like, and the quarrel of her enemy
the same? What point of Tyranny, (because wars are commonly undertaken by
great Princes,) may she be charged with? except this be Tyranny, to cast down
Images which were perking in the Rood-lofts, and to purge her Churches from
Idolatry, according to the Commandem%nt of God, and the example of good
Hezechiah? And what point of wrong can she be convicted to have done to the
Spaniard, except this be wrong, to prevent his lying in wait, and to seek to
save her own life, and the liberty of her subjects? There was in Rome one
called ^imbria, a mad fellow, and a violent, if ever there were any. The same
man having a quarrel to one Scaeuola, a worthy man, and of special reckoning,
sought to murder him, and did indeed stab him into the body very dangerously.
Well, the wound proved not to be deadly, and Scaeuola escaped with his life;
now what does Fimbria? He makes no more ado, but indicts Scaeuola; and why?
Quod totum telum corpore non exciperet, Because he brayded aside, and did not
suffer himself to be slain outright. So Caligula complained of the iniquity
of the time, that one doubting to be poisoned of him, did take a counterpoyson,
or a remedy against it. What, says he, Sueton.
Antidotum aduersus Caesarem? That's fair play indeed. Except the great enemy
of Spain will lay such a thing to our charge, namely, that when he, or his
Council had suborned desperate Ruffians to stabbe our Queen, or to pistol
her, she having intelligence thereof through Gods mercy has avoided the
danger* or when he had hired her own Physician to take away her life by
poisoning, she being warned thereof, did not consent to take the fatal drugge.
Except, I say, this be her fault, that she has not yielded wilfully to cast
away her life for his pleasure, I see no cause why he should complain of wrong
suffering from her. But yet now, I remember my self, he has another quarrel
against her. And what is that? Mary the same that the Galls had to the men of
Tuscan: We want Land, say they, and you must spare us some; Again, your Land
is a better Land then ours, this is quarrel sufficient. Howbeit as Herodotus
writes of the men of Andrus, Herodot. 1. Urania lib. 8.
that when Themistocles would needs have money of them, and to that purpose,
said, that he had brought two Goddesses with him, Persuasion, and Necessity.
The men of Andrus answered him, that they all had two great Goddesses with
them, which did forbid them to give him money, and those were Poverty and
Impossibility. So say we, If they have need of our Lands, and of our
commodities, we cannot spare them; and if they bring a sword against us, to
enforce, I hope we shall find a Buckler, and a sword too to resist. Well, this
is our comfort, that Hezechiah is invaded, that is, such a one as has
abolished false worshippings, (her Majesty I mean,) for which cause, the Lord
seems to have had a special care of her, and so I hope He will have unto the
end. Again, this is our comfort, that Jerusalem is invaded, England, I mean,
wherein though otherwise abounding with sin, yet God has had his Sanctuary now
a good while; and will He now bring it, that it should be destroyed, and laid
on ruinous heaps? No surely, if yet we shall repent, and turn unto him.
Lastly, this is our comfort, that Sennacherib is the Inuader, that is, such a
one as does not so much please himself in the multitude of his ships, and in
the expertnesse of his men, and in the heaps of his treasures, that is, in his
arm of flesh; as he does certainly offend God by his desire of joining
Dominion to Dominion, which is insatiable, by his raising of tumults, and
nourishing of broils in all his neighbor Countries, which is most malicious,
and specially through his wicked zeal to advance Idolatry, and to set up the
Kingdom of Antichrist, which is abominable. If any man think that I offer the
Spaniard hard measure, to match him with Sennacherib: first, one out of the
Church, then a Persecutor of the Church, etc. Let the same know that although
superstition be not altogether so bad in it self, as Atheism, (albeit
Nazianzene is bold, and says that (...) is (...), it were as good to worship
no God, as to have many in Gods sight,) yet for all that, to the Church
commonly it is no less hurtful or dangerous. For did any godless Tyrant make
more havoc of the faithful Servants of God, then did Idolatrous Iezabel?
This before Christ's time. And after; Is not the second beast which came up out
of the earth, Revel. 13. (by which Antichrist is meant,) said to do all the
first beast could, (that is, the Roman Tyrants,) and to be alike enraged upon
the Saints of God? Therefore to the Church, you see, they be alike cruel, and
therefore no great wrong done to our enemy in this respect. But now for other
respects, his dealing has been less honorable. For Sennacherib had some
color of a cause to make war upon Hezechiah, for denying the pension which
his father paid, though indeed it dyed with his father: but this man by no
color can demand any such thing. Sennacherib was no way beholding to the
Jews, for any merit or service they had done him. This man got Saint Quintins
by our means, and when we lost Casis in his quarrel, he left us in the lash,
and gave us the slip. Thirdly, Sennacherib was not tied to Hezechiah by any
band of affinity, or consanguinity. This man, besides the name of Brother and
Sister, which goes between Christian Princes current, married her Majesty's
own sister, (and afterward would have married her,) and so should l^ue her
even naturally. Lastly, Sennacherib invaded Hezekiah in his flourishing times,
surely in his best times; He, a woman, (I need not add,) well stricken in
years, whose very sex pleads weakness enough. Yet well fare Justinian the
Emperor, for he was so far from setting upon Amalosuntha, that virtuous and
wise learned Queen of the Goths, that dwelt in Italy, (though he might well
have pretended that Italy belonged to the Empire, and therefore, that she was
after a sort an Usurper) that contrariwise, (as Procopius writes,) he showed
himself to be very careful of her safety, and to be enemy to her enemies
first and last. But what speak I of Justinian, a Christian Emperor, and a
civil? Cosroes himself, that cruel King of Persia, a Barbarian, and for
ought I read, a Pagan; he, though his fingers were itching to be meddling with
the Empire, yet upon the Empress Sophia her letters (as Euagrius writes)
declaring that the government was in her hands, and that he should get no great
hon^ur in conquering a woman, etc. he was persuaded to be quiet, and to sit at
home. But this man had rather be like that dis-honourable miscreant Caesar
Borgia, his countryman by blood, who would not suffer Catharine ^fortia, a
Lady of Italy, to enjoy her Signiories in quiet, but would needs seek a
conquest, and a triumph over her* and like to his father and uncle, who would
needs have war with that Queen of Hungary (King John's widow,) though all
Christend^me, yea, and Turkey too, did hiss at them both for it. Well, God,
that takes upon him the protection of Widows and Orphans, he also does in a
more near respect tender the s^fety of his anointed Queen: and so I hope our
enemies shall find and feel, to their perpetual shame, if they shall be so
hardy, as to invade us, the Lord that fought for Hezekiah and Jerusalem,
against Sennacherib, will also fight for her Majesty, and this Realm, against
the Spaniard; they shall not come forth against us so proudly, but they shall
flee from us as fearfully, etc. Which God for his mercy sake grant: to whom be
praise for ever, Amen.

A SERMON UPON THE SEVENTY SIXTH PSALM. THE SIXTH SERMON.
PSALM 76. verse 9, 10. When God arose to Judgment, to save all the meek of
the earth. Selah. 10. Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee, the remainder
of wrath shall thou restrain.


PRAISE is not comely in the mouth of the foolish, (says the Wiseman,) but it
becomes well the just to be thankful, says the Psalmist. Thankfulness is
a most necessary duty, and a principal part of Justice, says the Philosopher:
therefore he that is unthankful, is justly odious both to God and man. What a
stain is that to Pharaoh his Butler, that he forgot Joseph? To Ioas King of
Judah, that he forgot the kindness of ^ehoiada, by whose means he attained
the Kingdom? I will trouble you with no more such examples. On the other side,
Iethroes gratitude toward Moses, for helping his daughters to water their
flocks, David's toward Barzillai, for furnishing him and his men with
victual, (I might recite diverse others out of the Scriptures,) is greatly
renowned. Now if we ought thus to be thankful to men, and to suffer no
benefit to be spilt upon the ground like water, but to proclaim as David did,
Who is left of the Lineage of Jonathan, that I may do good unto him for
Ionathans sake, who has made me beholding to him, that I may requite them? If,
I say, we are bound to be thankful to men for small favors, then how much
rather are we bound to God, for giving us life and breath, and all things to
enjoy? and if we cannot be thankful enough to God for ordinary blessings, in
that in him we live, move, and have our being, in that he causes his Sun to
shine upon us, and his rain to fall down upon our Lands; then what do we owe
him, and how can we possibly be thankful enough, for delivering our souls
from death, our eyes from tears, and our feet from falling, for catching the
wicked in his own snare, and bringing the mischief that he imagined upon his
own head? The Israelites having escaped the hands of the Egyptians, and the
danger of the red Sea, sung praises to God with joyful lips. So did Deborah
and Barack, for the victory which God gave them against Iabin King of Canaan,
and his Captain Sisera: so the women came out of all the Cities of Israel,
singing and dancing to meet King Saul, and David after he had slain the
Philistine; and which comes nearest our purpose; the Jews in the Kingdom of
Persia, that had escaped the bloody practices of Haman, were not content to
rejoice for the present time for a day, but ordained it for a Law, that such
two days should be kept festival every year. Esther 9.2.
Now if we will cast our eyes abroad to other Countries, we shall find the like
custom to have been taken up by Romans, Grecians, Scythians, Barbarians,
ancient, modern. A taste of them. The Romans counted it for an unspeakable
blessing, to be delivered from the Tyranny of the Tarquins, they celebrated the
memorial of it every year, and called the feast Regis fugium. The same
Romans were glad, most glad, to have the turbulent popular Estate removed, and
a Monarchy established among them: and so glad they are of their Emperor
Augustus, for that cause, that they honor the memory of his victory at Actium,
(whereby the same was settled) by an annual festiuity. So the Sicilians, for
escaping the danger of destruction threatened by the Athenians. And to come to
later times. So they of Lubeck celebrate the first day of the month for their
deliverance from the Rugians (as Helmoldus witnesses.) The Venetians also the
fifteenth day of June, Helmoldus.
for the defeature of a most fearful Conspiracy tending to the wrack of that
Commonweal, as Egnatius writes. And the Antwerpians such a day of the
month, Ignati^s.
for driving the French out of the City, that thought to have sacked it, and
surprised it; it was under the government of such States, as were Protestants,
when the City was delivered, but yet the Romanists after getting it, kept the
day holy still. To be short, The Lubecians, that I spoke of before, celebrate
such a day of the month, even Saint Lamberts day, for escaping the like danger
threatened by certain Traitors of their own City, as Crantzius writes.
Crantzius lib 9. Vandal cap. 14.
And because that Conspiracy does much pourtray forth, and fore-describe that
same hellish one, that was lately undertaken by our cruel and unnatural ones,
(for the confusion of whom we praise God this day,) let me briefly tell you
the sum of it, as it is set down by Crantzius. Some four male-contneted
wretches, sons of Belial, envying that the Governors had that which they
wanted, and commanded over them, and kept them under; gat as many partisans as
they could, and bound themselves by an oath to be true one to another, and to
keep one another counsel. Their plot was to destroy the Senators, and to take
their pleasure of their wives and daughters, and to rifle the City, and to make
themselves Lords of it. The day appointed for this Tragedy, was S. Lamberts, at
8. of the clock in the morning, when the gates should be opened. Of this
practice, though there were some muttering abroad, yet in the City there was
not the least inkling, until the very evening before it should be designed.
The evening before, God wrought so upon ones conscience, that perduenture was
privy to the design* but had been sworn before to keep it secret, that he
came unto the house of the Burgo-masters Deputy, and missing him at home, found
his son there, that was of good years and discretion, to whom he delivered
his mind, in these words: Your father, (said he,) is in Council, and there is
now as great need of Counsel and circumspection, as ever there were any where.
With that he called for a glass of beer: and when it was brought, he said, I
tell thee, thou glass, bu^ I tell no body else, that if there be not the
better care taken, and prevention used, to morrow next before noone, this City
will become the sepulcher of the chief Burgesses, and of all that be of worth,
the treason is so dangerous, and there be so many Traitors. When he had thus
spoken, he threw the glass against the wall, and hastily betook himself out
of doors, and rode away. When this was done, it was no boot to bid the
Deputies son to hasten to the Councell-house, nor yet for the Senators to
look about them. They presently took order for a strong and substantial
watch and ward, and seizing upon one of the Conspirators, (for so he proved to
be) they forced him by torture, or fear, to reveal the whole plot: and so by
Gods merciful Providence, that danger was removed, and the State preserved
from ruin and confusion. I need not parallel our danger with theirs;
Male-contentednesse bred both, oaths and imprecations kept both secret, both
were at the point to have been accomplished, and nothing, but Gods mercy,
defeated both. There were only two special differences, that the Traitors of
Lubecke sought the destruction, but of a few Statesmen in comparison, even of
one City, Ours of the Nobles, and chief Commons of the whole Realm. They had
one among them that compassionated their Country; ours had never a one that
was touched with any remorse to their Country, but only bare some private
affection toward one of our Nobles, and gave him warning to keep himself
away. But much honored be that honorable man, that would not escape himself
alone, but would his King, and Peers, and Country, to escape too. Yea, I
think he would not have thanked them for his life, if none of rekoning had
been left alive but himself. As in the Roman Story, when Sylla that Tyrant
put the Praenestines to the sword, and would have spared his host, he
generously refused it, thrusting himself among them that were appointed to be
slain, and so was slain with them. Therefore as Christ said of Mary Magdalens
pouring of ointment upon him, Ma^ke 14.
Verily I say unto you, wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached thorowout
the whole world, this also that she has done, shall be spoken of in
memorial of her. So may I say of him, that whersoeuer this Story shall be
recorded, the praise of the fidelity and carefulnes of this Peer, shall be
justly celebrated. But to return to our Traitors, (for whose confusion we
thank God this day:) They were enflamed against us with a rage that reached up
to heaven, and made account to cast over us the Line of Vanity, and the stones
of emptiness, the Strong man, and the man of War, the Judge, and the
Prophet, the Prudent, and the Aged, the Captain of fifty, and the Honorable,
and the Councellor, and the cunning Worke-man, and the Eloquent man, all
without exception, they devoted to destruction, head and tail, branch and
rush, a Caluo ad Caluum, as the Tyrant said: therefore cursed be their wrath,
for it was fi^rce; and their rage, for it was cruel; Genes. 49.
and blessed, and thrice blessed be the Name of our glorious God, for
disappointing their hopes and practices, and let all the people say, Amen.

I come at the length to my Text; whereout I observe four things.

1. First, Gods patience, [ When God arises,] Implying, that he is not always
up, as it were to execute Judgment. 2. Secondly his Justice, which comes at
the length, howsoever it comes not so soon, as they that are wronged would
have it. 3. Thirdly, his mercy and compassion toward the afflicted: he does at
the length help them, yea save them. 4. Fourthly and lastly, his Wisdom, and
Power: his Wisdom, in ordaining, even the heart of man to praise him: his
Power, in girding in, and restrayning whatsoever dregs of malice or cruelty do
remain in them.
Of these in their order, as God shall give grace, and the time leave.

Touching the first, As he that keeps Israel, does neither slumber nor
sleep; and as the Lord is not slack concerning his coming, as some men count
slackenesse; So no more does he sit down by the disgraces that are done to his
Name, nor by the despites that are done to his seruant^, but is patient toward
all, because he would do good to all, and have men to be saved, and escape out
of the snares of the Devil. Toward the wicked he is patient to heap coals
of fire upon their head, and to leave them without excuse, yea, and to make
their judgment the heavier, if being borne with so long, they will not repent.
Toward the godly also he is patient, and does not presently revenge the wrongs
done to them, that being exercised under the Cross, they might the more
thirst, and long, and cry for deliverance, and that deliverance when it
comes, might be the better well-come unto them. How long did the Lord endure
the old world? even an hundred years, while the A^ke was in preparing; The
Amorites, and the Gergesites, etc? till their wickedness was ripe. His own
People, first, the ten Tribes, then the other two? even till there was no
remedy, no hope of amendment, till the Prophets cried out Noash, it is
desperate. On the other side, Joseph was sold for a bondman, the Israelites
were strangers in the Land of Ham, Gods Heritage were carried away captive into
Babylon, the Christians were persecuted, and chased from post to pillar, and
martyred with all kind of martyrdom* in the Primitive time, by Heathen
Tyrants; in the later times, by Antichrist and his sworn ones; did the Lord
presently rise up and come among them? were they delivered as soon a^ they
groaned? O no; The King sent and delivered Joseph, the Prince of the people let
him go free, but when his feet were first hurt in the stocks, the iron entered
into his soul, He was many years in prison first. So the Israelites were
hardly dealt with in Egypt by their Taske-masters, that they cried out for the
very anguish of their hearts; Again, in the Land of the Chaldees, they served
ten Apprentiships before they had leave to return to their Country. This
for the faithful before Christ's time. As for the faithful since, as God in
the 15. of Genesis told Abraham; Know this of a surety, That thy seed shall be a
stranger in a Land that is not theirs four hundred years, and shall serve
them, and shall be evil entreated, but the Nation whom they shall serve, will
I judge, and afterward they shall come out with great substance. So you shall
find that the Church had but little peace or rest for the better part of four
hundred years after Christ's coming in the flesh: and in the later perilous
times (prophesied of by the Apostles) Antichrist had no sooner gotten to high
strength, which he compassed in Gregory the seuenths time, by superstitious
false-hood, established in Innocent the third his time by bloody Laws; but the
faithful went to the post, and wandered up and down hungry and naked, and had
no dwelling place, and were counted as the filth of the world, and the
off-scowring of all things; yea the time was, that whosoever killed them,
thought he did God good service; and this for the most space (in a manner,)
that the persecution lasted in the Primitive time. This may suffice to show
Gods patience, both toward his servants, and toward his adversaries. The
second thing is his Justice. For although God make a show as though he were
asleep, and saw not what is done, as also he sometimes makes a show as though
he heard not, yet for all that, at the appointed time, he will not fail an
inch, but coming he will come, and will not break, and the just shall live by
faith: but woe be to the wicked, it shall be evil with him, the reward of his
hands shall be given him. The Lords Seat is prepared for Judgment, and the
Lord rules over all, if he whet his glittering sword, and his hand take hold
on Judgment, he will execute vengeance on his enemies, and reward them that
hate him; Deuteronomy. 32.
He will make his arrows drunk with blood, and his sword shall eat flesh,
etc. Deuteronomy. 32. This for his Justice in punishing the wicked; as for his Justice
to right the Godly, and comforting of them, you know what is written in the 12.
Psalm. Now for the oppression of the needy, and for the sighs ofthe poor, I
will up, says the Lord, and set at liberty them whom the wicked has snared.
It is a righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble you, and to you that are troubled, rest with him. For that the
righteous should be even as the wicked, be that far from God, said Abraham,
Genes. 18. In this world many times there seems to be but a small difference
between the devout and profane, the pure and polluted, him that sacrifices,
and him that sacrifices not. Thus all things seem to fall out alike, to the
one and to the other: nay, the wicked seem to be the warmer, and to have a
greater portion in this life. What then, is the way of the Lord unrighteous?
God forbid; nay, let God be just, and all men sinners, as it is written. But
this it is, The Heaven of Heavens is the Lords, and for them to whom it was
appointed, even for them that call upon him in truth, and think upon his
Commandments to do them; but the earth and the commodities thereof, He
distributeth without respect of persons, even to them that are his children by
creation only, and not by adoption But yet there is a difference between the
prosperity of the one and the other; for the ones is but with anxiety of heart,
(even in laughter their heart is heavy,) the others is with cheerfulness and
joy in the Spirit; the ones is a pledge of the greater preferment in the world
to come, the others is their whole portion, and as if God should say, Let them
take that and look for no more; the ones is with the blessing of the people,
who wish they had more; the others with their curse and hatred, who are grieved
that they have so much: Briefly, the one flourish but for a time, and often
foresee the ruin of their house in their lifetime, but generally within a
few Generations their name is clean put out, but now the other having their
house built not with blood or oppression, but upon the foundation of Justice,
feel no shaking or tottering of it while they live, and when they are to leave
the world, they are full of hope that their house shall not be like the grass
on the house tops, which withers before it comes forth, Psalm 129. but
that it shall continue for a long season, even for many generations. Psalm
129.6.
Therefore let not the godly be discouraged, because he is kept down and troad
upon, neither yet let the wicked be brag, because their imaginations prosper:
for God has not forsaken the earth, neither has he forgotten to do Justice,
but his eyes are over the righteous, and his ears are open to their prayers;
as for the wicked, his countenance is set against them to root out the
memorial of them from off the earth. God is just, let this content the godly,
he tells all their bones, so that none of them are broken, he has all their
tears in his bottle, and will right them in due time. And that God is just,
let this appall the wicked, he shall cast up that which he has gotten
unlawfully, the Lord will draw it out of his belly. [ God arises to
Judgment,] This we have considered of. It follows, [ To save all the meek
of the earth.] It is good to be zealous in a good matter always, says the
Apostle; to be wise to do good, and in evil to have no skill, as the Prophet
does intimate. So it is good to rise betimes to serve God, to do the works of
righteousness, of mercy, and of our lawful and honest vocation, that is
pleasing to God, that is well reported of by men. Abraham did so, he rose up
early in the morning to offer a sacrifice to the Lord, which he had prescribed.
So Job rose betimes to offer for himself and his children. Job 1.
The good Lepers blamed themselves for sitting still, having so good news to
impart to their neighbors, touching the great plenty of victual the Lord had
sent them, by the running away of the Syrians. So the people rose in the
morning to come unto Christ to hear him in the Temple, Luke 2. 2. Kings 7.
Luke 2.
And Lysias the high Captain caused his men to rise very betimes, to convey
away Saint Paul, from the lying in wai^e of the Jews. These and such other
were good risings, good stirrings to save life, to save souls. On the other
side, there have been as many bad and a thousand times more. As the people you
know in Exodus, sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. And in
Esaias, they rise up early to follow drunkenness, and to smite with the fist of
wickedness, and to catch their brother with a net, etc. and I would to God
there were not infinite such among us. Well, the Lords rising is not of this
fashion, he rises to help, to deliver, to save; and whom? Not all without
difference, tag, and rag, good and bad, but the meek of the earth. And how
many of these? Not a few, but all, all the meek. So then you have in these
words.

First, the benefit, Saving, and no less. Then the disti^ction, Me^k, and none
other. Then the content, or full number, All.
Touching Saving, flesh and blood would gladly part stakes with God, ascribing
to the Lord some part ^f the work, and yet assuming to her own will or
strength that he quit himself so well from his enemy, or that he got the upper
hand of him. But now the wisdom that is of Gods Spirit otherwise. God has
wrought all our works in us, says Esaias; And neither is he that planteth any
thing, neither he that waters, but G^d is all in all, 1. Cor. 3. And
Augustine, August. de bono perseu^r. cap. 6.
Tutiores viuimus, si totum Deo damus: non autem nos illi ^x part, and nobis
ex part committimus, It is more for our safety (says he) if we ascribe all
unto God, and do not commit our selves, partly to God, partly to our selves.
And Lactantius most agreeably to my purpose. Iactan. lib. 1. cap. 11.
No man, says he, does pray in that manner, that God would help him, but that
he would save him, that he would give him health, (or salvation,) etc. He
adds, Non intelligit beneficia diuina, qui se tantummodo a Deo iuuari putat,
He does not understand Gods benefits, but does undervalue them, that thinks
that God does only help him. Thus Lactantius. So then, it is too little to
confess God to be our helper only, even touching our temporal life, and
shall we make our selves helpers with God for our everlasting life? God forbid.
Let it be Gods property, and let him have the honor to be the Savior, and the
only Savior, as he says in Esaias, I am the Lord, and there is no Savior
besides me. Why then is it said, We as helpers exhort you? Our help is in the
Name of the Lord. And, To help the Lord against the mighty? I answer, that
these phrases are used because of transgression, that we should not be
slothful in the business that we have in hand, but should stir up the gift
that is in us. For God has not given us wit, and memory, and tongue, and
hands, and legs in vain, but that we should use them: As causes to concur
with God? No, but as instruments that we should use them, at the most, that we
should use them so far as he appoints, Plutarch (...).
yea, and as he enableth. It is strange that Plutarch an Heathen man, should
observe a speech in Homer, and comment upon it as he does in his Tract. How a
man may praise himself, and not be enuyed for it, (...). You think that I
have slain the enemy of our Country (said one,) and therefore you look upon
me; No, but God has done it, he gave me strength in the Combat, he subdued him
under me. And in the same place he records, and highly commends the speech
and behavior of one Pitho, who having slain one Cotys, and the Officers of
the people striving, who might do him most honor for the same, he made this
answer, (...). Some God did this, and we did but lend our hands. This was
modestly, and this was humbly. We have heard what God does when he rises to
Judgment; he saves, he does not only help. Now let us see whom, and how
many he saves or rescueth. The Meek and all the Meek of the earth.

If the Psalmist had said, that God will save the mighty of the earth, the
gallant, the high-minded, then this had been wel-come to the great Ones, they
would not say, This is an hard saying, who may abide it? but, This is sweet,
give us euer-more of this food. Again, if the Prophet had said, God will help
all that be in low estate, that be in poverty, or necessity, whether they be
righteous, or unrighteous, faithful, or unfaithful, he shall be sure to have
support, and protection from God, even for this cause, because he is poor.
This again were a delightsome doctrine to such, even to scatter-thrifts, to
slowbacks, etc. But now there is no such respect of persons with God: The rich
and poor meet together: The Lord is the maker of them both, Pro. 22.2. And
there is one God and Father of all, Prouer. 22.^.
who is rich unto all that call upon him: therefore the Prophet did weigh well
his word, when he said, that God would save Gnanavim, he does not say Gnaniijm,
that is, poor, but, Gnanavim, that is, meek. It is true, that the Jews have
a Proverb, Bathar gnanijah azelah Gnaninthah, that is, Meekness abides upon
poverty. As on the other side, Bernard has this speech, Bernard. Epi. 42*
In alto posito non altum sapere difficile est, and omnino inusitatum, sed
quanto inusitatius, tanto gloriosius, To be in high place, and not to be
high-minded, it is a hard matter, and altogether strange, and unusual, but by
how much the more unusual, by so much the more glorious. For all that, as
Saint Paul says, The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink. So we may say,
The Kingdom of God is neither wealth, nor poverty, neither silks, nor rags.
A good rich man out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good
things, and a bad poor man, out of the bad treasure of his heart brings
forth bad things: for these things are as the person is, to whom God sends
them: they be not Gnaniijm, as I told you, that is, poor or afflicted, but
Gnanavim, that is, meek, to whom God promises this blessing, and salvation
for ever. But some man will say, Why does God promise so much to the meek, as
in this place, [ God arises to save the meek?] And in Saint Math. Blessed are
the meek: for they shall inherit the earth, Math. 5. Math. 5.
And The meek shall possess the earth, and shall have their delight in the
multitude of peace, Psalm 37. What is thy Beloved more then other beloueds?
Psalm 37. Cantic. 5.
Cant. 5. And so, what is in meekness more then in other virtues, that so
much should be attributed to it? Shall we say, that in this speech there is
^ynecdoche speciei, the particular taken for the general, one virtue for all
virtues, that the meek should signify the virtuous ones, or the godly ones;
or that it is a Metonymie, of the effect for the cause, as the meek for the
faithful, because meekness is the fruit of faith? Indeed, I take this
promise of saving, not to belong to the special practices of that virtue
only, but to the whole company of the faithful, even to the whole Church of
God; called meek, not only because they bear the Image and portraiture of
our Savior: ( Learn of me, for I am meek and lo^ly in heart, Math. 11. He
shall not contend nor cry, (or roar,) neither shall one hear his voice in the
street: Math. 11.
a bruised reed he shall not break, and the smoking flax he shall not quench,
etc. Math. 12.) But because the holy Ghost would signify by this word, the
hard estate of the Church in this world, that they should have need of
meekness and patience, as much as of any other virtue. As for example, when
many Nations were gathered against the people of God, saying, Sion shall be
condemned, and our eyes shall look upon Sion, Michah, 4. And Rabshakeh shall
revile Gods people, and blaspheme God himself. Who is your God, that he should
deliver you out of my Masters hands? 2. Kings 19.
And our Savior should not only be called a deceiuer by his own people, but
also be gibed at by Julian, What is the Carpenter now in doing? Further, when
his servants should be persecuted with taunts and reuilings, but also with
bonds and imprisonments, and with cruel death? When I say, they were to be led
as sheep to the slaughter, had they not need to be as a Lamb, dumb before
the Shearer, and not to open their mouth, etc? Thus meekness becomes Gods
Church especially, and therefore no marvel, if under the name of meekness be
promised salvation. And this truly the Chaldee Paraphrast, and some of the
Rabbis commenting upon this Text, did see that they were not to be
appropriated to any particular rank of men, but to the visible Church, (called
otherwise Gods firstborn, Gods flock, Gods Spouse, Gods secret-ones,) though
Kimhi as a Jew, would have it to be understood of Jews by nature, and of
Israel according to the flesh. You see at the length, who are marked out by God
to enjoy the benefit of protection, and Salvation, namely the Church of God,
those that have given their names unto God, that tremble at his threats, and
give credit to his promise, and are readier to suffer wrong then to do it. But
how many of these will God protect and defend? The Prophet tells us, All.
Nihil excipitur, vbi distinguitur nihil, as Bernard says in another case, God
is not a God of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles, neither is he a God
of the Elder Churches, I mean, in the Primitive time, but also of us, upon
whom the ends of the world are come. For had not the Lord himself been on our
side, may we well say, had not he himself been on our side, when man rose up
against us, it had not failed us, but our souls had been put to silence, they
were so wrathfully disposed at us. They thrust sore at us, that we might fall,
and the plowers plowed upon our backs, and made long furrows, and thought to
have swallowed us up quick, at the leastwise, to have blown us up quick, or
dead, that the name of a Protestant might no more be had in remembrance.
Behold, we have the name of Herod in detestation, because he cut the throats of
so many Infants in one quarter; Of Tarquin, because he cropped the heads of so
many Governors of one Town; Of Caligula, because he wished all the people of
Rome had but one head, that he might cut it off at a ^low; Of Cinna, and
Marius, for giving this watchword to their Soldiers, That they should slay as
many as they vouchsafed not to speak to, or to take by the hand. Also V^sperae
Siculae and matutinae Parisienses, and Danish Wassals, are recorded for
barbarous effusion ^f much blood: but now our men (if monsters might be called
men,) might they have done their work, their strange work, brought to pass
their act, their strange act; they ^ad far passed all former butchery. O mites
Diomedis equi, Busiridis, arae Clementes, etc. as Claudian says. For why,
Claudian in Ruffi^ lib. 1.
the former either shed the blood of their enemies, or of strangers, or of
their Commons, and did it either of fear, or in revenge, or upon a pang and an
heat, etc. but our men deliberately, advisedly, and with an high hand resolved
to tear in pieces, not the bodies of our Commons only and Peers, but (which
my tongue abhors to utter) of the King, and of the Queen, and of the Royal
seed; all must have gone one way, and been wrapped in one common bundle of
destruction. But the way of man is not in himself, neither is it in man to
direct his way, much less to effect his work. They took counsel, but it did
not stand; they made a Decree, but the Lord did frustrate it. We were within a
step of death and the Axe hanged over our head by a twine thread; but the Lord
arose to Judgment, he awoke as a man out of sleep, and took our cause into
his hand, and delivered us from the plot, which they had plotted, and this
(...), as it were with an Engine from heaven. Behold, we account Isa^c happy,
that had an Angel sent to hold Abraham's hand that was lifted up to slay him;
also Peter that had likewise an Angel to loose the chains from his hands, and
to set him at liberty, even the night before he should have been arraigned,
Also the Prince of C^nde, the late French Kings uncle, happy, that had his
capital Enemies stripped of their authority, even in the very nicke that they
had meant to bring him forth to the block. All these trusted in God, and he
delivered them, even at such time as the waters had like to have overwhelmed
them, and utterly to have sunk them. And surely our estate was not unlike to
theirs, neither for danger, nor for deliverance. And therefore as Moses says
in Exodus, Chap. 12. of the celebrating of the Passover, It is a night to be
kept holy to the Lord, because he br^ught them out of the Land of Egypt: this
is that night which all the Children of Israel must keep thorowout their
Gene^ations. So may we say of this day, This is the day that the Lord has
made, let us be glad and rejoice in it, Psalm. 118.24.
as it is in the Psalm. And as it is in the Book of Ester, Esther 9.22.
This is the month that is turned to us from sorrow to joy, and from mourning
to a joyful day. O let us never forget this mercy of the Lord, (never had any
(...) more showed it,) but let us write it in the tables of (...), with a pen
of iron, or with the point of a Diamo^^; Let us think of it, when we lie
down, and when we rise up, and talk of it at home, and abroad; but above all
things, let us offer to God the Sacrifice of righteousness, of repentance, of
^^^nkefulnesse, of new life, that we never provoke him to brin^ ^^on us, that
which he does so often threaten in his Word, and we have so long deserved. And
so I proceed to that which follows. [ Surely the rage of man shall praise
thee.] Which is not so meant, as that the wicked in their rage, should praise
God: No, for then they allow their tongues, and teach their tongues to speak
all words that may offend, ( Men boiled in great heat, and blasphemed the Name
of God, Revel. 16.) But that their rage should yield great store of matter for
God, to raise his praise and glory thereby: I mean, to make his Power, his
Providence, his Wisdom, and his noble Acts, to be known to men. Behold, sath
God by Esaias, I have created the Smith that blows the coals in the fire, Esaias
54.16.
and him that bri^geth forth an instrument for his work, and I have created
the destroyer, to destroy: but all the weapons that are made against thee,
shall not prosper, and every tongue that shall rise against thee in Judgment,
thou shall condemn, etc. For this cause have I stirred thee up, to get me
honor upon thee, and upon thy horsemen, and upon thy Chariots, says God to
Pharaoh, and God has made all things for his glory, even the wicked against
the day of wrath. God at the first caused light to shine out of darkness, and
ever since there is no evil in a City, but God does it. How? by inspiring the
evil into the heart of man? God forbid. No, but by directing and ordering the
same to the executing of his Judgment upon the children of disobedience, yea,
and for the benefit of his children in the end, howsoever they be in heaviness
for a time, as need requires, Inimici ^mnes Ecclesiae (says Augustine, August.
li. 18. de Ciu. Dei, ca. 15.
) quolibet errore ^aecentur, vel malitia deprauentur, etc. All the enemies of
the Church by whatsoever either error they are blinded, or malice depraved, if
they receive power to afflict her corporally, they ex^rcise her patience; if
they cross her by bad opinion, (heresies,) they exercise her wisdom: her
charity also, whilst she is feign to love them, and her bounty also, whilst
she is feign to teach them, and disciplinate them. Thus Augustine. And thus we
see, That as cut of the eater, Samson gate meat, and out of the strong,
sw^etnesse, Judges 14. And as of the Vipers flesh the A pothecaries m^ke their
Treacle: so out of the violentest, and hardest courses that are taken against
the godly, God gathers especial occasions to illustrate his glory, both for
Wisdom, Mercy, and Justice. What did Sennacherib get for advancing his Banner
against Gods City? Saul by practicing so as he did against David Gods chosen?
Jeroboam, for lifting up his hand against the man of God that came from Judah?
Nabuchadnezzar, for casting Sedrach, Mesach, and Abednego, into the fiery
Furnace? Herod, for casting Peter into the prison, and glorying to hear from
the mouths of his flatterers, The voice of God, and not of man? was he not
smitten by an Angel, and eaten up of worms, Acts 12? Yea, as Josephus
writes, Act. 12. Josephus.
he made a confession of his weakness before his end, and ascribed to God the
glory due to his Name. So did Sennacherib preach by his Statue, He that
looks upon me, let him (learn to) fear God. So did Nebuchadnezzar confess,
that the God of Sedrach, Mesach, and Abednego, was the true God, and to be
worshipped. Saul, that David was righteous, and himself faulty. Jeroboam could
not have his hand restored, before he confessed he had offended, 1. Kings 13.
Thus the rage of man praised, (that is, as Kimhi expounds it,) turned to Gods
praise, (tashub hodeah lera,) in these men. Kimhi in Psalm
But did it in these men only? Truly, as the Apostle to the Hebrews says,
The time will be too short for me to tell of Gedeon, Hebr. 11.
Barac, etc. So if I should go about to relate unto you, what mine own poor
reading could afford out of the continued Story of the Church, I should hold
you too long. The Prince of our Salvation was consecrated by affliction, and in
his weak manhood, triumphed over the Prince of darkness; and so did his
poor servants, over worldly Governors. What did Herod and Pontius Pilate, and
the high Priests, and Rulers of the people, and Saul also, while he was Saul,
get, by banding themselves against our Savior? did they not find and feel,
that they kicked against the prick, and that they prevailed nothing for all
their stirring? So Julian was feign to confess in the end, Vicisti Galilaee;
And before him Claudius H^^minianus being strangely visited by God, T^rtul. ad
Scapu^^m.
and eaten up of Li^e, said, N^mo sciat Christianus: O let no Christian know of
it. In like manner, about two hundred years agon, when Sigismund the Emper^ur,
and the Prelates of Germany had led so many Armies, even Army upon Army, against
the poor Bohemians, and their Captain Zisca, Aeneas Syluius in Hist. sua
Bohem.
which had but one eye, and were all defeated almost miraculously, (it is
certain, that though they came forth one way, they fled away ten ways, and
though they came sorth by thousands, they went home by hundreds, and th^s in
sundry invasions, lest it should be thought to have happened by chance,) did they
not cry out that God was become an Hussite? To be short; when in the year
1588. the great Armado was either sun^ke in the Seas, or dashed upon rocks, or
shattered in pieces by our Artillery, or surprised by our Forces, (albeit, let
there be no mention made of our Forces in that fight, but let God have the
whole glory,) did not the Spaniards swear, and curse, and tear God, and cry
out that he was become a Lutheran? Thus the rage of man turned to Gods praise;
and the more, and the mightier, and the fiercer they were, the more was God
honored, in taking part with us his weak ones. This for defeating of Forces.
So for defeating of Policies, we need not to go farther for an example, then
to the Gunpowder Treason: Was there ever any thing carried with greater
secrecy? They dug deep, even to hell almost, to hide their Counsel from
God, and said, No eye shall see us; we will give them a blow before they be
aware, that whosoever shall hear of it, his ears shall tingle, but whosoever
shall hear it, and feel it, he shall be torn in pieces. Thus as King Peter
of Aragon, when he resolved upon the surprise of Sicily, kept his plot so
secret to himself, that he swore he would tear his shirt from his back, if
he thought it were privy to it. And as N^rses said that he was spinning such a
pi^ce of cloth, that it should be impossible for the Empress with all her
Council to undo. So our Traitors persuaded themselves, that they had made all
things so sure, that their design should take place maugre all the Angels in
heaven. But let not him that girdeth on his armor, vaunt as he that puts it
off: neither let any man promise himself too much f^r his own policy: There
is no wisdom, there is no counsel, there is no understanding against the
Lord. The horse is prepared against the day of battle: and so, cunning, and
slights, and underminings are used, but the victory and success comes of the
Lord. Thus much our Traitors felt to their woe; and we found, and do find to
our unspeakable comfort. No Nation under heaven more bound to God for
wonderful deliverances. O that we could once learn to be thankful to God
for the same! Thankful, I say, not in word, or in tongue only, but in deed
and in truth. If he that sins, would sin no more, I mean, commit no more
crimes, (^or what man is he that lives and sins not?) but serve the Lord in
fear, and rejoice before him in trembling. If every one of us would set his
heart upon righteousness, choosing the thing that is pleasing to God, seeking
every one, not his own good, but his brothers good, and doing every one, not
his own will, but the will of our Father which is in heaven, etc. then should
our prosperity be as the floods, and our safety as the sand of the Sea; then
should no evil come near our dwelling, and the son of wickedness should
not hurt us; our enemies should be smitten before us, and all their turning of
devices should be but as the Potters clay, they should still be confounded and
abashed, and at their wits end, and ready to t^are their flesh with their
teeth, as our Traitors were, when they heard their plot was defeated; but
contrariwise, upon our King should his Crown flourish, and peace should be on
our Israel all our life long. Thus much the Lord vouchsafe to effect, and if
there be any remnant of rage or of malice in our foreign enemies, (if we have
any,) or in our domestique Underminers, (as I fear we have too many,) He
vouchafe to cross, restrain, and disappoint, making them and their devices
like the untimely fruit of a woman that never sees the sun, or like the
Spiders web, or Cockatrice eggs, that either makes no cloth, or tends to
the destruction of the deuisers: Even the Lord our God mercifully grant, and
work this for jesus Christ his sake. To whom with the Father, and the holy
Ghost, be all praise and thanksgiving, for ever. Amen, Amen.

A SERMON UPON THE TVVENTYNINTH OF JOB. THE SEVENTH SERMON.
JOB, 29. verse 14. I put on righteousness and it clothed me, my Judgment was
as a Robe and a Diadem.


JOB, that worthy servant of God, so pious and righteous, even in prosperity,
that the Devil himself could not find a hole in his coat, Job 1. so patient
and constant under the cross, (or rather under a world of crosses,) that he is
set forth by Saint James, for a pattern, and example of patient enduring,
James the 5. so gracious and inward with God, that the Prophet Ezechiel ranketh
him among them that found especial favor in Gods sight, even with Noah and
Daniel, Ezekiel. 14. Briefly, so rich in all spiritual knowled^^* and endued
with such a principal measure of Gods spirit, tha^ Moses himself disdained
not to become his Interpreter, as some of the Ancients have thought; But as is
probably conceited, Origin.
had his hand in the publishing of his Book, as Saint Peter had his in the
publishing of Saint Marks Gospel by the report of Saint Hierom. This Job, I
say, so qualified, so approved, so graced, Hieronym in Catalog.
so privileged, is the Penman of the words which I have read unto you; and
therefore the same ought highly to be regarded and observed for the excellency
of his person that spoke so, as no doubt, he was moved by the holy Ghost. Now
as Christ says in the Gospel, John 12.
This voice came not for my sake, but for yours. And as Saint Paul says to the
Corinthians, 1. Cor. 4.
These things have I figuratively transferred to myself, and to Apollo for
your sakes, that ye might learn in us, not to think of men above that which
is written. So we ought to persuade our selves, that Job telling us so much as
he does in my Text, touching his upright carriage in his place of Government,
did it not so much to magnify himself: no, nor to justify himself, (except
it were against his Backe-biters,) as to set before us as it were in a glass,
what are the special duties of them that be in place of government. [ I put on
righteousness, and it clothed me, etc.] As if he said; Others made it their
care to strowt it, and to stout it, and to brave it in costly apparel, as
though thereby they would procure respect and esteem to their place; but my
delight was to do Justice, and Judgment; to help them to right that suffered
wrong, to relieve the oppressed, that is, as far as was possible, and as much
as l^y in me, to help every one to his own; This was my Robe, and my Diadem,
and my Crown of rejoicing. This I take to be the meaning, and sum of my
Text. Now for the explicating of the words, I do not think good to make a
long discourse unto you of Robe and Diadem, (as Hierome does some-where of
Ephod and Ephod-Bad, Hieronym. ad Marcellam.
) to tell you either wherein the Robe of them of the E^st differed from the
Gown of the Romans, and the Cloak of the Grecians, or what was the stuff of
the Diadem, and the form and making thereof; These things might rather make a
show of reading, then cause godly edifying. Only I will endeavor to help the
ignorant to understand what is the difference between Justice and Judgment,
lest they be deceived. For Justice and Judgment be not one and the same thing,
though they be joined together in my Text, as also they be in half an hundred
places of the Scripture, as I think. Neither yet does Judgment signify
Discretion in this place, as it does, when we say, Such a thing is done with
judgment. No, the original word (...) is seldom or never so taken in the old
Testament. But these be the differences between Justice and Judgment; Justice
is the virtue or good quality, Judgment the exercise and practice of it.
Justice is considered as inherent in our selves, Judgment has relation unto
others, even to them with whom we have dealing. Briefly, Justice is the letter
of the Law, and tenor of right; Judgment is taken often for the qualifying of
it by conscience and equity. On these three points hang all the special
differences between Justice and Judgment. Having thus helped some of you for
the better understanding of the words; we will come now to the matter, and take
it before us as it lies, for this shall be my method, and all the division
that I will make. I put on Righteousness, etc. In the Scriptures, (if you
observe them,) you shall find the qualities of the mind to be expressed, or at
the least, shadowed by the apparel of the body; and the getting or possessing
of these qualities, to the attiring or adorning of the same. You know what
Saint Peter says, Deck your selves with lowliness, knit it unto y^u, 1. Pet.
5. Galat. 3.
make it your girdles as it were. And Saint Paul to the Galatians; As many as
are baptized, have put on Christ. And to the Romans, Romans 13.
Put ye on the Lord Jesus, make him your bearing-cloth, as it were. So to the
Ephesians, Cast off conce^ning the conversation in times past the old man, etc.
and put ye on the new man, make him your inwa^d garment. Ephesians. 4.
So to the Colossians, As Elect of God, holy and beloved, Colos. 3.
put on the Bowels of mercies, gentleness, humbleness of mind, meekness
long suffering; make them your outward garment. Many such places may be found
in the new Testament. For the old, let one be in stead of all, Let not mercy
and truth forsake thee, Prouer. 3.
bind them on thy neck, (make them thy chain,) and write them upon the Table
of thine hea t; make them thy Tablet; I will trouble you with no more
Citations. Now this and the like kind of phrasing, may be thought to be used
by the holy Ghost, for two causes: First, because we are dull of
understanding, and cannot conceive of spiritual matters, but by carnal
descriptions; secondly, because he would draw us away from that which is viler,
to that which is more precious from that which is pleasing to our senses, to
that which is profitable to our souls. Further, this phrasing, our Savior and
his servants may be observed to have used in others matters besides apparel.
Do you tell me that my mother, and my brethren would speak with me? Math. 12.
He that does the will of my Father in heaven, the same is my brother, sister,
and mother. He does not deny his carnal kindred, but prefers the
Spiritual. So in Saint John, Do ye ask me who has brought me meat? My meat
is to do the will ^f him that sent me. So again, John 4.
Do ye brag that ye are Freemen, and were never servants to any? If the
Son has set y u free, then are y^u free indeed, but if ye commit sin,
then are ye the servants of sin. So the Apostle; John 8.
will ye know what is the riches to be accounted of? 1. Tim. 6.
Godliness is great riches, if a man be content with that he has, etc. Would
ye know what Sacrifices be best? To do good, and to distribute forget not,
for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased. So Bernard, Hebr. 13. Bernard.
Would you know where be my merits? My merit is the mercy of the Lord; while
he is not void of mercy, I am not void of merit. So Chrysostom; Would you
know what is the best fast? Chrysostom and Origin.

Prosper.


To fast from sin. So Prosper, The best keeping of Holy Days, is to feriat
from dead works. Yea, out of the Church you shall find this figure and
phrasing to be used. Where are your children, Epaminondas? My children are my
victories, said he* and namely, that gott^n at Leuctra, Probus.
they will perpetuate my name. Who is the best Patriot? ^nnius.
The best Carthaginian? Hostem qui feriet, mihi e^i^ Carthaginiensis. What Is the
b^st Divination? (...), Homer. (...).
that is, The best Divination is, to fight f^r ones Country. Who is the most
Capital Enemy? What the Noblest Conquest? Liuy.
To conquer ones affections, that the greatest Conquest, and sensuality the
deadliest enemy. So what is the best Fortress, Horace.
A good Conscience. What true Nobility? Virtue. To return to the faithful;
Nazianz^n has a good speech to our purpose; (...), that is, Nazian. (...).
Shame-fastnesse is a fair flower in a Maidens garland, Palenesse, that is a
great ornament, Virtues, they be the brauest platting of the hair. Tert^ll. de
cult^s foeminarum.
Thus he: and Tertullian before him, Vestite vos Serico probitatis, etc. Put on
the Silk of honesty, the ^iffiny (as it were) of Sanctimony, and the purple of
Chastity, Taliter pigm^ntatae D^um habebi^^s amator^m. If you trim your
selves thus, nay, if you paint your selves with this kind of painting, you
shall have God himself your Lover. By this time, I know, you are more then
satisfied, that ^ob, in saying, he did put on Justice, (made it his garment,)
did speak no strange thing, but that which many, both of the Church and out of
the Church, have spoken. And this, to draw us from that which is too much
^steemed, to that which ought only or chiefly to be esteemed. Certainly
gold, and silver, and purple, and scarlet, and the like, and garments, and
ornaments, made of the same, are not of themselves common, 1. Tim. 4.
or unclean. Every creature of God is good, says Saint Paul: And every
Ordinance of man, (not repugnant to the Ordinance of God,) is obediently to be
yielded unto, says St. Peter. 1. Pet. 2.
Both Riches and Honor come of thee, O Lord, etc. and it is in thy hand to
make great, and to give strength, 2. Chron. 29. And He that has set some above
their brethren in dignity, 2. Chron. 29.
for the maintenance of peace and order, has provided for such more costly
ornaments, and habiliments, for the better distinguishing of them from others.
Esau the elder brother, had fairer clothes then Iaa^ob the younger, Genes. 27.
Genesis 27. And Joseph being promoted by Pharaoh, was not scrupulous to wear a
Ring of gold, and a chain of gold, and Silk, or five Linen, Genesis 41. No more
was Daniel scrupulous to be clothed in purple, Genes. 41.
being advanced by Belshashar, Daniel 5.
Dan. 5. No more Mor^ecat, to be bravely mounted, and gorgeously apparelled by
the appointment of Ahashuerus, as it is in the Book of Esther. Nothing that
enters into the bel^y, Ester 6.
defiles a man, if his heart be clean; So nothing that is put on the back,
if his heart be humble. Howbeit as one may be a glutton, M^rke 7.
and highly offend the Majesty of God, i^ he feed above the measure of
moderation, though meats of themselves be things indifferent: So let a man
prate never so much that his heart is upright, that he is not high-minded, and
has no proud looks; yet if he wear apparel beyond the compass of his
calling, or other then Law does allow, he lies and speaks not the truth, but
makes himself a grievous transgressor. Meats for the belly, and the belly
for meats (says the Apostle:) And so apparel for the back, 1. Cor. 6.
and the back for apparel, and God shall destroy both the one and the other.
True, yet as he that wea^eth, should not despise him that wears not; So he
that wears not, should not judge him that wears; for God has called us in
peace. This I speak, not to give way to braueing and flaunting, (the special
sin of this age, for the which the Land mourns, and fades, and seems to
be pressed down with it, as a Cart is pressed that is full of sheaues, as the
Scripture speaks,) or to excuse them that offend that way: By no means, but
to remove superstition, and to justify distinction of degrees, even by outward
deportment. For there have been, and yet are, Monks and Friars, that have
pleased themselves, and bragged to others, of the homeliness of their Weeds,
as if they merited thereby, and were more perfect then other men; when as
generally they did tread down Pride with greater pride, as Plato said of the
Cynicke. Again, there have been some, even the Spartans by name, who by
equalling the Plebeians with their Magistrates and Nobles for habit, made the
one sort more contemptible, and the other too saucy and insolent. The point
that hitherunto I have insisted upon, is this* Justice is the best Robe for a
Magistrate, for it is the inward, but yet the outward is not to be condemned,
nor contemned neither, for that was no part of Jobs meaning, no more then it
was C^rists, to condemn the moderate care for the things of this life, by
saying, either as he does John 6. Labor not for the mea^e which perishes, but
for that which endures to everlasting life, John 6.
which the ^onne of man will give unto you. Or as he does, Math. 6. Lay not up
for your selves Treasures on earth, wh^re the moth, Matthew. 6.
and canker do corrupt, etc. but lay up for your selves Treasures in heaven,
etc. The truth is, that though one thing be necessary, and Job did choose the
better part, yet other things have their use, Luke 10,
and may lawfully be provided and used: but a word is sufficient to warn men
to keep their estate by outward compliture. All the doubt and danger is, that
they will not be careful enough to put on the inward of Justice. Now this you
are to understand, that there is a maine difference between the furnishing of
our selves with outward, and the furnishing of our selves with inward apparel;
For a man may have the outward, and not put it on, and he may put it on, and
it not be his own; But whosoever has Justice, he puts it on, and whosoever
puts it on, it is his own. Now, Genes. 41.
as Joseph thought not himself fit to be presented to Pharaoh, before he was
shaued, and had changed his raiment: And as Bartimeus threw away his cloak,
when he was going toward our Savior: Mark 10.
And as Moses was bid to put off his shoes, before he approached to the Bush
where God appeared; Exodus 3.
So it becomes every one that is a Magistrate of higher or lower place, or
looks that way, to cast off every thing that press^th down, and the sin that
does so easily beset us, as the Apostle speaks. Hebr. 12.
So shall he be the more able to get the same precious Robe, and so shall he
appear more venerable in it when it is gotten. It is certain, that there be
very many things which will greatly hinder the putting on of it, and which will
stain it grossly, when it is on or se^meth to be on. First Prejudice,
secondly, Partiality, thirdly, Bribery, fourthly, Precipitancy. He that keeps
himself free, from these is a perfect man, (in comparison,) and worthy to be a
Successor of Job, and to sit in the place of Judgment. I may but glance at
these things, and must ouerskip whatsoever besides these does hinder Justice,
lest I be prevented by time. Touching therefore the first, Prejudice is a great
corrupter of Justice and Judgment: It carries reason violently after will,
whereas will should attend upon reason. Fertur Equis Auriga, and currus nescit
habenas. Can any good thing come out of Nazareth, said Nathaniel, John 1? Shall
Christ come out of Galilee? John 1.
He may not so much as dwell there. Search and look: for ^ut of Galilee
arises no Prophet, John 7.
John 7. There is one Prophet more, Micaiah by name, but he never prophecieth
any good unto me: No more will he to thee, by all likelihood. To this effect
Ahab, 1. Kings 22. But what said Iehosaphat? Let not the King of Israel say so.
And Philip, Come and see ((...) a Proverb among the Jews to this day.) And
Nicodemus; Does our Law judge a man, except he be first heard? The Judges in
Athens took a corporal oath (...), that is, to hear both parts
indifferently. And the saying is well known: He that gives Sentence, hearing
but one side, Seneca in Medea.
though it may perhaps be just, yet himself is surely unjust. It is not the
manner of the Romans, (said Festus, Acts 25.) to deliver any man to die, Acts
25.
before he which is accused, have the accuser face to face, and have license to
answer for himself, concerning the c^ime laid against him. Therefore
inexcusable was the fault of Pilate, that suffered himself to be borne down
by the preiudicatory exclamation of Christ's enemies, John 18. If he were not an
evil doer, we would not have delivered him unto thee. If it be enough to
accuse, who shall be innocent, said the Emperor? And Innocence it self may be
condemned, Am^^an. Marcell^n.
if Prejudice sit upon the Bench. The Story of Caesar would be remembered: He
had a preiudicate opinion against Ligarius, Plutarch.
that he had been a busy man against him and his capital foe, and therefore
resolved to condemn him, whosoever should speak for him. Yet when he had
given leave to the Orator to undertake his cause, (who opened it to the full,
and removed many imputations that were cast upon him,) Caesar found himself so
much altered in affection and judgment, that he pronounced him innocent, whom
before he thought to have been the arrantest Traitor that lived. So it falls
out many times, that they that have been strongly suspected for this, or that
crime, because their former carriage had not been regular, have yet been
found faultlesse for that which was laid to their charge, and whatsoever they
suffered, they suffered wrongfully. Now as in the matter of charity, it were
better to bestow an Alms upon such as it is no Alms to give unto, rather then
for the unworthy sake, to withhold from the worthy, (the saying is not mine but
Gregory Nazianzens, Nazianzen.
in the Funeral Sermon that he made upon his father.) So it is a good rule in
my judgment, rather to let ten Felons escape, Vide Vlpian. ca. 5. de poe^^s,
ex Iacobo Simanca, 5. de Rep. ca. 17. pu. 264.
(if their offenses be not heinous,) though there be proof against them, then
to hang one true man upon presumption. For the Felon escaping at this time, may
come into the net again, according to the manner, and then he may receive the
wages of his iniquity, and no man pity him; but life being taken away, cannot
be restored. As, In Bello non bis peccatur, Lamachus. (...). Lege Veget. li. 1.
cap. 13. Tacitus.
No more is it in cases of life. But you will say, Better to have a mischief
th^n an inconvenience; And Habet aliquid ex iniquo omne magnum exemplum, quod
contra singulos vtilitate publica rependitur: Every great example has some
iniquity in it, somewhat that may be hurtful to some particular persons, which
yet is recompensed by the public good. I answer, For pecuniary mulcts, and
such punishments, as do not reach to the taking away of life, or limb, in the
name of God, let the Magistrate use his discretion, I will not be against the
same (...), to make some smart for example-sake: but for life cases, (when life
is at the stake,) I think S. Paul's rule is to be followed, as well in that
case as any other, We may not do evil, that good may come thereof; Romans 3.
And likewise Tertullian has a good rule, Nulla est necessitas delinquendi,
quibus vna est necessitas non delinquendi, that is, Tertullian.
There is no necessity to offend (upon this or that pretext,) for as much as
this only necessity lies upon us, not to offend: And that it is not safe to
give severity the reins to work her will, and to put to death, for example
sake. Let me tell you a Story out of Seneca, Seneca lib. 1 de Ira cap. 16.
which in brief was thus. A couple of Soldiers going abroad to forage, when
they had been forth a time, at the length one of them returns alone without
his fellow. It was observed, complained on, and he brought before the Judge
Martial, who charged him with the murdering of his fellow; but he denied it,
and besought liberty to seek out his fellow. It would not be granted, but he
was condemned to die, and a Centurion charged to carry him out of the Camp,
according to the manner, and to see execution done. When they came to the place
of execution, behold, the Soldier that had been missing, appeared, and then
there was great joy between him and his fellow, and in the whole presence
also, who were glad to have life saved: The Centurion also thought he could
do no less, but bring the supposed murderer back, for as much as he, for
whose sake he was to die, was found to be alive. He thought also (I warrant
you,) that he should have great thanks of the Judge for stopping wrong; but
hear what followed, hear, and wonder. The Judge, Piso by name, (let him be
named and remembered to his perpetual shame,) condemns all three to die. The
first, because he had condemned him before; the second, because he was the
cause that his fellow was condemned; the third, because he had not done
execution upon the condemned. Thus, said Seneca, Excogitauit quemadmodum tria
crimina faceret, quia ^ullum inuenerat, He was so witty, that he was able to
make three crimes of never a one. For the point; This Piso being neither absurd
for conceit, nor very bad for disposition, (for so it is written of him,) had
some reason to move him to do as he did, and in likelihood this, that he
would Sancire Disciplinam militar^m, by the death of three: both to make
Soldiers afraid to straggle, and Under-officers wary to fulfill the command
of the Superior, without staggering. Howbeit though Piso would wash himself
in Niter, as our Job speaks, yet he cannot blot out the stains of
hard-hartednesse; And cruelty is cruelty, howsoever it be colored and
plastered. Well, we have seen that Prejudice is a great hinderer of Justice,
and it is not excused by pretense of public good. Thus far we are gone. A
second hinderer of Justice, (and stain to the Magistrate, Iam. 2.
) is Partiality. If there come into your company a man with a gold Ring, and in
goodly apparel, and there come in also a man in vile raiment, and ye have
respect to him that wears the gay clothing, and say unto him, Sit thou here
in a good place; and say unto the Poor, Stand thou there, or sit here under my
footstool, are ye not partial in your s^lues, and are become Judges of ^uill
thoughts? Thus Saint James concerning private Partiality. The like we are to
think also of public. If they that are in Commission should say, Da Trebio,
Pon^ ad Trebium, Iuuenal.
etc. O, make room for such a one, he can further such a great man's cause,
that is to be heard, I must look that he have no wrong; but on the poor man's
case, we have no care which end goes forward: he can make no friends, he can
work no revenge, therefore let us destroy the tr^e with the fruit; let us
tread him down like mire in the street; let us make him an example to all
busie-bodyes, that will dare to maintain their right, or once to quacke
against their betters. Then we walk not uprightly, but have the faith of our
glorious Lord Jesus Christ in respect of persons. The Law is plain, Deuteronomy. 1.
You shall have no respect of persons in Judgment, but shall hear the small as
well as the great, you shall not fear the face of man. Deuteronomy 1.
And the Apostle charge Timothy, that he do nothing (...), that is, Tim. 5.
by titing the Balance of one side. And the Prophet Ezechiel reckoning up ^he
grievous sins of Judah, Ezech. 9.
makes this an especial one, that the City was full of Muttah: what is that?
Kimhi.
Mishpat mutteh, that is, Judgment turned from the bias, as it were, as the
Hebrew Interpreter does expound it. Yea, and nature taught the natural Poet to
condemn it for a great sin in the Governors, when they do (...), that is,
deprave Judgments by partial inclining to one side. What a shame was that for
Caesar, to confess, Melior causa Cassij, sed denegare Bruto nihil possum?
Cassius his cause is better, but Brutus must go away with the cause, because
he is nearer unto me: Haec caro tangit Brutum. Also Henry the Emperor (the
seventh of that name,) is much taxed in Story, for that being appealed unto by
a couple of Lawyers, who contended about the Sovereignty of the Emperor,
making their agreement between them, that he for whom the Emperor should give
Sentence, should win an horse of his fellow; He fair pronounced truth to be on
his side, that spoke most for his power and authority; whereupon this Proverb
was taken up, Alter respondit aequum, sed alter habet Equum: Such a one has
right on his side, but the other rides the horse. Thus you hear how Partiality
has perverted right, and corrupted Judgment, even in the highest Magistrates;
and therefore not to be doubted, but inferior Magistrates be sometimes tainted.
How can they choose, all the while they cannot see all things themselves, but
must follow the leading of others who may be deceived and deceive? Therefore
the Shrieues are to be admonished, that they return none for Inquest men, that
are like to serve men's turns for the trial of Nisipriusses, or which will
help to cast away men upon displeasure, but such as are esteemed men of
virtue, (or worth,) Men fearing God, hating covetousness, and no way
obnoxious. For as the inward senses may be abused, Exodus 18.
if the outward do mistake and misreport unto them; as that to be sweet, which
is not, and that to be black which is not. And as Cyprian says, If the water
at the wellhead be corrupted, the stream or perle running from the same, will
not be wholesome: So if they that should convey truth to the Magistrates, even
as water is carried by pipes into the Cisterne, be either stopped with
Prejudice, or poisoned by Partiality, then they that are to pronounce according
unto their mouths, must needs pronounce amiss. Therefore they that are faulty
this way, deserve double punishment ((...),) because they offend themselves,
and make others to offend. So much against Partiality. The third thing that
impeacheth Justice, is Bribery. A Lacedemonian General complained, that he was
driven out of Asia by a thousand Archers: he meant, by the King of Persia his
money, (an Archer was the stamp of the Persian coin.) So in the late civil
wars in France, many were said to have been pelted with Spanish Pistols, (a
Pistol is an indifferent word, both for a certain coin, and a small Piece.
1. Sam. 4.
) So the Philistines cried out, Who shall deliver us out of the hands of these
mighty Gods? and so, many have said, Who can withstand an Army of Angels, (of
golden Angels?) But as Austine said, Aliud est ridere, aliud resp ndere: It is
one thing to jest, another thing to answer: So I think, such a sin as
Bribery is, must be beaten down, and broken in pieces, more gravely and more
substantially, then by breaking of Jests. It is a truth, that corruption is a
very old sin, even Hesiod, that lived seven or eight hundred years before
Christ, complains, that his brother went beyond him, by bribing of
Magistrates, ((...), Hesiod.
by greatly honoring such as deu^ur^d gifts*) And Plato long after him, yet
long before Christ, recites a Sentence of an old Poet, (...), Pla^o.
that is, The greatest Rulers, and the greatest Governors, (they that are like
Gods upon the earth,) have been won and overcome with gifts. Philip.
There is no City so invincible, (said one) but an Ass laden with gold, will
make the gates fly open. And another received this Oracle: Fight with silver
Lances, and thou shall be sure to conquer. But we need not to rake in the
puddle of heathenish writers, to know the power of Bribes and gifts. Solomon
the wisest, and best experienced King, says, A gift is as a precious stone in
the eyes of him that has it, Proverb 17.
it prospers whither-soeuer he turns it. Proverb 18.
And again, A man's gift makes room for him, and brings him before great
men. Yea, God himself by Moses, in Deuteronomy. shows the great strength of gifts,
or the great weakness of man to withstand them. A gift, (says he,) does
blind the eyes of the wise, Deuteronomy. 16.
and peruerteth the words of the just, therefore thou shall not take a gift. As
if he told us, that there was, I know not what poison in them, (and indeed, men
use to say, that beneficia be venificia,) that the very handling of them, will
infect a man; Pliny li. 32 c 1.
As ^liny writes of the fish called Torpedo, that if a a man touch it not
only with his hand, but with stick or rod, or such like, it will benumme him:
And as Scholars know, that D^mosthenes by poisoning Harpalus his Goblet, was
tempted and weighed to favor his cause, to the great danger of his Country,
and unto his own utter shame. No man doubts but Samuel his sons were well
brought up by their Father, and so was Gehesi, as well by his Master Elisha,
and Judas best of all, at the feet of our Savior: M^th. 26. 2. Kings 5. 1.
Sam. 8.
And yet Judas for money sold his Master; and Gehesi for money shamed his
Master; And Samuel his sons for money, (by taking of gifts,) made their
Fathers Government odious to the people, which otherwise, they could never have
been weary of. Now if this were done in better times, and where the best
examples were showed* then what is to be expected in these worser times, in the
wane of the Moon, as it were, and in the decrepit age of the world? Is it for
any man that is in authority, being wise, to give absolute credence to his
followers, that, that must be true which they do prompt, just, which they
persuade? Or are they not rather to suspect them, when they see them earnest in
a cause that Bo^em habent in lingua, as one said, Argentum in faucibus, as it
was said of another? It is certain, that it is not enough for a Magistrate to
have abstinent hands himself, but he must look to the fingers of his
followers, that they be not given to finger or prowle. Plutarch writes of
Pompey, that marching with his men in Sicily, because he would have them to
keep good rule, Plutarch.
he caused their swords to be sealed up in their scabberds, and if he found
the seals stirred, it was an argument to him they had been meddling, and had
done some body wrong, and then they paid for it. I do not wish Officers, or
their men should have their purses sealed, or their arms tied behind them,
when they begin their Circuit, or enter upon their employment; By no means;
For The Labourer is worthy of his reward: And, M^th. 10. 1. Cor. 9.
Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox, that tread^th out the Corn. And
if we think them worthy their hyre, that gather stones out of the fields to
mend the highways, or that do pluck up weeds out of a Garden, that the good
herbs may have the more room, and grow the better* then how can we honor or
reward them too much, that do plow up iniquity by the roots, and do take all
offenses out of Church, and Commonweal? Therefore such Fees as are granted
them by Law, let them take in the Name of God, no man is to grudge at it. Only
this I advise, and admonish, and pray, that they that be in authority, whether
Civil persons or Ecclesiastical, yea, and their servants also would think
John Baptists charge to the Soldiers in Saint Luke, to belong to themselves,
Use no violence, ((...), toss no man to and fro,) get nothing by sycophansie,
and be content with your wages, whatsoever is taken above, that is evil. Luke
3.
What if it be given of good will? should any man's eye be evil, because some
man's hand is good? Truly, if it be given of single sincere good will, I have
nothing to say against it, for nothing is freer then gift; and volenti nulla
iniuria. But what if it be Mixta voluntas, as in a tempest, the Merchant
throws his goods into the Sea, to save himself and his ship? shall we call
this benevolence or good will to the Sea, or is it not rather necessity, or
inforcement? Why, David, the time was, did make choice of the plague, 2. Sam.
24.
which otherwise he would have shunned as the gates of death: but it was
because he would escape a greater Plague, even the plague of Famine, or Sword.
So, many put themselves to great charges, which they would be glad with all
their hearts to save, saving to avoid a greater mischief. Gifts from them that
have no suite present, or toward, are kindnesses, gratuities, liberalities, and
against such there is no Law; from them that have a suite, either in present or
fear, or hope, or mean to have one, they are in plain English, Bribes. But
touching them that have had their suites sped, I think they may more honestly
be offered of the party, then honorably received of the Magistrate. I am sure
that Elisha would take no reward of Naaman the Syrian, no, not after he had
healed him of his Leprosy, nor allow his man to take any, but punished him
exemplarily for taking. And Erasmus reports of Frederick Duke of Saxony, that
being offered a great mass of gold by the Agents of Archduke Charles, Erasmus.
even after he had given him his voice to be Emperor, (and indeed made him
Emperor,) he would not so much as look upon it: And when they were instant
upon him, at the least, to give them leave to bestow a larges^e upon his
Gentlemen, and followers; his answer was, that they might take some thing if
they would; but I tell you, and I tell them (said he,) that not one of them
that takes a penny, shall stay a day in my house. This was a godly He^oicall
mind, but sooner praised then followed. It is well now a days if nothing be
given or promised beforehand, and when the cause is toward hearing; but to
bar men from taking indifferently, hand over head without exception, lest hap
some of them might have a suit^, that may seem rough-Stoicknesse, and rude
inciuility. Let it be so, let it be lawful to take without scruple, such
things as the Law allows, Esculenta and Poculenta, but yet that you be not
too forward to enter further, then will stand with conscionable discretion. Let
me tell you a Story out of Bernard: In short thus it was; Martin, a Cardinal
of that name, Bernard ^. de Considerat.
returning from Denmark, where he had employment, all weary and spent, at the
length got to Florence, and there he is honorably received and entertained by
the Bishop, who also at his departure bestows an horse upon him to carry him
to Pisa. But what followed? The next day, (the very next day, as I remember,
says Bernard,) the Bishop followed after, having a matter in the Court, and
the day of hearing being at hand, he therefore seeks voices, and at the
length comes to Martin, and craves his furtherance; to whom he said,
Decepisti me, nesciebam tibi imminere negotium, Thou have deceived me, I did
not know that thou had a cause toward hearing; take thy horse again, I will
none of him: and so presently rest^red him unto him. Bernard, even so long
ago, maruelleth at this example, and says it was alte^ius seculi, fitter for
a less corrupt age, then that wherein he lived. Yet I doubt not, but the like
is usually practiced by many Judges of our time, and namely by them that hear
me this day: for I hear well, yea, very well of them. But as Physicions in
their Doses, do not intend, that the Physic which they minister, should
work an especial effect in every part of the Patients body, but in that only
that is affected: And as Captains in the wars, do cause alarmes to be
sounded, not because they think all, or the most part to be asleep, but lest
any should be unready; So the Preachers duty is, to lift up his voice like a
Trumpet, and to hold forth, (as it were) the Word of medicinable exhortation:
if any have need, there it is ready; if they have no need, the Preacher has
showed his good will, and the same shall return as a blessing into his bosom.
Enough of Bribery, whether in higher degrees or lower. The fourth and last
thing that I proposed for a c^rrupter of Justice, is Precipitancie. -- Qui non
moderabitur irae. infectum volet esse, dol^r quod suaserit and men's, Hor^^.
He that will not master his anger, will many times do that, which he would
eat his nails were undone. Thus speaks one of Anger, which is a very bad
Counselor. The like may be said of Haste, that it causes many ouer-sights
and trippings. Indeed Herodotus does say so much in plain words, (...).
Herodot.
So we say, Have makes waste. And Kimhi upon the first of Esaias, records this
for the Apophthegme of the ancient Hebrew Doctors, Ashrei hadaijan sheme
chammets dino, Blessed is that Judge does Fermentare, (is well advised of) his
Sentence. Kimhi.
If David had not been too hasty, he had not rewarded Ziba with half his
Masters Estate, (who deserved an halter for his Sycophancie,) to the great
hinderance of Mephibosheth, 2. Sam. 16. and 19.
and to the great distaining of his own honor. For was there not an
extraordinary League of friendship between David and Jonathan, Mephibosheths
father? So before this, if Putifer had not been too hasty, Genes. 39.
he would not have cast Joseph into prison, without due ex^mining of the
matter; by which means he stripped himself of a faithful servant, and
fostered an Adulteress in his bosom. So, long after this, If Theodosius the
great had not been too hasty, Histor. Tripart. lib. 9. cap. 30.
he had not committed that horrible massacre in Thessalonica, which afterward
he rued and repented, almost in sacke-cloth and ashes. Certainly for trial of
small matters, such as are pecuniary and the like, it is not amiss, that there
be an hastening to ripeness, which when it is attained unto, it is a wrong to
defer Judgment any longer; lest it befall the litigants, as it did a
certain Great man in his exile, that they had cause to say with him, We had
been undone, if we had been undone: I mean, and they meant, if the matter
had gone against them, they had been quite undone; and yet though it go with
them, they are more then half undone, they had spent so much in the suite. But
now for matters of life and death, I am of his mind, that thought and said,
Nulla vnquam de mo^te hominis cunctatio longa, I^uenal. Satyr. 6.
A man cannot be too well advised of that which he cannot mend, or make amends:
for when once it is done, Surely, There is hope of a tree if it be cut down,
that it will yet sprout again, and that the tender branch there of will not
cease; but man dy^th, etc. and where is he? he lies down and rises not, till
the heavens be no more, that is, till there be an end of this world. What
then? Do I speak against Justice, or expedition for, or in Justice? No, but
against Precipitancy in doubfull cases, and especially if they concern life.
For if a man be a Murderer, Burglarer, or Robber to day, he will be so to
morrow, and be found so the third day, or the third week, or the third
month, etc. and then when there is good certainty, let him suffer, a
Gods-name. How many have taken it upon their deaths, that they were innocent
touching the crime laid to their charge, and after their deaths it was made
manifest that they were innocent indeed, but in vain? Their lives could not be
given to them again. Now in such a case, it is not enough for the Inquest to
lay the fault upon the witnesses, nor yet for the Justices to lay the fault
upon the twelve men, (for every man shall bear his own burden; And as the
righteous shall live by his own faith, so the unrighteous shall die for his
own faultiness; and a pillow of blood is a very hard pillow for a tender
conscience to take rest upon, harder then the pillow of stones in Genesis;
Genes. 28.
for upon that Jacob did sleep: (But that ought to be done in such weighty
cases (that concern life,) which the Law of God requires to be done in the
case of Idolatry; namely, They should seek and make search, Deuter. 13.
and inquire diligently; and if it be true, and the thing certain, etc. then
thou shall not fail to slay them, etc. And as Job professed, that he did in
these words* The cause which I knew not, Job 29.16.
I searched out. Otherwise if the matter be not evident, it is better to be
slow then forward, lest Cinna, Cesars friend, be slain in place of Cesars
enemy, (that had railed upon him) as in the Roman Story; And lest Histiaeus
make the shoo, and Aristag^ras wear it, as in the Greek Story; And lest that
one sow, John 4.
and another reap, as in the Gospel; I mean, lest one commit the offense,
and another be punished. If the least imputation of cruelty did stick to your
reputation, (Honorable men and brethren) if it might be said of you with any
probability, which was said of Claudius the Emperor, that his hands were
otherwise weak and feeble, Seneca.
but strong and sturdy to shead blood. I could use many reasons to move and
induce you to lenity and clemency, so farre-forth as the state of the
Commonweal would bear, (for that is always to be vnder-stood, Salus
Reipublicae summa Lex:) but I persuade my self of you, that you propend
thereunto by nature, and specially by grace, and that you say many times to
your selves, when you are about to give Sentence, as the successor of Claudius
did, when a Bill was brought unto him for the execution of a man condemned,
Quam vellem, nescirem literas! Oh that I could not write my name! Oh that
another had my room! Su^ton.
And that it may be said of you, as it was of that good Emperor Augustus, Qui
cum triste aliqui^ statuit, fit tristis and ipse, cuique fere poenam sumere,
poena sua est: that si, You are grieved your selves when you pronounce a
grievous Sentence, and you think your selves are punished, when you punish
others. I have stood very long upon the three first words of my Text, [ I put
on Righteousness.] Wherein I have showed, First, the meaning, Fitness and
vsualnesse of the Phrase; secondly, for the Vettue, (the bulk of the Phrase,)
how necessary and goodly it is; the goodliest Robe that a Magistrate can put
on; thirdly, and lastly, what be the hindrances and stains of it. First,
Prejudice; Secondly, Partiality; Thirdly, Brib^ry; and lastly, Precipitancy.
Now Job is not content to tell us, that he put on Justice, but adds, [ it
clothed me:] Meaning, that he did not cast it behind him like a cloak, or
throw it about him like a mantle to cover some p^rts, and to leave the others
uncovered, but that it covered him on all parts from top, to toe, like the same
(...) (which was a long Garment down to the feet,) mentioned in the
Revelation; Ester 8.14.
And like the same (...) a Garment wherein one might wrap and roll himself,)
mentioned in the Book of Ester. Meteranus in his Belgicke Story, Metera^.
writes of a certain old woman in the Low Countries, that she being near her
end, required her Keeper, of all loves and in any case, to put upon her the
Cowle of a Friar Minorite, (when she should be ready to yield up the ghost,)
which she had prepared for the purpose: And, said she, if death happen to come
on so suddenly, that thou can not put the whole Cowle upon me, yet fail not
at the least, to put one of mine arms into it, that by virtue thereof, three
parts of my sins may be forgiven me, and the fourth expiated in Purgatory.
Thus Meteranus of the old wives persuasion, touching the virtue of the Friars
Cowle: which persuasion, Superstition bred, Covetousness tendered, and folly
entertained. I cannot say so much of the virtue of the Robe of Justice, either
commutatiue, or distributive; either private or public, (though I think
passing well of it,) that it should have power to forgive sins. No, The blood
of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sins* 1. John 1.
And, He has washed us in his blood; Revel. 1.
And, We must be found in him, not having our own righteousness which is of
the Law, but that which is by the faith of Jesus Christ, Philip. 3.
even the righteousness of God through faith. But this I dare boldly say, that
it yields a pleasant savor unto the nostrils of our heavenly Father, Genes.
27.
as Esaus garment upon Jacobs back did to Izack their father; And of all the
garments ye can put on, after faith and love, there is none to be compared to
it. There is mention in Saint Matthew of soft clothing: but it was only for
them that were in Kings Courts. Math. 11. Psalm. 45.
Also in the Psalm, of a garment of needle-worke wrought about with diverse
colors: but it was only for the Queen. Also, in the 2. Sam. of garments of
many pieces or colors: 2. Sam 13.
but they were for Kings daughters that were virgins. Also of garments of
Linen and Woollen, which were forbidden the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 22.
who thereby as by an Allegery, were forbidden all hypocrisy and insincerity,
not only in matters of faith, but also in conversation. Also in the book of
Ioshuah, of a Babylonish garment, which Achan purloyned to his destruction.
Joshua 7.
Further, there is mention in Stories of garments of gold, and of silver, at
which Dionysius iested, That they were too cold in the Winter, and too heavy in
the Summer, (but now they are in special request; every ordinary fellow
wears cloth of gold, and of silver: nay, he is not an ordinary fellow, but a
Nobody, that is not so attyred;) Also there is mention in Story of perfumed
garments, which were the undoing of Muleasses King of Tunis; Iouius.
for by the smell thereof he was hunted after, taken, and bereaved of his eyes,
and of his Kingdom, as Iouius writes. Thus the outward garment, or ornament
is for some persons and purposes, and not for others; and for some certain
times, and not for all. But now Justice is for all sorts of men, and for all
times of the year; sweet without fulsomnesse; precious without burdensomnesse;
safe without dangerousnesse; indifferent to all degrees, to all persons,
common, equal, glorious, full of Majesty, and full of all good works. We
have not so great use of fire and water, as we have of Justice, said one, (or
one maysay,) The Morning-starre, or the Euening-starre is not so fair as
Justice, said another. Fair as the Moon, pure as the Sun, Cant. 6.
terrible as an Army with Banners; So have some applied that of the Canticles.
Without Justice, neither City, Town, nor house can continue, said another.
Nay, very thieves cannot live without Justice, (without parting their booties,
equally,) it is confessed generally; Nay, Remota Iustitia, quid sunt regna,
nisi magna Latrocinia, August. 4 de Ciuit. Dei, ca. 4.
said Augustine? Take away Justice, and what are Kingdoms else but great
theeueries, great haunts or meetings of Thieves? Therefore Justice being so
goodly, so pleasant, so profitable, so by all means necessary, is it any
marvel, if Job were not content to say he put it on, but add eth, that it
clothed him, that is, he thought himself sufficiently well apparelled while he
had Justice on, and without it, he thought himself, and all others naked?
Travelers write (N^than Chytraeus by name,) that in Padway, Justice is
described in a public place between a pair of Scales and a Sword (according
to the manner,) with these two verses proceeding from her mouth, Reddo cuique
suum, sanctis and legibus omne, Concilio mortale genus ne crimine viuat. The
verses are but clouter-like, (unworthy such an University as Padway is renowned
to be,) but the sense is good, and for the shortness of them, Nathan Chytr.
they may the better be remembered. I give (says Justice) to every one his
own, I procure and win all men to be obedient unto godly Laws, lest
otherwise they should prove criminous, that is grievous transgressors. It is
so; where there be not wholeso^e laws, (which are the parents of Justice, the
daughters of Prudence, the Nurses of Virtue, the Companions of Peace, the
Harbingers of Prosperity, etc.) there all things go out of order, Seruanis on
Horse back, (as in the book of the Preacher,) and masters, Eccles. 10.
even Princes on foot. Like Priest like people, as in the Prophet Esaias: Esaias
24. Bernard. Esaias 24.
nay the people not so bad as the Priest, as Bernard says, Like buyer, like
seller, like borrower, like lender, as Esaias again says; Nay, then no buyer,
or seller, or borrower, or lender, but all upon snatching and catching, and
rapine, and wrong, and blood touches blood, and He that refraineth himself
makes himself a prey. Therefore blessed be God for Laws, Esaias 59.
and blessed are the people to whom the mouths and expounders of the Law, the
Administers of Justice, I say, are sent. Their very feet upon the mountains
(as they are coming) ought to seem beautiful unto us, and we are to receive
them as an Angel of God, even as God himself: for his office they bear, and
he vouchsafes them his own name. In plain and distinct English, they ought
to be had of us in special honor and regard for many causes. First, for the
Lords sake, who is the Author of their authority, ( There is no power but of
God, Romans 13.) Secondly, for the Kings sake, who is the immediate sender of
them, 1. Pet. 2. 1. Tim. 2.
(Rulers are sent by the Prince for the punishment of those that do ill, and
praise of them that do well, says St. Peter.) Thirdly, for their work sake:
for they watch over us, and take pains for our good, that we may lead a quiet
and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty; that we mayeate every man
his own bread, and drink every one of his own Well, and cloth our selves
every one with his own Wool, and sit every man under his own Vine, and under
his own Fig Tree, from Dan to Beershebah, even from one end of the Land, unto
the other. These be the fruits and commodities of Magistracy and Justice,
many and singular every way. But where those be wanting both, or one of them,
(Magistracy as in the days of the ^udges: There was no King in Israel, but
every one did that which was good in his own eyes; Justice and execution, as
Acts the 18. The Grecians took Sosthenes and beat him before the Judgment
seat, and yet Gallio (the Governor) cared nothing for these things,) there
the earth is clean emptied and utterly spoiled: (the words in the Original be
sounding, and like the voice of Thunder, Hibbok, tibbok, hibboz, tibboz, (...)
Esaias 24.3.
) there things go (...), that is, against the stream, or rather they are
carried headlong by a maine current of disorder, into a bottomless swallow of
confusion. It has been questioned and argued, whether it were better to live
under a tyrannous government, where every suspicion is made a crime, every
crime capital; or under an Anarchie, where every one may do what he list? And
it has been long since ouer-ruled, That it is much better to live under a
state, sub quo nihil liceat, quam sub quo omnia. So then, if even the worst
kind of government be a kind of blessing in comparison, then what is it to live
under a godly and Christian King, that does govern with Counsel, and rule
with wisdom; and under such Judges and Justices, that do not take themselves
to be absolute, but confess that they are (...), Math. 8.
like the Centurion in the Gospel, and to give an account, not only to him
that is Judge of quick and dead, but also to the Higher powers on earth, if
they should too far forget themselves? This then being their charge and
Commission, to administer Justice indifferently, to encourage the upright, to
cut off the incorrigible, their charge and terror, (terror, I say, in respect
of the reckoning day, sometimes in this world, but certainly in the world to
come,) will any man envy them their Robes, the honor, the place that they do
enjoy? Truly, if they had no other comfort but the honor outwardly given unto
them, that were but a cold comfort ^r reward. Some lenitiue, I grant, it may be
to flesh and blood, to them that are Gloriae animalia, as Tertullian first, and
after him Hierome, T^rtull^an. Hieronym.
do call Philosophers. But to them that have learned Christ aright, to them
that judge not according to the eye, but with righteous judgment, these things
are but vain and vile. Praises they esteem for bubbles, and applauses for
babl^s; eminent places, but for scaffolds to be gazed on, and a great deal ^f
attendance, for a great deal of ado and trouble; Titles of honor, but for
tittle-tattles, Robes of scarlet, or purple, for depriments and detriments.
Indeed there was a great King, Antigonus.
that turning and winding his Diadem, said to them that stood by, That if a man
knew what a deal of cares and troubles were lapped up and lodged in it, he
would not think it worthy the taking up. And there was a Pope (not the worst
Pope) that confessed to his friends, that he lived an happier life, when he was
a (poor) Scholemaster in Louaine, Hadrian. 6.
then since he was advanced to that high See. It is not therefore the high
place, nor the great state, nor whatsoever is gainefull for the purse, that
makes many Magistrates amends for their travel and toil, for their care and
study, for their sweating and hazarding their health, for the hard censures and
bitter exclamations and cursings that they incur and endure for directing of
Justice, and pronouncing of Sentence against the faulty; but this is their
comfort, and exceeding great content, if they can say with Pericles, Plutarch
in Pericle. 2. Cor. 1.
that they never caused any to wear a mourning gown; or rather, if they can
say with Saint Paul, This is our rejoicing, even the testimony of our
consciences, that in godly pureness we have had our conversation in the
world. And with Saint Paul again, Act. 20.
That they are pure from the blood of all men, (I mean that they shed no
innocent blood.) And lastly with Samuel, whose Ox have I taken, etc? Whom have
I hurt, or of whose hand have I received any bribe to blind mine eyes withal,
etc? This is a Robe that will better grace and adorn them, then any Scarlet,
and be more cordial to their inwards then any B^zar-stone, and more
comfortable and warm to their stomachs, then any stomacher of Swans skin,
or whatsoever is most warm and comfortable. But I have been too tedious. The
Lord make that which has been spoken, profitable unto us, for his Son
Christ's sake; To whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all honor and
glory, for ever, and ever. Amen.

A SERMON UPON THE SIXTH OF JEREMY. THE EIGHTH SERMON.
JEREMY 6. verse 16. Thus says the Lord, Stand ye in the ways, and see, and
ask for the old paths, where is the good way and walk therein, and ye shall
find rest for your souls.


WERE they confounded (says Jeremy in the Verse immediately going before,) when
they committed abomination? No, they were not abashed at all, (...) neither
knew they shame, or to be ashamed, (...): (the Hiphil taken passiuely, as many
times it is,) therefore shall they fall among them that fall in the time that I
visit them, they shall be made to fall ((...) cast down) says the Lord. In
which words the Prophet shows both the hidiousnesse and transcendent
greatness of the sins of the Jews, as also the fountain and wellspring
thereof. It is a bitter thing and wicked, to depart from the Lord by any kind
of transgression, either against the first Table, or against the second. But
now when a man has done evil, to bless himself, as it were, and to say in
his heart, that no evil shall happen unto him for the same, to harden his face
like the Adamant, and to be touched with no remorse or shame, (no remorse
inwardly, no shame outwardly,) not to blush for the matter, nor to seek as
much as Figge-leaues to cover his nakedness. This argues both the height of
presumption, and the depth of iniquity and villainy: and this is that which
makes sin to be above measure sinful and hateful. Well, this was their
desperate malady and the fearful (...) or Paroxysm thereof. What was the
cause? (for me thinks the Prophet proceeds after the manner of Physicians,
from the disease, to the Symptoms; from the Syptomes, to the causes; from the
causes, to the remedies.) They knew not shame; The light of Nature that was in
them, they had for the greatest part extinguished by their custom of sinning:
And as for others that should reform and reclaim them by setting before them
the things that they had done, and by thundering forth Gods Judgments and
plagues against them, for holding the truth in unrighteousness; such, I say,
as should do this great work of the Lord seriously, and sincerely, they
wanted. Thus the people perished for want of knowledge, for want of knowledge
of their sin and shame: and in this forlorn estate the Jews are described
to be, in the verse before my Text. In my Text is set down the last thing that
Physicians do, and is most acceptable to the Patients, (namely, (...), the
manner and medicine for cure, that should remove the disease, and bring health
to the Patient,) in the words which I have read unto you: Stand upon (or near)
the ways, and ask for the old paths, (or everlasting paths,) where is the
goodway, and go therein, and find rest for your souls. As if he said, One of
the greatest causes of your shameful and shameless carriage, both toward
God, and toward man, at the leastwise, one of the greatest matters that you
can pretend for your excuse, is ignorance, or want of knowledge of the will of
God, that you do not know the Royal Law; that your Levites teach you not
Gods Judgments and Laws; that the Priests rebuke not in the gate; that the
Prophets sooth you in your sins, healing the wound of the daughter of Gods
people with soft words, etc. But how? The Lord has spoken nothing in secret,
neither is his Word darkness, neither are you so blind, that you need always
to be led by the hand. Why then, do you not take Gods Book into your hand,
and there search for the right way, for the good will of God, and acceptable
and perfect? Why do you not learn at the length to be your own caruers? or
if that place be so difficult, that you cannot understand it, why do you not
consult the more learned, them that have their wits exercised and acquainted
with the Word of God, that so you may find satisfaction, and rest for your
souls? This know for a surety, that the old way, that which was at the first
chalked out by God himself in Mount Sinai, and after laid open by Moses the
man of God, and the Prophets sithence, which spoke and wrote as they were moved
by the holy Ghost: that is the Good way, and the straight way, neither is there
straightness or goodness in any other.

This I take to be the true coherence of the words of my Text, with the former
verse, and also the natural meaning of them; wherein note with me three things.

1. A persuasion, consisting of diverse branches; Stand upon the ways, this is
one. See, this is another. Ask for the old way, this is the third.

2. A correction, or limitation. Ask not simply for the old way, (for that is,
(...), and that may be called old in comparison, which in comparison of old
truth is but new) but for the good old way, and be bold to walk therein.

3. And lastly, a motive or reason drawn ab vtili, You shall find rest for
your souls, that is, you shall be sure to find it.

Touching the first. When the Prophet says, Stand near the ways, or upon the
ways, he meets with and strikes at two vices, too frequent and usual in
all ages, Epicurisme, and Superstition. Many there be, that make no reckoning
of Religion, which end goes forward, nay, whether they know any thing of it or
no. Who is the Lord (say they,) that we should serve him? and what profit in
learning his ways? do we not see that all things fall out alike, to the
ignorant, and to the learned, to him that sacrifices, and to him that
sacrifices n t, etc? wherefore then should we weary our selves in vain, to
search, and sift what is written in the volume of Gods Book? to run to and
fro, to hear the Word of God? (...), said one, Sophocles.
Nil scire in vita iucundissimum, said another. Who lives so merry as the
ignorant man? Mihi sex dies sa^is sunt vitae, septimum orco spondeo, Better a
short life and a merry, then a long life and a weary; 2. Pet. 2.3.
Whose Judgment long ago was prepared, and their damnation sleeps not, as
Saint Peter speaks. Do they indeed provoke the Lord to anger, and not
themselves to confusion of faces? Who ever was fierce against him, and
prevailed? Who ever despised the least of his Commandments, and escaped
unpunished? or is it not the everlasting will of God, that we should believe in
him the only God, and whom he ha^h sent, Jesus Christ? And how this? but by
forsaking our houses, that is, our natural, and imbred ignorance, and by
standing in the ways, that is, by resorting to the Churches, where Gods honor
dwells, and where he has set his Name, and where his voice sounds. Where
the dead body is, thither the Eagles resort. Be they Eagles, or not Dawes
rather, that refuse to resort to Christ Jesus, pointed out before our eyes in
the preaching of the Gospel, and among us crucified in the breaking of the
Sacrament? My Sheep hear my voice. Be they Sheep, or not rather Goats, that
despise them that come unto them in Christ's Name, and bring his Word with them,
because (forsooth) they be not in Communion with him of Rome? He that gathers
not with me, scatters; does he say, He that gathers not with the Pope? Where
two, or three are gathered together in my Name, I am in the midst of them;
does he say, In the name of any Romish Priest? yet Peter and John refused not
to go into the Temple at the set hour of prayer, even when Scribes and
Pharisees did most shamefully pollute it; And Saint ^aul rejoiced, when Christ
was preached any manner of way, though they that preached did it not sincerely.
But to whom do we preach, that they may hear? Behold, they stop their ears
like the deaf Adder, that they may not hear. Behold, the Word of the Lord is
unto them as a reproach, they have no delight in it. Shall we say as the
Prophet does, ( Jeremy 6.) I am full of the wrath of the Lord, I am weary of
h^lding of it? nay rather, we will pray yet against their obstinacy, that the
god of this world may no longer blind their hearts, and that the partition wall
which they have wilfully built between them and us, and the covering which by
Gods just Judgment remains over their minds untaken away, may be removed. As
for you (Beloved) which are of the day, and to whom the Sun of righte^usnesse
has so long shined, be never weary of well-doing, neither count ye it
weariness to serve the Lord: for surely the righteous Lord tries the very
hearts and reins. He sees whatsoever is done by any in the chamber of his
Imagery, and notes, and billeth those that despise Rulers, and speak evil of
those that be in authority, and that say to the Parliament as the Jews did to
Aaron, Make us gods to go before us; Let us have our Im^ges again in our
Rood-loft, and our Masses on the Altar, and our god in the Pix, or else we will
do so and so unto them, and worse too. This is to do that which Agesilaus
did, (...), to send a message of Entreaty upon a Speares-point. This is to
deal as Cesars Conspirators dealt: They fell upon their knees before him, and
besought him of favor for one of their Favorites, but withal, they plucked by
force the Robe from his back, to make way for their Poniards. Quid facis
scelerate Casca, (cried C^sar?) Thou wicked Casca, what meanest thou by that?
And so may we ask, What Devil bewitched the hearts of our Rebellious ones,
sons of Belial, to attempt things beyond all degrees of comparison enormous,
mischievous, bloody? What? King and Queen, Prince and Peers, Judge and
Prophet, Prudent and aged, Honorable, and Counselor, and Eloquent man to be
destroyed, and all at one blow, as it were, and with one blast? This would
make a man cry out in Esaiahs words, Who has heard such a thing? who has
seen such things? Or with Jeremy, O ye heavens, be astonished at this, be
afraid and utterly confounded, says the Lord. To end this point; Note with me
here the depths of Satan, as Saint John speaks, or rather the demonstrable
Tyranny of him and his Vicar General, with open face; I mean, how they work
and reign in these Children of disobedience. They that could not be moved or
won by many years persuasion, by the authority of two Sovereigns, to stand
in the ways of God, to stand in thy Gates, O Jerusalem, nay, to put one foot
into the Church in the time of Divine Service; Lo, at the voice of the man of
sin, or to approve their service and devotion to him, they are easily
persuaded to blow up with one blast, and to bury in one heap, both their King
and their Country, and whatsoever ought to be holden near, and dear, and to
think that they did God good service thereby. But their god is he that is
described, 2. Thessal. 2. Who is an Adversary, and exalts himself above all
that is called God: who has the key of the bottomless Pit, not of the
Kingdom of heaven, and is worthily called Abaddon, son of perdition,
actiuely, and passiuely. His contentment they sought, and his will they did,
and therefore their root shall be as rottenness, and shall not escape the
vengeance of the Lord. Genes. 48.5, 6, 7.
Simeon and Leui brethren in evil, the instruments of cruelty, are in their
habitations; In their wrath they would have slain a man, (nay, a Realm of
men,) and in their self-will, (or for their pleasure,) they dug down a
wall. Cursed be their wrath, for it was fierce, and their rage, for it was
cruel. But God be thanked, that every one here can say, as it follows in
that Chapter, Into their secret my soul came not, my glory was not joined with
their assembly. And as many as cannot say so, and as many as yet say in their
hearts, as Tully did to one of the Conspirators against Caesar, Vellem
inuitasses me ad Coenam, iam nihil ^uisset reliquiarum, I would I had been
acquainted with the plot, I would have dealt so surely, that they should have
been dispatched every mothers son. Let the Crows (or Ravens) of the Valley
pick out their eyes, as it is in the Proverbs: (...), let the Vulturs devour
them, to use the Poets Phrase. If they die in the City, let the Dogs devour
them, Homer.
and if in the fields, the Foul; And that, because they sought the destruction
of so many Innocents, and endeavored to set up what God had thrown down, and
to throw down what God set up. We have showed sufficiently, that though it
be a commendable duty, and very necessary to stand in the ways of godliness
and truth, and to hearken after the same; yet to stand in the ways of sinners,
and of superstitious, and seditious, and Idolatrous persons, which weaue
Spiders webbes, nay, which sit upon Cockatrice eggs, it is not safe. Therefore
our Prophet does wisely and necessarily add in the second place, That we See
(or look) about us. For as the mother of the ouer-hardy does never want woe,
no more does the rash and hasty. The blind man swalloweth many a Fly, takes
hold of a Scorpion in stead of a Fish, yea, falls in the ditch, and groapeth
and stumbleth at noonday. Our eyes are therefore compared to the Sentinel,
or Watchmen of a City or Camp, that forewarneth the body of danger
approaching, and bids it beware. Now the Eye is not more needful to the
body, for the direction thereof against stumbling and falls, then Prudence and
circumspection is to the Soul against error in judgment, and crookedness in
will and affection, (...), the understanding, that is, the eye, and the ear
too, as Clemens Alexandrinus cites out of an old writer; Clemens Alexan. 2.
Stromat.
And (...), etc. Understanding and a good mind, and much forecast, is the
highway to happiness, said Demosthenes against Aristogiton. Therefore Saint
Paul charge us to walk circumspectly, Demosthen. Ephesians. 5.
not as unwise, but as wise. And our Savior, Be wise as Serpents. The Serpent
is very quicke-sighted, ( -- tam cernis acutum quam aut Aquila, aut Serpens
Epidaurius,) and therefore he is called Draco, of seeing. So we must beware
that we be not (...), such as cannot see a far off, as Saint Peter speaks;
but must anoint our eyes with eye-salue, as Saint John bids, that so we may
discern things that differ, light from darkness, truth from error, the sweet
bread of sincerity and truth, from the leaven of the old and new Pharisees: yea,
that we may be able to ken a far off the sleights of Satan and his cogging,
(...). This is one property that we must learn, if we will be wise as
Serpents, we must espy the frauds of deceivers a far off; Praesens sit long
insidias praesaga mali men's. Secondly, the Serpent stops his ear against
the charmer, and will not be gotten out of his hole; And so if many among us
had turned the deaf ear unto Inchanters, who labored first, to withdraw them
from love to the truth; and then from loyalty to the Prince: many worshipful
houses had continued until this day, which now we see overthrown.
Demosthenes would needs be gazing upon Harpalus his plate: Plutarch. in
Demosthen.
was he not corrupted thereby? The sons of God would needs be staring upon
the daughters of men: did they not beget Giants upon them? (...), by looking
comes liking, you know the Proverb. This I speak only for the simpler sort,
that they cast not their eyes upon every pelting Pedlers ware, lest they be
coozened by them, lest they lay out their money, and not for meat, and their
silver for that which will not profit, as the Prophet Esaias speaks. They that
have known the Scriptures from their youth, as Timothy did, and are rooted and
grounded in the truth, there is no danger for them to confer with deceivers,
for greater is He that is in them, then he that is in the world. Therefore I
speak not to such as have their Antidot or preservative in their bosom. A
third property of the Serpent is remembered by Augustine and Ambrose too;
August. 2. de Doct. ^hristiana. Ambros. lib. 6. Epist. 42.
and that is this, That he is wont Totum corpus p^o capite fertentibus
obijcere, To seek to save his head, whatsoever becomes of the rest of his
body; so we must be sure to hold the Head Christ, his Gospel to be our
Loadestone; his merits, to be the Anchor of our hope; his obedience, to be our
satisfaction; his death, to be our life; howsoever for other matters they seek
to carry us about with every blast of vain doctrine. This is one thing, that
we are admonished of, in that we are called upon to See. Another thing we are
put in mind of, and that is this; namely, that we stir up the holy Ghost that
is in us, and that we do not despair (by the help thereof,) to distinguish
between a right course and a wrong. For surely if there were not some thing in
us, (I do not say of us,) that are enlightened by Gods grace, and have tasted
of the good gifts of God; Hebr. 6.
some ability of discerning, I say, the Prophet would never have commanded us
to lift up our eyes, or to cast our eyes about, and to See. For is a blind man
called to judge of colors? or a lame man to try masteries? I know, I know,
that without Christ we can do nothing; and n^ man can say, that Jesus is the
Lord, but by the holy Ghost; And, We are not sufficient of our selves to think
a good thought as of our selves, but all our sufficiency is of God. But these
places are not against my purpose (Bell.) for I speak not a word for pride,
that any man should say as Nabuchadnezzar said, Is not this great Babel that I
have built, by the might of my power, and for the hon^ur of my Majesty? Dan. 4.
Are not we wise? are not we intelligent? are not we sharp-sighted? No, but
against heedlesnes and imprudence, that we be not wanting to our selves, and
that we quench not the Spirit. 1. These. 5.19.
Know ye not that the Spirit of God dwells in you, except you be Reprobates?
Now where the Spirit of God is, there is light, there is the searching of Gods
secrets, there the secret of the Lord is made known to them that fear him.
Who ever was enlightened by him, and slept in death? Who ever sought him in
humility and faith, and was denied him? He that comes to be cleansed, God
will join himself unto him: the Jewish Doctors have such a speech. When the
Eunuch used his eyes in reading the Prophet Isaiah; Philip was commanded by the
Spirit of the Lord, to join himself unto his Chariot. Philip. 2.13.
For albeit God works in us both the will and the deed of his good pleasure,
as Saint Paul says; yet he will not save a man against his will ((...)) by
force, as Nazianzen speaks. And sure it is, that he that has given us reason
and understanding, and the same (...), has not given us these Talents in
vain, but that we should labor by all means, by ardent inuocating of the
Name of God, by craving the assistance of his Spirit, by Spiritual exercises
and meditations to increase them, to sharpen them, to direct them. For to him
that has, shall be given, and he shall have abundance, and God will not be
weary of giving, till thou be weary of asking. A grain of mustard seed at the
first is the least of all seeds, but what grows it unto afterward? Into so
great branches, that the fowls nestle in it. The Clowd that Eliahs servant
saw, at the first was no bigger then the palm of an hand, but anon, the whole
heavens were black with it, and the whole Land was wet with the showers
thereof. Therefore let no man say, I am a dry tree, I have a dull head, I have
a da^ke eye, I cannot perceive those spiritual matters which are spiritually
discerned. But let him think this rather, that if he has been baptized and
put on Christ, if he has been washed, justified and sanctified in the Name of
the Lord lesus, and by the Spirit of his power; then he will deliver him out of
the power of da^kenesse, and will cause all scales to fall from his eyes, as
they did from Saint Paul's: he will not keep from him the knowledge of the way,
for whom he appointed the Inheritance of the Kingdom. If you see nothing yet,
as you ought to see, know nothing yet as you ought to know, be not discouraged
for all that: for it is not so with Gods graces, as it is with natural
faculties, that we must have them at the first, or else never. Nay, but though
ye be blind and ignorant men, (even as beasts in comparison,) to day, yet you
may to morrow, or within a very short space see Gods truth with open face, and
become as wise as your Teachers in the mysteries of Salvation. Who gives an
eye to man, or teaches man knowledge? Does not God? Therefore remember ever to
pray with David, Open mine eyes, O Lord, P^^l. 119. v. 18.
that I may see the maruailous things of thy Law; And again, Turn away mine
eyes, lest they behold vanity. Surely as in the matter of obedience, Psalm.
119.37.
Austins Supplication is to be imitated full: Da quod iubes, and iube quod vis,
Give (Lord) what thou command, and then command what thou please: which
speech he uses frequently in his writings. So in the matter of knowledge and
persuasion we a^e to subscribe to his well ruled humility; Non pa^ua^x part
intelligit and scit, ^
qui intelligit and scit, etiamhoc a Domino sibi dari, vt intelligat and s^iat
Dominum, He does not a little know and vnd^rstand the Lord, that so
understands and knows, that it is of Gods gift, that he understands and
knows the Lord: so Augustine. And so much of the two doctrines contained in
thi^ word ^ee. Both for cautelousnesse to look ere we leap, and against
sluggishnesse, that we endeavor what we may, to see the way of our selves, and
do not look always to be led by the hand. It follows. Ask after the old
wa^, etc. As God has furnished few Countries with absolute perfection, and
fullness of earthly blessings, that it needs nothing that another Country
has, neither for necessit^, nor for delight, (for then merchandise would
cease, and traffic vanish away, then one Country would be as great a
stranger to another, as we are to those that are departed out of the world:) So
for the maintenance and enlarging of the offices of charity, and for the
abating of pride and disdain, God has so distributed his gifts that one
should have use of another, the weaker, of support from the stronger; the
darker of direction from the wiser. Are all Apostles, are all Prophets, are all
Guides of the blind, and worke^s of miracles? 1. Cor. 12.29.
Are all Instructers of them that want discretion, and ^eachers of the
unlearned? Were all in the Mount of God with Moses? Did all see the Lord Jesus
with Paul? This were to imagine a Commonweal consisting all of Kings, or an
Army composed all of Generals. Why? if all were Commanders, there were never a
Commander, and if all were Kings, there were never a King. I grant, Cyn^as
being demanded his opinion of the Senate of Rome (when Rome was at the best, not
at the greatest) said, It was an assembly of Kings, such Majesty and state
there appeared in them. And of Alexanders Army it is leftwritten by diverse,
that it was a gathering together of thousands of Captains: such expertnesse
and skill they showed upon occasion. But these speeches were Hyperbolicall and
ouer-lashing, and argue rather affection in the commenders, then merit in the
commended. It is certain that as God has made some to bear rule, so some to
obey; as some to be full, so some to be empty; as some to be wise and learned,
so others to be ignorant and unwise, that the ones abundance might supply the
others want, (as Saint Paul says in another case) and ^h^t they that want, may
know whither to have recourse for their supply. If Jacob had not heard that
there was Corn in Egypt, in what case had he been, when his provision was
consumed in Canaan? If Joseph had not met with a man that told him where his
brethren kept their sheep, when he was sent to them by his father, he might as
well have been devoured of a wild beast indeed, as he was falsely reported. It
is a great blessing to meet with a faithfu^l guide, when one is wandering out of
the way; And so when a man is distracted in his opinions, what he may hold,
what he may embrace, what he may abhor, when he is puzzeld, and cannot tell
which way to turn him, whether to the right hand or to the left; then to find
such a faithful Counselor as Iehosaphat did touching war and p^ace of
Micai^h; Such an Interpreter* as the Eunuch did of Philip, touching the
interpretation of a place in Esaiah; such a deep Divine and Learned, as
Augustine did of Hierome, touching Ion^hs Gourd, touching the beginning of the
Soul, etc. This must needs be as sweet, and as wel-come as a shower of rain
in the time of drought, nay, as bread is to the hungry soul, or drink to the
thirsty. Now here our common saying has place, Spare to speak, and spare to
speed. Do ye look, (I speak to the unlearned,) that as Bees brought honey
into Platoes mouth, as they fable; and as Timotheus had Cities and Castles cast
into his lap when he was asleep, as they painted him; so knowledge and the
resolution of hard doubts, and the understanding of dark places of Scripture
will be breathe^ upon you, without once opening of your mouths, or asking a
question? Cur nescire pudens praue quam discere malo? Horat.
Why should I through sullenness deprive my self of the help of
understanding, which for once moving the matter, might be imparted to me? It is
true that Seneca says, That many might have attained to wisdom, if they had
not thought they had attained it already. Seneca.
And so it is true, that the former writer has, Stultorum incurata pudor malus
vl cera celat. The unwise suffer their sores to rankle and to grow incurable,
while of a proud kind of modesty they keep them close and conceal them.
Therefore Plutarch (I remember) notes it for a sign of great towardliness in
young Cato, that he doubted of many things, and would ask a reason of his
Master of every thing. And Plato requires in his ingenuous Scholar, that he
should be (...); And our Prophet in my Text, would not have a man to trust too
much to his own wit or perspicacy, but that he should ask of others. Indeed,
Ask, and you shall have, seek, and you shall find, Math. 7.7.
knock, and it shall be opened unto you, does not tie us to Gods inspiring and
touching of us alone, (according to that of Saint James, If any man want
wisdom, let him ask of the Father of lights, Iam. 1.
) but enioyneth us to use all lawful means, all possible endeavors for the
purchasing, and compassing of the same precious pearl, the knowledge of the
true way, which leads unto life. Therefore has the Lord so precisely and
distinctly referred us to several guides and instructers as he has done; 1.
Cor. 14.
The women to ask their husbands at home; the children to ask their fathers,
(When thy children shall ask thee what this Ceremony of the Passover means,
Exodus 13.
thou shall say, thus, and thus;) All the people in general, Malach. 2.7.
of the Priests and the Prophets, The Priests lips shall preserve knowledge,
and they shall seek the Law at his lips. Therefore let no man that wants
wisdom, think scorn to ask counsel of them that are learned, (albeit
every good gift and perfect gift comes down from the Father of light, Iam.
1.17.
) for then he will take scorn to ask a benevolence of him that has more then
himself, because God it is that does open his hand, and fill all things living
with plenteousnesse. Subordinata non pugnant, is a rule in the Schools. Now as
we are commanded by our Prophet to ask, so are we told by him what to ask; [
Ask, says he, for the old wa^.] This is a very pleasing speech to some old
Cinque-Caters. If this be admitted once, think they, then all is Cocke-sure on
their side; For they have the prescription of a thousand years, and more, when
as our faith is but of yesterday. Where was it before Martin Luther, etc? I
answer, first with the word of Ahab to Benhadad, Let not him that girdeth on
his Armor boast, as he that puts it off; Homer (...).
(...), Any man may prate and talk, but Counsel and strength are for the
war; 2. Kin. 18.20.
words will not win the cause in a serious encounter. The Athenians bragged,
that they were (...), spawned, as it were, there where they dwelt, and
therefore used to wear Grasse-hoppers on their heads, for which cause they
were called by Aristophanes, (...). And the Arcadians boasted of their
antiquity, that they were more ancient then the Moon, (Lunagens prior illa
fuit:) And yet they and all the Grecians in general are told their own by an
Egyptian Priest (as Plato bears witness, Plato in Timaeo.
) that they were but children, and that there was not an old man amongst them.
So the Gib^onites told Iosuah, and the men of Israel, that they were not of
their cursed neighbors, (whom God had devoted to destruction, and whom they
were forbidden to make any league with) but that they came from a very far
country; and therefore to bleare the Israelites eyes, Joshua 9.
they took with them old sacks and old bottles, and old shoes, and old
raiment, etc. But were they the more ancient, or the more honest for that
cause? words be but wind, unless there be proofs correspondent. Secondy, I
say, that in the original, it is not (...) which properly signifies old, but
(...) which more properly signifies everlasting or perpetual. Now what are
they the nearer for that? was their doctrine from the beginning? or shall it
last ever in our Church? Nay, Every plant that the heavenly Father did not
plant, was of later set, and shall be plucked up by the roots. If theirs be of
the heavenly Fathers planting, let them show it by the Scripture; For, Non
accipio quod extra Scripturam de tuo infers, says Tertullian, Tertull. de
Carne Christi.
I will not admit of that which they allege out of their own head without
Scripture. Thirdly, because they rely much upon the exposition of Fathers;
Hierome upon this place, and after him their ordinary Gloss, understands by
(Ways) in the first place, the Prophets. Stand in the way, that is, search the
Prophets what testimony they bear of Christ. And by the Good way, Christ Jesus
himself, the Way, the Truth, and the Life. John the 14. This for a taste, what
judgment the Western Church was of, touching the meaning of this place. So
for the E^sterne Church Theodorit shall speak, (a very ancient writer, and as
learned as he was ancient,) who in his tenth book of Therapeuticks, has these
words, Theodo^^t. li. 10. Thera^eutit.
(...), that is, The Prophet ( Graece the Prophets word,) calls Ways, the
old Prophets; and the good way, our Savior and Lord himself. So that you see,
that it is no new shi^t of ours, to avoid the stroke of the Argument drawn
from Antiquity, but an ancient and approved interpretation received in the time
of the second and third General Councels, in which time Hierome and Theodorit
flourished. Fourthly, I say, that our Prophet himself in my Text, as though he
had ^ore-seene how some would walk in a vain shadow, and make a flourish
with a painted scabberd; lest any should mistake the point and so be seduced;
corrects and explaineth himself in the very next words, [ Which is the good
way.] And so I am come to the second part of my division, whereof I will speak
but a word. Ask after the old paths, (...), where is the same good way? As if
he had said, Did I bid you ask after the Old way, and walk therein, as though
that were a safe and certain direction of your faith? Alas, you may be
deceived in this inquiry, except you ask for the Old way, which is the good
way. For as some of your Ancestors have been good, and some bad; some true
worshippers of God, and some Idolaters: So by that reason, some old or beaten
ways must be crooked and erroneous, as well as other some right and straight.
Decline therefore from that way, seem it never so old, if it may be proved
unto you to be wrong; and follow and hold on that only which is good. Thus the
Prophet; and this to be the true meaning of the place, any one that will look
into the Original, may easily find. For though it be somewhat doubtfully
translated, as though the Prophet would have the old way to be esteemed for the
good way, and rule of faith, yet it is a truth, that the Hebrew Text does
import no such thing. For if it were to be taken (...), or (...), by way of
expressing or defining, then it would have been said, (...), this is the good
way, not (...), where? or where that? which is ever taken Interrogatiuely. Now
then, if this be all that the Prophet means, that we should ask for the old
way which is good; does not this imply, that there be old ways which be bad?
and consequently does not this make against our Adversaries, that do rely upon
Antiquity simply without distinction? Thus, as he that diggeth a pit, Eccles
10.8.
falls (many times) into it himself, as it is in the Book of the Preacher:
So the Arguments that are framed against the truth, do turn oft-times to the
conviction of false-hoood which it would establish. We can do nothing against
the truth, but for the truth, says the Apostle. Lastly, let it be granted,
that the old way is the good way, the right way, the true way, which in some
sense is true, if they understand by Old, that which is most old, that which
was from the beginning, As our Savior, Math. 19. When the Pharisees alleged
for themselves the Antiquity of Moses his dispensation about the matter of
divorce, answered, that the manner of Dispensing was not old enough, for from
the beginning it was not so. And Tertullian, Id verum quod prius, prius quod ab
initio, ab initio, Tertull. 4. contra Ma^^i^n.
quod ab Apostolis. That is true that is former, former, that was from the
beginning, from the beginning, that was from the Apostles. I say, if we should
grant, as we may grant, that they that can show the highest Antiquity to be on
their side, should go away with the cause, should our Adversaries gain any
thing thereby? Where was their Supremacy in Saint Peter's, and Saint Paul's
time? Romans 13.1.
When Saint Paul commands Ecclesiastical persons, and all to be subject to
the Higher or chief Powers, namely, to the Magistrate, by the interpretation
of St. Chrysostom, and of whom not? And Peter more precisely, To be subject to
the King (or Emperor,) as to the chief, (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 2. ad Populum
Antioch. (...) Tertull. ad Scapulam.
(...). Chrysostom in ca. 13. ad Romans 1. 1. Pet. 2.13.
To whom agrees Tertullian; Colimus Imperatorem vt hominem a Deo secundum, and
solo Deo minorem: We honor, says he, the Emperor, as a man immediately
subject or second to God, and inferior to none but God. So where was it taught
in Antiquity, That Subjects were no longer to obey their Prince, then it should
please a foreign Bishop (if a Bishop,) and that at his voice, they might take
Arms against their Sovereign, and lawfully kill him? nay, that it was a
meritorious deed to kill him? Did Peter or Paul, or any of the Apostles so
teach? Did Augustine or Ambrose, Basil, or Chrysostom, or any Doctor for a
thousand years after Christ, ever write so? Lego and relego Romanorum Regum
res gestas, etc. says Otho Frinsigensis, I read, and read over again the Acts
of the Roman Emperors, Otho Frisingen.
and do find none of them to be so proceeded against by any Roman Prelat
before Hildebrands time, who lived a thousand and threescore years after
Christ. (I know he adds an exception of Pabianus his dealing with Philip; and
Ambrose with Theodosius: but it is one thing to put away a Prince from the
Communion, another thing to deprive him of his Kingdom.) This for discharging
of Subjects from their oath of obedience. As for the suborning of Friars and
Monks, and Ruffians to stabbe Kings or Queens, or otherwise to mischief them,
it was never heard of in Christendom for a thousand and five hundred years
and an half after Christ, until the time of these vpstart Jesuits, whose
proper vocation and employment seems to be, to set the whole world on fire,
being themselves set on fire of hell. In Christendom, I say, the like practice
to dispatch the Popes enemies by the hands of Cutthroats, allured with the
fair promises of this life, and of that which is to come, has not been heard
of. But in Turkey and in Syria, for the advancement of the authority of the
Calipha of Babylon, and to strengthen the Kingdom of the Soldans, it has
been many times set on foot by the hands of Assasins, as some call them, as
others call them, Arsacidacs. Thus, as Aspis a Vipera venenum mutuatur, as
Tertullian says: So they of new Babylon have learned of the old, to embrue
their hands in the blood of the Lords Anointed. But from Mount Sinai this came
not, nor from Jerusalem, nor from the Ancient of days. But if they will stand
upon Antiquity, I will tell you who was their Schoolmasters, even he that was
a Murderer from the beginning, John 8.44.
the old Serpent, the Devil, and Satanas. Shall I prosecute this course a
little further, to show the newness of their doctrine in other points of
Religion? What one probable place out of Scripture? what one colorable reason
out of the Fathers, or Councels can they produce, either for their Service in
an unknown Tongue, or for their barring of the people from reading the
Scriptures? Or for denying them the Cup in the Communion? Or for the Popes
Pardons? Or for the merits of Monkery? Or, that five words mumbled by a Priest
over a piece of bread, should annihilate the substance of bread, and bring
Christ's body in place carnally, as he was borne of the Virgin Mary, etc? These
and twenty other such toys, nay Heresies, nay Impieties, if they have any
ground in the world for, in Antiquity, let us be taken for false witnesses and
slanderers, and bear the blame for ever. The time is spent (I presume,) and
therefore I must huddle up that which remains, and conclude in a word or two,
that which is yet unhandled of my Text, to wit, the last branch of the
Persuasion. That we walk in the good old way, And the promise of the reward,
We shall find rest for our souls. I will handle them both together. The
Apostle in the first to the Romans conuinceth the Gentiles, for that they
knowing God, did not glorify him as God. And our Savior, John 13. tells his
Disciples, If you know these things, happy are ye, if you do them. If God
has traced unto us in the Scriptures the old and good way; If we declare and
lay open the same unto you out of the Scriptures, and you refuse to tread the
same, then we may say unto you as the Prophet does in the like case, Doubtless
in vain made he it, the pen of thewriter is in vain. The King in the Gospel,
making a marriage feast for his Son, did not bid them, that they should
refuse to come, or come evil appointed, but that they should come with their
wedding garment, and meet at his Table. No more do we light a candle, and put
it on a Candlestick, that any should wink with their eyes, or love darkness
more then light, but that they should take knowledge thereof, and do their
business thereby. Even so, if we show you the truth so evidently, that you
cannot deny it, why do you not believe it? If we show you the more excellent
way, as the Apostle speaks, so plainly, that you cannot control it, why do
you not follow it? why do you not walk therein, that so you may find rest
for your souls? Shall they come in Christ's Vicars name (so he calls
himself, and would be called by others, but indeed he is an Adversary) and you
will receive them, and adventure your necks for them? And we come in Christ's
name, with his message and reconcilement unto God, (whom you have offended,)
without any working of you to offend the State; and will you refuse us? Shall
they be welcome with their Traditions, that is, with their Tales? and we odious
with the Gospel which was preached unto you, which ye also received, and which
you must return to, if you mean to be saved? What is strong illusion? what is
the working of Satan? what is the power of darkness, if this be not? (...),
etc. Clemen. Alexan. (...).
You forsake the right and straight way, and go that which is full of thorns
and stakes; what arrogance and frenzy are you possessed with, says Clemens
Alexandrinus out of Sibylla? So Cyprian, Christ promises everlasting life, if
we will follow him; and he is forsaken. The Devil promises Gu-gawes, and
lies too in his promise; and he is adored. O foedam defectionem, o iniquam
permutationem, O filthy, defection, O absurd exchange, Cyprian. de duplici
martyrio.
says Cyprian! The like may we say to those bewitched Contrymen of ours
(that prefer Rome before Sion, and the doctrine thereof, before the lively
Oracles of God,) that like children or women that have the disease called Pica,
prefer Lime or dirt before white bread: yea, like unwise Merchants, glass
before pearl, lead before gold, cotton before silk, that is, error before
truth, Belial before Christ, Baal before Jehovah; more particularly, ignorance
before knowledge, dumb Images before effectual Teachers, Saints before
Christ; doubtfulnesse before Faith, servile fear before filial love, horror
of conscience before tranquillity of spirit. There is no peace to the wicked,
says the Lord. Isaiah 57.21.
And truly there is no rest to the soul in Popery. What rest can there be?
when they make Saints mediation the only anchor of their hope, men's books the
foundation of their faith, man's Absolution the remission of their guilt here,
and men's pardons, the relaxation of their punishment hence. This they do, and
an hundred things as bad in Popery: and therefore it is impossible that they
should be at peace with God, or have peace within themselves, that thus make
flesh their arm, and in their heart depart from God. And therefore if you
desire to find rest for your souls, or to have your Election and salvation
made sure unto you; you must have nothing to do with the unfruitful and
vnco^fortable opinions of Popery, but rather abhor them and reprove them. The
Lord in mercy vouchsafe to bring them home that go astray, to confirm them
that stand, and to grant us true peace and true rest, through Jesus Christ our
blessed Savior: To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be praise and
thanksgiving, for ever and ever. Amen, Amen.

A SERMON UPON THE FIRST OF PETER. THE NINTH SERMON.
1. PETER, 5. verse 6. Humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of
God, that he may exalt you in due time.


THE word [ therefore] has reference to that which went before, namely, to the
last words of the former verse, [ God resists the proud, and gives grace to
the humble,] and infers strongly upon the force of them. For if God
resists the proud, if contrariwise he gives grace to the humble; then there
is no cause in the world, why any man should be proud, and there is great cause
why every one should be humble. For do we provoke the Lord? are we stronger
then he? If we walk cross against God, or hardly, stiffly, 1. Cor. 10.
Leuitic. 26.
(the Chaldee has (...) hardly) he will walk so against us. It is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Jacob (I grant) wrastled with
God, and prevailed: but how? he did not make head against God, neither did he
think himself an equal match for God, by no means; but God vouchsafing to
take him up in his arms, and bearing him in his arms, that he should not dash
his foot against a stone, he might do all things by him that strengthened him*
he might swim easily, the Lord holding him up by the chin; he might fight
valiantly, the Lord teaching his hands to war, and his fingers to fight. But
tell me how they sped, against whom God bent himself, Pharaoh and his Host,
whom the Lord looked upon (out of the fiery and cloudy Pillar,) for evil and
not for good? were they not drowned in the red Sea? Those stiffenecked and
rebellious Israelites, (which provoked the Lord ten times, that is, many, and
many a time, against whom the Lord swore in his wrath, If they shall enter into
my rest, that is, Never believe me, if they enter,) did not their carcasses
fall in the Wilderness? and were they not utterly consumed there, till not one
of them was left? This before they came into the Land of promise; When they
were there, did not the Lord take the Kingdom from Saul and his Stock,
because he was angry with him, and gave it to David? From David's son Solomon,
(because of his Idolatry: 1. King. 12.15.
) did he not rend the Kingdom, and c^nferre ten parts thereof upon Jeroboam?
From Ieroboams Line, yea, and from all the Kings of Israel succeeding him, and
caused them to be carried away captives into Assyria? There remained the Tribes
of Judah and Benjamin for a while in honorable estate; but when these also
defied the Lord, and provoked the Holy one of Israel; when they said, that they
should be delivered because of the righteousness of their Fathers, and the
holiness of the Temple, though they hated to be reformed, and had cast Gods
Commandments behind them; Then did the Lord cast Judah out of his sight, as he
had done Israel; he plowed Sion as a field, as he had done Samaria; he made
Jerusalem the beloved City in former times, (which also he called a green
Oliue-tree, fair and of goodly fruit,) a breeding of Nettles and Salt pits,
and a perpetual desolation. For it is a righteous thing with God, as to show
mercy to them that fear him and stoop unto him, so also to render
tribulation, and anguish, and shame, and confusion to every one that exalts
himself before him, to the Jew first, and also to the Greek. Lysander, a
great man in Lacedemon, and one that had deserved well of King Agesilaus, being
disgraced many ways, and suffering many indignities by the Kings conniuence,
falls into expostulation with the King, because he suffered him so to be
contemned and abused: To whom the King made answer, So they deserve to be used
that take so much upon them as thou do, and will not reverence and awe the
King. Precedent merits, and good service, will not tie Princes of a g^nerous
spirit to such subjects of theirs, as show themselves ouer-lusty and crancke
with them: And can we think that God, who is of pure eyes, and
incomprehensi^le Majesty, to whom the greatest men are as nothing, and the best
merits, lighter then vanity, that he, I say, will justify those that say in
the pride of their heart, Is not this great Babel, that I have built for my
self, and for the glory of my Majesty? am I not rich and righteous, and have
need of nothing? He shall find none iniquity in me, that were wickedness.
See thou a man that is thus proud in his own eyes? There is as much hope of
a (Publican) as of such a one. For every one that exalts himself, shall be
brought low, and eu^ry one that humbles himself shall be exalted. So it is,
as God resists the proud, or (as the Original speaks more emphatically,)
sets himself in battle array against him (...): So he gives grace to the
humble, he is many ways gracious to him. First, in forgiving him much, as in
the Gospel, that servant that having nothing to pay, fell down before his
Lord, and besought him to be good unto him, had the whole debt forgiven him,
Math. 18. Then by giving him much; namely, the spirit of Regeneration, Math. 18.
the spirit of Sanctification, the spirit of wisdom, of Counsel, of Faith,
of Adoption, of Justification, etc. All these graces (that I speak nothing of
worldly or temporal blessings,) are imparted to such as are lowly in their
own eyes, and condemne^ themselves, that they may be acquitted by God,
according to that which is written, I dwell in the high heavens, Esaias 57.
with him also that is lowly. These therefore are special motives to humility.
And justly might our Apostle upon the consideration of them infer, as he does
in my Text. [ Therefore.] But now that we have considered of the Illatiue, and
of that which went before my Text immediately, let us look a little more
narrowly into the Text it self, even to that which is inferred upon this
term, [ Therefore humble your selves under the mighty hand of God.] Two things
are contained in this verse. The former, an Exhortation: the other, a Reason.
The Exhortation or Precept in these words, [ Humble your selves under the
mighty hand of God.] The Reason or Promise in these, [ That he may exalt you
in good time, or in fit time, (...).] Touching the first: It is strange to
recount how many Exhortations there be delivered in the Scriptures persuading
to humility, by Moses, by the Prophets, by the Apostles, by Christ himself.
What may this mean? Peter thought himself much disgraced, that he was called
upon the third time to feed Christ's flock. So Iehu spoke but half a word
against ^esabel, and straightwayes a couple of Chamberlains or Courtiers, (
Sarisim) threw her down. So once bidding did serve Zacheus: and presently he
came down from the tree. So Math. the 4. The two brethren that were called by
our Savior, presently forsook their nets and followed him. But now to
humility, we are exhorted in the Scriptures, not three or four times or seven
times, but I think, se^^nty times seven times. Vniu^rsa facies, ac vt ita
dixerim, August. Enchir. cap. 98.
vultus sanctarum Scriptura^um been intuen^cs, id admonere videtur, vt qui
gloriatur in Domino, glorietur, The whole face and countenance of the holy
Scriptures, (so to speak) seems to admonish those that look well into them,
thus much, That he that rejoices, should rejoice in the Lord. Thus Austin. He
must rejoice (or boast (...)) in the Lord; therefore he must be far from
boasting of himself, except it be of his infirmities, as the Apostle speaks;
then he must not be high-minded, he must have no proud looks, as the Prophet
has it; but he must be as one that is weaned, yea, he must be in himself as
one that is weaned. Indeed that is true, humility that is not so much in show,
and in outward appearance, as in deed, and in truth. There was a great
Rabblement or Order of Friars, called Humiliati, professing great humility, who
but they? and crouching low, and stooping low, what else? and yet their
stomachs did so swell, and were so bloody, that they were intolerable to Rome
it self, and therefore cashiered and abandoned. So Paul the fourth pretended
so great mortification, and neglect of the world and worldly things, that it
was a special motive to the Cardinals to choose him Pope, in hope to rule him
as they lusted: but when this humble Fellow had found Peter's Keys, then he did
no longer look down toward the dust, as it were seeking them, but held up
his head as high and as lofty as ever did any in that Chair. Plutarch.
Antipater, as Plutarch writes, went very meanly apparelled, more like a
private man then a Prince, yet he was noted and censured by them that knew him
well, to be intus purpureus, all purple within. Aut loquendum nobis est vt
vestiti sumus, aut vestiendum, Hieronym. ad Furium.
vt loquimur. Quid aliud pollicemur, aliud ostendimus? Either we must speak
sutably to our apparel, or else we must be apparelled sutably to our speech.
Why do we promise one thing, and show another? A Hood does not make a Monk.
You know the Proverb. Neither does (...), a ragged coat make an humble
Philosopher, said Hero, by the report of Nazianzen. Diogenes trampled upon
Platoes pride, but with greater pride. And the Gibeonites for all their humble
speech, and old apparel, were notwithstanding very coozeners. So then if
humility consist neither in word, nor in apparel, wherein is the virtue
thereof to be found, and how may it be discerned? Truly, Beloved, the heart is
deceitful above all, who can know it? The Lord he searches the heart, and
tries the reins, to give to every man according to his ways, etc. Jeremy 17.
So our Savior, John 1. was able to give a true verdict of Nathaniel, as soon
as he saw him, Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile. How
this? Because he was God. But now man has but a shall^w sound, and a short
reach, and deals only by probabilities and likely-hoods, and according to
outward appearance, and therefore may be deceived, and in that respect, is not
to pronounce lightly concerning other men's humility, or pride. Yet for all
that, as Christ says of false prophets, By their fruits you shall know them:
So the son of Sirach speaks not in vain, A man's garment, grenning, ((...),
when a man shows his teeth) and gate (or paceing, (...)) declare after a
sort, what he is, and which way he does incline. The British Clergy being sent
unto by Augustine (not the learned Bishop of Hippo, whom you hear so often
cited out of this place, but an unlearned, and unsavory Monk, whom Gregory
sent over hither, (read but his questions moved to the said Gregory, as they
be registered by Beda, and you will say he was no better,) to make their
appearance before him, consulted a grave man, famous for his wisdom in those
days, what they were best to do; He advised them to be ruled by him, if he
were a man of God. But how shall we know that, said they? If he be mild and
humble in heart, said he. And how shall we know so much? Why, said he, use the
means, that he, and his may come to the Synod, and be there before you; and
if he rise up unto you, when you come near, know that he is the servant of
Christ, and (therefore) hearken to him obediently. But if he despise you, (si
spreuerit) and will not vouchsafe to rise up unto you, you being the greater
number, then do you also despise him, and care as little for him. Thus they
were advised, and accordingly they make trial; and Augustine keeping his
place, and not daining to rise up unto them, they condemn him for a proud
fellow, and became his opposites to the uttermost. Beloved, that wise man was
to blame, whatsoever opinion of wisdom he had, to make a man's manners to be
the trial of his faith, and one ceremonious complement, to be the trial of
ones life. You know Naaman the Syrian, when he took it in dudgeon, that Elisha
the Prophet did not come out unto him in person, but only sent a message to
him, was reproved for the same of his servants, and required to do as the
Prophet bade him, never standing upon circumstances; And the Civil Law says
well, Veritas rerum erroribus gestorum non vitiatur, The truth of the case is
not corrupted by the errors falling out in the handling of it; yet for all
that, Augustine is no way to be justified in his Pontifical stately
deportment, specially toward strangers, and of the same rank that he was, for
all his Pall. For as holiness becomes Gods house for ever, so surely
humility graceth man's seat exceedingly, be a man never so high lifted up above
his brethren. The Kingdom of God is neither sitting, nor standing, nor
perking, nor stouping; no more is virtue; yet because these are tokens, and
bewrayers of that which is in man, many times therefore do men observe them
maruellously. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth
good things, and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings
forth evil things, for of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks; yea,
and so do all the rest of the parts of the body, and all the faculties of the
mind show themselves outwardly. A man may dissemble naughtiness, I grant; as
not be covetous, when yet he is an extortioner; not to be wanton, when yet he
is a wedlocke-breaker; not to be riotous, when yet his heart is evermore in the
Tavern, etc. But how few do dissemble virtue? how few do appear worse then
they are indeed? The common fault is, that men will be counted more virtuous
then they are; that men love that, which they will not be known of, and are
ashamed to make profession. Therefore they that carry t^eir noses high into the
wind, like the wild Ass in the Wilderness mentioned by Jeremy, and stroute
in their gate, as though they went upon stilts, or carried Pomparum fercula;
they that brave it in silks, and veluets, nay, in silver and gold, above their
ability and means, above their degree, beyond all good order; well they may
please themselves, and such as gain by them, but hardly will they get the
reputation of humble men, nay, they will hardly wash away the imputation of
pride and insolency. Poterat fortasse minoris piscator, quam piscis emi, The
Fisher himself was not so much worth, as he rated the Fi^h, said the Poet; and
so we may say, Many a man is in the midst of his wealth, (nay, of another
man's too,) when he has his suite on his back. For thus is the Tenant racked,
the poor repelled, the Broker enriched, and the Usurer almost Lorded. He that
begun with an hundred, nay, with ten, increases to thousands, and he that
began with thousands, decreaseth to nothing. But as in Tacitus his time, there
were every year Edicts, and Proclamations set forth against the Mathematicians
or Astrologers, and yet they could never get Rome to be rid of them; so let the
Preachers speak never so much against the vanity of apparel now-a-dayes, the
speech shall be as the sound of one that has a pleasant voice, (as the Prophet
says,) or rather as of one that speaks unpleasantly, and most harshly, and
he shall labor in vain, and for nothing. Well, if we humble our selves, let
us humble our selves, even in our apparel. In like manner, let us humble our
selves in speech and in demeanor. Rehoboam through an discourteous and rough
speech, lost ten Tribes at a clap. Demetrius lost a whole Kingdom, and the
same a rich one, even the Kingdom of Macedony, by his arrogant behavior. C.
Caesar lost no less then an Empire and his life, and all by keeping his seat,
and not vouchsafing to rise up unto his Peers. Why should it be thus among
Christians? I stout, and thou stout, I dare not venture a cap, or a salutation,
lest I should be a loser. Why do we not rather behold in our brother our own
image, yea, the image of God, and for his sake, make our selves equal to them
of the lower sort? Why did we not go one before another, in giving honor,
and bear one another burden, and in humbleness of mind, look not every one
of his own things, but upon that which is in another, and esteem of that
better then of our own? This is true humility, and this is thanke-worthy with
God, when a man not in apparel only, or in word, or in gesture humbles
himself, but when the hidden man, which is within, is decked with this virtue
as with a garment. For when humility is once rooted in the heart, there will be
a correspondency and conformity in the outward behavior, that no exception
shall be taken against it: for a tree will be known by his fruit. It is not a
good tree that brings forth bad fruit, neither is it a bad tree that brings
forth good fruit. (...), said even Nature in an Heathen man. [Humble your
selues] therefore. We have seen what we must do, what duty we must yield,
even the duty of humility. Now let us see a little to whom we must do it, in
these words, [ under the mighty hand of God.] If we were bid to (humble) our
selves to stocks and stones, the work of men's hands, which have eyes and see
not, ears and hear not, then we might refuse to obey; for we must bow to the
Lord our God, and him only must we serve. If to a shrewd Master or Mistress, as
Hagar was bid to submit her self to Sarah; to our aemulus, as Haman was feign
to do honor to Mordecai; to our fellow-seruant, and the same a stranger, as
the Egyptians submitted themselves to Joseph; to an enemy of our Country, or a
Tyrant, as the Israelites were commanded to stoop to Nabuchadnezzar: then it
were another matter, then we might complain, as some do in the Scriptures;
Why has the Lord dealt so cruelly with us? But now, when the Precept of
humiliation is to the Creator of all things, shall flesh and blood disdain to
submit it self to God? weak flesh and blood, to the mighty hand of God? It
was a reason that Josephus used in his Oration to his Contrymen, to persuade
them to submit their necks to the yoke of the Romans, for as much as they had
gotten the Dominion of the greates^ part of the world; The same reason used
Rabshak^h, to them that were besieged in Jerusalem, that for as much as the
King of Assyria had subdued many other Nations strong and mighty, therefore
they might with credit enough yield. Dignitate Domini minus turpis est conditio
se^u^, By the honor of the Master the (base) estate of the servant becomes
more tolerable. It was some comfort to Marcus Antonius, having wounded himself
to death in desperation, that he was overcome, not by any base coward, but by a
valiant Roman. -- AEnaeae magni dextra cadis. So Aeneas bade one comfort
himself. Sal^em ne lixae manu cadam, says the valorous Admiral of France:
Slay me and spare not, but yet not by the hand of a skullion. Let not a boy
slay us, (said Zibah and Zalmumah, Judge. 8.) but rise thou and fall upon us,
for as the man is, so is his strength. Therefore, for as much as we are
required to humble our selves under Almighty God, who made the heavens and the
earth by his great power, and by his stretched-out Arm, and nothing is hard
unto him, Jeremy, 32. Behold, he will break down, and it cannot be built, he
shuts up a man, and he cannot be loosed, Job 12. He puts his hand upon
the Rocks, and overthrows the mountains by the roots, Job 28. For as much,
I say, as he is the Creator of the Spirits of all flesh, Numb. 16.22.
(not only of their bodits,) and does what he will both in heaven and earth,
turning man to destruction, and again saying (in mercy) Turn again, ye
children of men; Shall we bridle it or bristle it against him? shall we scorn
to answer, when he calls? obey, when he commands? sorrow, and mourn, when
he chasticeth? shall we receive good of the Lord, and then to be unthankful?
evil, and then be impatient? Nay, rather let us hearken to the Commandment in
my Text, [ Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God,] and to the promise
annexed, [that he may exalt you.] Foelix Ecclesia (says Austin) cuise Deus
debitorem fecit, non aliquid accipiendo, sed omnia promittendo, Happy is the
Church, to whom the Lord has made himself a debtor, not by receiving any
thing (at her hands) but by promising all things. Surely though the Lord had
only commanded and bade us on our Allegiance, to embrace humility, and to
remove arrogance far from us, we were bound, even for the Commandment sake,
to yield all obedience to it. For does not a son honor his Father, and a
servant his Lord? Mal^ch. 1.6. Ephesians. 2.
And are we not his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works,
which he has appointed that we should walk in them? Again, if he had
tendered the virtue humility unto us in it own kind, without any painting,
without any sauce, as it were, were it not worthy to be looked upon? nay, to be
tasted? nay, to be swallowed down, as most wholesome meat? Whatsoever it
seems to you; of the wise it has been esteemed, either the most excellent,
or the most necessary of all virtues. Some call it the Rose of the Garden, and
the Lilly of the field. Some the Queen of all virtues; Some the mother; Some
the foundation, and groundwork, Some the root. Certain it is, says
Bernard, Nisi super humilitatis stabile fundamentum spiritale aedificium stare
non potest, Bernard sermon. in 36. Cant c.
A spiritual building cannot stand (steady) except (it be placed) upon the
sure foundation of humility. Augustine goes further and says (to Dioscorus)
that it is the first thing in Christianity, August Dioscor. E^ist. 56.
and the second, and the third, and almost all in all: for (says he) except
humility do both go before, and accompany, and follow after all whatsoever we
do well, pride will wrest it out of our hands (and mar all.) Therefore
humility is to be thought upon, and by all means to be coueted after, even for
the very worth of it, though there were no promise annexed to it to draw us
on. But now, when God is so good and gracious to us, as to promise us promotion
for the issue and cloze, we must needs show our selves very dull, and very
unhappy, if we do not strive for it as for silver, and dig for it as for
treasure. The Husbandman is content to go forth weeping, and to bestow his
precious seed, so that he may return with joy, and bring his sheaues with him.
So every one that proves Masteries, is content to abstain from all things, so
that he may obtain a Crown, though the same be a corruptible one. So the
Soldier, to approve himself to him that has chosen him to the Warfare; The
Captain, and specially the General, to get glory; what pain and hardness
do they sustain, or rather what do they not sustain? It is written of
Alexander (I will trouble you but with one Story,) that being in the farther
parts of Asia; one while striving against heat, and thirst; another while
against cold and hunger; another while against craggy Rocks; another while
against deep and dangerous rivers, etc. he could not contain but burst forth
in this exclamation, O ye Athenians, what difficulties and dangers do I
endure for your sakes, to be praised and celebrated by ^our pens and tongues!
Now if to be extolled by the pens and tongues of vain men, could prevail so
much with a Prince tenderly bred, and of great estate; should not we much
rather submit our selves to Gods will and pleasure, and providence, and even
deny and defy whatsoever worth may seem to be in us, that he may advance us
and bring us to honor? God surely uses to make great ones small, and small or
mean ones great, as Xenophon speaks. Nay, the blessed Virgin being moved by
the holy Ghost, acknowledges as much, Luke 1.5^.
He pulls down the mighty from their seat, and exalts the humble and
meek. He makes high, and makes low, yea, he makes them high that before
were low, if in humility and meekness they possess their souls. David kept
his fathers sheep, and was not ashamed, nay, he braggeth of it, (in an holy
kind of rejoicing,) in the Psalm; That the Lord took him as he followed the
Ewes great with Lamb, to be a Ruler in Jacob, and a Governor in Israel. So
Agathocles, so Willigis, (to trouble you with no more,) the one was exalted to
be King of Sicily, being but a Potters son; the other to be Archbishop of
Mentz, (a Prince Elector in Germany,) being but a Wheelers son. They
acknowledged Gods providence and work in their advancement, and were so far
from being ashamed of their base parentage, that the one would not be served
with other plate then with earthen, to show how Nobly he was descended; The
other gave for his Arms the Wheels, and had this Motto, or rather Memento,
written in his bedchamber in great letters, Willigis, Willigis, recole vnde
vene^is: O Willigis, remember whence thou came. This indeed is the way to
become high, (to be exalted before God and before wise men,) to be lowly in our
own eyes, to confess that we are worms, and not men, that we are sinful
men, and not Saints; that we are unworthy the least of Gods mercies, and that
it is of his mercy only, that we are not consumed. For what have we that we
have not received? what have we received, but we have corrupted and made worse?
what have we corrupted, but for the same we deserve to be called to account,
yea, to be cast forth of Gods house asvnprofitable servants? And is it a time
then for us to be high-minded, or to fear, to be lofty, or to be humble? This
is certain, Christ came not to call the righteous, (those that in the pride of
their heart, think themselves to be such,) much less to reward them, much
less to crown them; but sinners penitent, and humble sinners, to faithful
repentance, and consequently to salvation. They that are whole, need not the
Physician, care not for the Physician, but they that are sick, and are heavy
laden, and bowed down with the burden of their sins; they cry out in great
humility, God be merciful to me a sinner. Those the Lord receives into grace,
and makes them to sit at his right hand, and gives them a name in his house,
better then of sons and daughters, as the Prophet speaks. Now as we are to
think meanly of our selves in respect of Sanctity, if we will be found in
Christ, not having our own righteousness which is of the Law, but that which
is by the faith of Jesus Christ, Phil. 3.9.
by which only we can attain unto Gods Kingdom; So we must beware that we
take not too much upon us in respect of knowledge: you know that knowledge
puffs up, 1. Cor. 8. Job 37.
And Job, Let men fear God, for he will not regard any that are wise in their
own conceits. N^^i^nzen.
And Nazianzen, Whatsoever I know by my self, I know nothing better ((...),
wiselyer) then others; except some think this to be my wisdom, to know that
I am not wise, (...), neither (do I come) near true wisdom. Thus Nazianzen.
And he had it from Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 3. If any man among you seem to be wise
in this world, let him be a fool, that he may be wise. Neither did Saint Paul
make a rule for others only, and not for himself, as the manner of the world
is, to lay heavy imputations upon others, and to exempt themselves; no, but as
he strippeth himself of all opinion of righteousness, 1. Timoth. 1. saying
there, that of sinners he was chief. 1 Cor. 2.
So to the Corinthians, he disclaimeth all credit for knowledge (for humane
knowledge,) saying, I esteem to know nothing among you, save Jesus Christ, and
him crucified. Thus Saint Paul judged himself, that he might not be judged of
the Lord, to be arrogant. And who would not propose to himself his example to
follow rather, then those proud (...), such as Sir Thomas Moore writes of in
an Epistle to Dorpius, who take upon them to be ripe in those things which they
never heard nor read? Doubtless many there be that might have attained to
knowledge, but that they thought they had attained it already, (as Seneca
says;) And therefore modesty and humility are good means through Gods
blessing to advance men to learning. But to recount what we have done in this
later part, and to proceed to that which remains: You have heard Saint Peter
promise, on Gods behalf, that he will exalt those that humble themselves,
whether it be in matter of piety and virtue before God, or in learning or skill
before men. Now, some will say peradventure, we see not the accomplishment of
these promises, for how many modest and humble men be there, and ever have
been, that have wanted preferment, nay, that have wrestled with great
extremities? Were not the Christians in the Primitive time under Heathen
Princes, and in the later perilous times under Antichrist kept under the
hatches, for hundreds of years? Did not they hunger and thirst, and were
naked, and wandered up and down in sheepskins, Hebre. 11.36, 37.
and goat skins, as it were, and had no dwelling place, and were counted as the
filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things? Call you this
exaltation or advancement? Hic pietatis honos, sic nos in Sceptra reponis? I
answer, or rather Saint Peter answered for me, in the one word of my Text,
which is as yet untouched, [(...), in due time they shall be exalted.] The
Kingdom of God comes not with observation, says our Savior, Luke 17. Act.
1.
And it is not for men to know the times and seasons, which the Father has put
in his own power, said he again. Though it stay, yet wait thou; for it shall
surely come and not stay; as the Prophet speaks. Haback. 3.
Known to God from the beginning are all his works, and best known unto him
are the best times of working. Peradventure we shall not enjoy our selves the
Land or preferment that is promised to us; As Abraham got not himself in the
Land of Canaan the breadth of a foot; yet our posterity may have it.
Peradventure we shall be in trouble and heaviness till our old age, as Jacob
was the greatest part of his time, and then we may be provided for to our
content, as Jacob was in the Land of Gosen. Peradventure we shall be oppressed
by Tyrants, diffamed by slanderers, held in bands and imprisonment by
unrighteous Judges; yet when the time appointed shall come, the Lord will cause
their truth to appear as the light, and their righteousness as the Noonday.
The King will send and deliver them, the Prince of the people will let them go
free. He dealt so with Joseph; And did he not deal so with Daniel? Also with
Paul and Silas, in the 16. of the Acts? Well, be it that you should be in
continual trouble, and anxiety all your life long; that you should be clapped up
in a Dungeon fast bound in fetters and iron; and that you had none to comfort
you, and that none cared for your soul; yet if Christ shall cause his heavenly
light to shine into your habitation, the light of the Gospel, I mean; If he
shall reueile himself unto you, and cause the scales of ignorance to fall from
your eyes, and especially the shackles of impiety and iniquity to fall from
your hands and hearts; you are no longer losers but gainers, no longer of low
and base condition, but highly preferred and exalted. Let the brother of low
degree rejoice, in that he is exalted, ((...),) says Saint James, James 1.
in that he is exalted to the knowledge of God, to the faith of Christ, to the
Adoption of sons, to be a Citizen with the Saints, and of the household of
Gods! He is not a bondman that is set free by Christ, nor poor, that is rich
in faith, nor contemptible, that is enrolled in the book of life, nor
base-borne, that has God to his Father, and Christ to his brother. If the King
would bestow an Office upon you, you would not only be glad, but be proud; but
now if a great man would adopt thee to be his son (...), says Arrianus upon
Epictetus) your superstitiousnesse and arrogance would be intolerable. Now see,
says Saint John, how great love the Father has showed us, that we should be
called the sons of God: If sons, then heirs, (says Saint Paul:) heirs of
God, and fellow-heires with Christ. And yet do we complain of our hard
fortune, as though God had done nothing for us? And yet do we demand
impatiently, Where is the promise of his coming? Where is the exalting and
preferment, the Apostle speaks of? Beloved, if we have murmuring within our
selves, and grudging at the good man of the house, because he sets us below,
and not above; because he does not cast us up our Indentures, before we have
served our years; then do we walk and talk unorderly after the fle^h, and
not after Christ, We do not humble our selves under the mighty hand of God:
And so there is no promise made unto us. The Husbandman must first labor, 1.
Tim. 2.
before he receive of the fruit. Jacob must serve seven years, before he have
his hearts desire in one thing, and seven more before he have it in another;
and seven to that, before he have it inthe third. Understand what I say, and
the Lord give you understanding in all things. Blessed the man that endures
temptation: for when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of life, if he
faint not. But take heed that you do not mistake the case, and make that to be
a temptation or a cross, that is not. You have not so much as you would have:
but have you not more then you deserve? You are made the tail, and not the
head, as Moses speaks. Peradventure it is good for the Commonweal that you
be so, yea, and good for your selves too. Many being set on horseback, have
road so madly, that they have broken their horses neck, and their own also.
Therefore let every one be content with the estate that God has given him, and
let him not envy him that is greater or higher then himself; For the promise
of exalting which is in my Text, if you refer it to the blessings of this
life, has a secret condition employed, namely, if it be good for us. And shall
we be so unwise, or unhappy, to wish for that which will do us no good? God
forbid; children indeed will be meddling with knives and with edge-tooles, also
they will not fear to take a Snake or Adder by the tail in stead of an Eele;
But we must not be children in understanding, but in wit be perfect; As
concerning maliciousnes and ambition, and greediness, it were good to convert
and become as children, but for knowledge and discerning between good and
evil, we must be of a ripe age, we must not be dejected for every light
affliction, neither must we be puffed up for any good success or advantage. We
must rejoice, as though we rejoiced not, and mourn, as though we mourned not,
using the world, as though we used it not, and humble our selves under the
mighty hand of God, and take all things in good part, saying always, The Lord
be praised. This is true riches, to be content; and this is true honor, not to
be ambitious; and this is true preferrement, nay happiness, to be in the
favor of God, which none sooner gets then the humble man, if his humility
proceed from a pure heart, and a good conscience, and faith unfeigned. The Lords
Name be ever blessed. Amen, Amen.

A SERMON UPON THE SECOND PSALM. THE TENTH SERMON.
PSALM 2. verse 10. Now therefore be wise, O Kings, be instructed, O Judges of
the earth.


SOME of the Jewish Doctors would have these words to be an Apostrophe to those
Kings and Princes, which plotted against the Crown and dignity of David;
first, to keep him from his right, then to disrobe him being invested. The
Psalmist therefore does advise them to bethink themselves better, and not to
make head any longer against David, lest they be found to fight against God
himself. This exposition is good, but it is not good enough, (if that which is
not good enough, may be truly called good.) For as Tertullian says, Ratio
Diuina non in superficie, sed in medulla, and plerumque aemula manifestis: That
is, Tertull. de resur. carnis.
The sense and pith of the Word of God, is not in the uttermost skin, but in
the marrow, and commonly crosses the apparancy of the letter; And as Hierome
to Paulinus, Whatsoever we read in the Scripture, Hieronym. ad Paulin.
it shines truly and glistereth even in the rind, but is sweeter in the
marrow; Therefore to rest upon the Type or Figure, and not to proceed so far
as the thing figured, is to deal as weakly, as if a man searching in minerals
for gold or silver, should content himself with the first rubble, and give
over before he come to the precious Oar. It is truth, that David did not only
spe^ke and prophecy of our Savior, (as is euery-where to be seen in the
Psalms, and euery-where vouched in the New Testament,) but also was a Figure
of him, so express a one and lively, that Christ might seem to have been
borne in David, even long before He came in the flesh, and David to have
revived, and been borne again in Christ, even long after he was dead and
rotten. This is not to make Iesum Typicum, with the Franciscans, nor yet to
bring In Somnia Pythagoraea, that is, the passing of souls from bodies, from
one body to another, with those phantastikes: but this is to teach, as the
truth is in Jesus, that Christ not only is now painted out before our eyes,
and among us crucified in the preaching of the Gospel, but also was shadowed
and fore-described in the Old Testament, by certain personal Types, as it
were Verbo visibili, (as Augustine speaks:) To such an effect as Iustine
Martyr touches, when he says, The G spell what is it, but the Law fulfilled?
The Law what was it, but the G^spell foretold? Justin Martyr ad orthod. resp.
101.
This I would say, that as David did, and suffered many things which were not
to have an end and consummation in David, but were to fore-shew the doings and
sufferings of Christ, the true David; (He is called David by Hieremy, Ezechiel,
and Hosea, to speak of no more,) and the glory that should follow after: so we
are to think, that the Psalmist requiring the Kings of those days to be wise,
and to stoop to David's command, does by good consequent advise the high
Estates of all ages to strike sail to our Savior, and to yield obedience to
his Law. To put the matter out of doubt, the Apostles themselves, who could not
be deceived, having received the first fruits of Gods Spirit, and would not
deceive, being endued with grace, and sincerity from above; they, I say, Acts,
4. do plainly apply this Psalm to our Savior; that we should no longer be
doubtful in the matter, but believing: yea, as Saint Augustine says out of
Moses (Deuter. 32.) Inimi^us meus testis m^us, that is, My Enemy is my
witness; some of the chief of the Jews do grant, that it may be understood
of our Savior, either in their own judgment, or in the judgment of their
Fathers, or ancient Rabbis. The former point is affirmed by Aben-Ezra,
surnamed the wise, the other by Shelomoh, somewhat more ancient then he.
Aben-Ezra and Shelom. C^m. in Psalm. 2.
So then the Kingdom that is here spoken of, being chiefly to be understood
of the Kingdom of Christ, and the opposition that is here signified, to be
chiefly directed against it; we may without offering any violence to the Text,
hence exhort all Kings and Princes upon whom the ends of the world are come, to
look unto themselves, and to the station wherein God has placed them, and to
esteem it the greatest policy, to be wise according to godliness; and the
highest Soueraignety, to be subject to Christ. Especially it being granted by
all, that the Scriptures were not made to serve one age or two only, (No, for
then there must have been many Bibles made from the beginning of the world,
and then there must have been a continual sending down of the holy Ghost,
and a continual sending forth of Apostles, and Prophets,) but to be the rule
for faith, and the direction for manners to all posterity. Therefore Irenaeus
says well, That which the Apostles first taught, Iraeneus lib. 3. Praefat.
they afterward committed to writing, to be the ground and pillar of our
faith; (He speaks indefinitely without limitation of time, and therefore
would be understood to mean of all times.) And Tertullian not long after him,
is bold and says, Tertull. de Spect.
Late semper Scriptura diuina diuiditur, vbicunque secundum praesentis
reisensum disciplina munietur, The Scripture is of a large extent, and wide
circumference, as often as any thing from it is to be deduced, that pertains
either to information or reformation. Hitherto I have proved, both that this
whole second Psalm is chiefly to be understood of our Savior, and that my
Text out of the tenth verse, may rightly be applied to the Kings and Princes of
these days. Now I come to the words themselves: Now therefore be wise O Kings,
be instructed, O Judges of the earth. Two kinds of persons are here called
upon, Kings and Judges: Kings, as the chief, Judges, as they that are
appointed by them, for the punishment of them that do i^l, and the praise of
them that do well. Two kinds of duties are here urged, to be wise and
intelligent, this is required of Kings; to be instructed and disciplined, this
of inferior Magistrates. I at this time shall speak only of the first kind of
persons, that is, of Kings and their duties: and therein I mean not to speak
of Kings by themselves, and of wisdom by it self, (that were not to divide
the Text aright, but to break it,) but of both together, as God shall give
grace. But first I observe, and it is wor^hy to be observed, how the Psalmist
begins with Kings; and surely great cause for it, not only for their place,
eminent and supereminent, Tertul. ad Scapul. Optatus li. 3.
(Imperator homo a Deo secundus, soloque Deo minor, Tertullian. Supra
Imperatorem non est nisi solus Deus, Optatus,) Nor only for their Titles:
Shepherds, Leaders, Fathers, Sons of the Highest, the lively Images of God,
Gods Vicegerents, Gods upon earth, Sine dubio Imperator non est nisi Deus
terrenus, says the Gothe to Theodosius, witness Paulus Diaconus, Paul
Diaconus li. 12.
) but for two other more maine reasons; first, for the great dependency upon
their safety, for that they neither stand nor fall to themselves; Secondly, for
the great power of their example, either to good, or evil. Touching the first,
they do not stand or fall to themselves, (as I said,) but are the standing or
falling of most in Israel. They may be compared to the two Pillars, upon the
which the great house of the Philistines did rely; which while they stood, did
bear up the whole building, even when there were many hundreds upon the roof:
but when they fell, they pulled down all with them, and the fall of that house
was great. Judges 16.
Also to the Sun in the Firmament, which while it is over our Horizon, and
scatters abroad its glorious beams, it gives light unto the world, and
renews the face of the earth, but when it is whirled from us, or eclipsed by
the interposition of the Moon, then it causes or occasioneth darkness, and
fills all things living with horror and amazement. Briefly to the head and
heart of a man, not to the head only, nor to the heart only, but to the head
and heart, upon whose liveliness and soundness, the life and motion of the
whole body does depend. Zach. 13.
Smite the Shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered, it is said in Zachary.
Let me smite Saul, (King Saul) but once, and the Kingdom shall be thine, 1.
Sam. 26.
and the victory thine, said Abishai, in effect. 2. Sam. 17.
Let me smite David (King David) and all Israel shall be gathered to thee,
(said that wicked Counselor Achitophel, 2. Sam. 17. When Alexander was dead,
the Army was not lessened but by one man, every man knew: but yet it was
compared by the wise to the Cyclops, Demades.
which had his eye, and the same his only eye, boared out. In like manner
fared it with the great forces, that Cyrus the younger led against Artaxerxes,
when he through his forwardness was slain, Plutarch. in Artaxerxe. Bonfinius
de^ad. 3. lib. 6. Guicciardin. li. 10.
all went to wrack, and of vanquishers they became vanquished. So with the
Christians at Varna, when their King Vladislaus was lost; So with the French at
Rauenna, when their Foisee was ouer-throwne: Therefore be wise, O ye Kings, ye
carry about in your bodies, not your own lives alone, but the lives of
thousands, you have upon the stake not your own safety alone, but the safety
of thousands. Thou shall not go forth with us any more to battle, 2. Sam. 21.
2. Sam. 18.
lest thou quench the light of Israel, for thou art worth ten thousand. When
one exhorted Cleomenes to hold his life vile unto him, Plutar^h. in Cl^om^ne.
and to power it out like water upon the ground: he answered, I will not stick
for that, if I had none to care for, but my self, but now I must make much of
my life, to do my Country good. Cicero ^ro M^rcello.
When Caesar had given forth in speech, that he had lived long enough, and cared
not though he dyed on the morrow; Thou speak reason, said Tully, if thou
liuedst only for thy self, but thy Country cannot spare thee. Sertorius his
Soldiers were not wont to shift for themselves by flight, before they had put
their General Sertorius in safety. So the Galls had their Soldurios, that is,
devoted men, which vowed to live and dye with their Lord, as Bodin out of
antiquity does gather. Bod^^. de Repub. lib. 1.
So the French Protestants are much commended by the equal, for that they
b^stowed the young Princes of Navarre, and Condie, in a strong Castle, out of
gunshot, before they hazarded the great battle of Moncounter. The King is so
to the Commonweal, as the helm is to the ship, or rather as the ship is
to the passengers; while the ship is safe, there is hope to recover the land,
be we never so far from it, and though the Sea and winds do never so much
swell and rage: but if the Ship sink, or be dashed on the rocks, there
remains nothing, but a fearful looking for of drowning and destruction.
Therefore the safety of the King, being the safety of all, what marvel if the
Prophet begin with Kings, and advise them to look about them? This may be one
cause. Another this, We know that there is no cloth, that does so kindly take
the color that the Dyer would stain it with, as the people are apt to imitate
the guize and carriage of their Prince; the similitude is not mine, but
Nazianzens* Nazianzen. Apolog.
therefore because the converting of him, is the converting of hundreds at a
clap; and his auersenesse, or stiffenesse, the auersenesse or standing out of
multitudes, this also may be thought to be a cause why he begins with Kings.
When was there a good King in Judah, (for there were but few in Israel, after
that Ephraim departed from the house of David,) that sought the Lord with all
his heart, but he drew the people to be well-giuen, at the leastwise, in
comparison? On the other side, when was there a wicked King that did set set up
Idols in his heart, or worshipped the Host of heaven, or burnt incense unto
Baal, but the people were as forward, and as sharply set upon Idolatry as he?
(...), that is, Herodian.
The subject is wont to emulate and imitate the life of his Governor or
Prince, says one Historiographer; and another, Princeps quum Imperio maximus
sit, Patercul. li. 2.
exemplo mayor est, that is, Be the Prince never so great for command, yet he
commands most by his example. It is somewhat strange, Circumcision is a
painful thing, specially in them that are out of their Infancy, (it may be
gathered hereby, for that the Turks using it at this day upon their children,
being of some years, do use such dissembling toward them, for the
circumstance of the time when they do it,) and yet when the King of Sichem had
yielded thereunto, the whole City followed: Genes. 34.
So Diodorus writes of the Aethiopians, that when their King had caught some
mayme or mark in any part ofhis body, Diodorus.
the manner was for all his Favorites, to maime or mark themselves in the same
part. Is it not written of Rehoboam expressly, that when he forsook the Lord,
all Israel did so with him? 2. Chron. 12.
Also is it not to be observed in the Ecclesiastical Story, that when Julian
fell from Christ unto Paganism, Valens in stead of the truth embraced a lie,
(the vile Heresy of the Arians) a great part of the Empire did so likewise? On
the other side, when Josiah served the Lord with all his heart, all Judah did so
all his days. And when Constantine the great, 2. Chron. 34.
and Theodosius the great, gave themselves to advance the faith of Christ, and
to purge out the old leaven of Heathenisme, there was such a change in the
Empire on the sudden, that Zosimus and Eunapius being Pagans, do much
complain thereof in their writings: therefore me thinks Fulgensius speaks
to good purpose, and agreeable to true experience, Fu^gen. de conue. E^ist. 6.
that although Christ dyed indifferently for all the faithful, yet the
converting of the mighty Ones of the world, is of special service to win
(souls) unto Christ. He does symbolize with that learned Writer, that
allegorizng upon those words of Saint John touching the taking of so many great
Fishes, John. 21.
does congratulate unto the Church the happy converting of Princes, because by
their conuetsion many were brought unto Christ's Fold. Yea, Plutarch, a Heathen
man, saw in a manner, as much touching the great force that is in the example
of Princes; for he in the life of Dio, speaking of Plato his sailing into
Sicily, to do some good upon King Dionysius, makes this to be the special
motive, for that the reforming of the King would be the reforming of the whole
Island. So then, the Kings piety and sound persuasion being as effectual, for
the winning of the souls of his subjects, as his bodily safety is available
for the conseruing of their worldly estates. Our Psalmist without doubt had
great reas^on to do as he does, to begin with Kings. This may suffice for the
natural placing of the words, and withal touching the incomparable good, that
redoundeth to the common Estate, by the Kings piety and safety. I come now more
closely to the Duty of Kings; for of that only and of the touch of the time, [
Now] which shall be for application, I shall speak at this time. Be wise now
therefore, O Kings. Two kinds of wisdom are required in Kings and Princes;
wisdom or knowledge in Gods matters, otherwise called Divinity, and wisdom
or knowledge in matters of the world, otherwise called Prudence or Policy; Both
are contained in the Original word (...). (It signifies also good success,
to note, that God many times crowns pious prudence, and prudent piousnes,
with many a temporal blessing*) Both are not only for ornament like the two
Pillars that Solomon put in the Porch of the Temple, but also for special use
like the hands of Aaron and Hur, 1. Reg. 7. Exodus 1^.
which did support the arms of Moses for the discomfiture of the Amalekites.
For if they be pious only in Gods matters, and be not otherwise prudent: then
they are fitter for the Commonweal of Plato, then for the corrupt estate of
Romulus; for the Cloister, then for the Court: Again, if they be prudent or
politic only, and be not pious; then they are fitter to be Kings of Babel,
where dwells confusion, then of Jerusalem, where Gods glory is seen; and
more rightly to be called the children of this world, which goes to naught and
perishes, then the children of God, who love truth in the inwards, and ca^e
for none but for such as worship him from a pure heart with a good conscience.
Well, they must be Divines, as it were, (this is first required,) I say not in
profession, but in knowledge, they must know God the only Lord, and whom he
has sent, Jesus Christ* they must know Christ, and him crucified, and the
power of his Cross, and virtue of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his
afflictions, that they may be conformable unto his death; they must separate
and distinguish truth from error, clean from unclean, right from wrong; yea,
they must be able to put a wise difference between the great things of the
Law, as Righteousness, Mercy, and Judgment, and the lighter things of humane
observation, which perish with the use or abuse. If Iephthah* had known and
considered what things might lawfully be vowed, Judges 11. Deuteronomy. 12.8. and
Deuteronomy. 5.32. 1. Sam. 13. and 15.
and how far vows do bind, he would not have immolated his own daughter.
If Saul had known and considered what is written in the Law, (Ye shall not
do what seems good to your selves, but what I command you, that you shall
do, you shall turn neither to the right hand, nor to the left,) he had not
forfeited his Kingdom. 2. Chron. 26.
If Vzziah had known and considered, that none but the sons of Aaron were to
approach to the Altar of the Lord, and there to burn incense, he had not been
smitten with the leprosy. To be short; If those Kings of Judah and Israel, that
built high places, Deuteronomy. 12.5.
and sacrificed under every green tree, had known and considered, that
Jerusalem was the place, whither they should have brought their oblations,
being the place that God appointed to put his name there, they had not been so
bitterly inueighed against, nor so fearfully threatened by the Prophets as they
were. To conclude, If the Machabees had been wise, and known what that
means; I will have mercy and not sacrifice; and that which was the kernel of
the ceremony from the beginning, Hosea. 6.16.
how-soeuer the shell was not so cracked and opened in former time as it was by
our Savior, the Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath; Mark 2.27.
they would not have suffered themselves to bo knocked down like Oxen in the
Shambles, or to be led as sheep to the slaughter, but would have stood upon
their guard, and upon their defense, even upon the Sabbath day. On the other
side, David was not afraid to eat of the Shewbread, (which was appointed
only for the Priests.) David was wise, and knew that Necessity ouer-ruleth
Ceremony. So Solomon was not afraid to command Ioab to be slain, even in the
Tabernacle of the Lord, although he caught hold of the horns of the Altar.
Solomon was wise, and knew that there was no Sanctuary for murder. So briefly;
1. Kings 3.
Hezechiah was not scrupulous, to go forward with the celebrating of the
Passover, though there were some present that had not been cleansed after the
purification of the Sanctuary. 2. Chron. 30.
Hezechiah was wise, and knew that there was a maine difference between those
things which God commanded principaliter, and those things which he commanded
consequentia, as Iraeneus says. Thus knowledge of Gods matters clears the
understanding, Irenaeus lib. 4. cap. 32.
chaseth away superstition, shows the more excellent way, and brings a King
to glory. Look what the light is to the eye, the eye to the head, the head,
nay, the soul of a man to his body: the same is wisdom to the soul of a
King; It fills him with grace in believing; it gives light to his mind,
reformeth his will, sanctifies his affections, snubbeth and crosses all
unlawful designs; In crosses, it makes him patient, in dangers undaunted, in
prosperity moderate, in what estate soever he be, content: On the contrary
side, where this knowledge is wanting, there the Sun goes down at
noonday, there the light that is in them, is turned into darkness, and how
great is the darkness? They are not so much to be termed (...), that is,
pore-blind, 2. Pet. 1.9.
(which are Saint Peter's words,) but are stricken with gross darkness and
blindness, like the Sodomites, they stumble at the threshold, nay, they do in
Montes impingere, as Augustine speaks, and are as ready to enter into the
gates of their enemies as of their friends, 2. Kings 6.
like the Assyrians. The Grecians talk of the great help, that a certain
great Commander had from Philosophy for the quieting of his own mind, and of
those that were about him in the time of an Eclipse, by showing by a familiar
example, the reason thereof. So the Romans tell of the great satisfaction that
was given to their Army in Macedony, when one Sulpitius Gallus, Valor. Maxi.
skillful in Astronomy, foretold them of an Eclipse before it happened. This was
somewhat I grant to be heaued up, as it were, by the hand of natural reason,
to the observing of Gods uniform power and providence, in causing the Planets
to keep their courses in their Spheres, and the reuolutions of the heavens,
to be certain and ordinary: but yet in respect of the good that is reaped by
Divinity, (I mean, by the knowledge of Gods will in his Word, it is but as
sounding brass or as a tinkling Cymball;) For light, it is but as the light of
a rush candle, to the light of a great burning Torch, as Clemens Alexandrinus
says. For profit, as dross is to silver, or the cha^le is to the wheat, as
the Prophet speaks. Princes therefore are to have their hearts stablished by
faith, and therefore, first, they must be stored and furnished with the Word of
God, it must dwell in them plent^ously, they must be exercised and skillful in
the same; so shall they be sufficiently prepared and furnished to every good
work, so shall they be sufficiently armed against error and heresy. There
have been since Christ's time many corruptions and deprauations of the truth in
the Church of God, it is confessed; and it cannot be denied, but a great part
of them, either sprang originally, or was much increased, through want of
wisdom and knowledge in the chief Governors. What marvel if the Mystery of
iniquity, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
which began to work in the time of the Apostles, grew to such a head and
strength, even in Constantines time, or shortly after, when that shall be
allowed for a good collection out of these words, Ye are Gods; therefore the
Church of Rome has a special privilege neither to be looked into for their
lives, nor to be qu^stioned for their doctrine? So what marvel if the
Imperial dignity did decay and sink, as fast as the Papal did swell, and
pearke up, as Otho Frisingensis does observe? (nay, the rising of the one, was
the ruin of the other, as wisemen men know: Otho Frisingen.
) When Kings and Princes do suffer themselves to be gulled with the sweet
words of Peter and Paul, and of the Church, and especially with those words,
Math. 16. touching the Rock, and John, 21. touching the Feeding of Christ's
Sheep, (by these words, I say, foully mistaken,) to be stripped of their
Regalities, and to cast down their Crowns not before the Lamb, but before
the Beast. Whereas the former place, touching the Rock, viz. (Upon this Rock
will I build my Church,) contains a promise common to all the faithful, as
the most ancient and learned Fathers do agree, and the latter place touching
the Feeding of Christ's Sheep, and Lambs, contains a duty belonging to all
true Pastors, Act. 20. 1. Peter 6.
as not only Saint Paul in the Acts, but also Saint Peter himself, by whom
they would make their claim, do most plainly show. I might thus run over
most points in controversy between us and the Romanists; seeking out of the
wooden Cross, worshipping of the Cross, yea of the counterfeit of it;
fighting for the Cross; seeking to the Sepulcher; fighting for the Sepulcher;
worshipping of the Sepulcher; setting up Images in Churches; worshipping of
Images and of some of them with latria* Inuocating of Saints; wo^shipping of
their Relikes, yea, of the Relikes of Thieves, and Murderers, yea of the bones
of Apes and Foxes; yea, of the Pictures of Adonis and Venus, (these things were
not done in a corner, neither were they reueiled in the twy-light, but in the
sight of the Sun.) To be short, eleuating of the Sacrament, adoring of the
Sacrament, inuocating of the Sacrament, and calling it Lord, and God; yea,
dedicating of books unto it, ( Saunders does so,) these and a hundred more
such abominations, had never been so admitted, nor so long allowed in the
Church of God; if they that sat at the Stern, had been wise and intelligent
in Gods matters: For when the Emperor, or King was wise, then the stream of
Idolatry and superstition was greatly stopped and stayed, though not dried up;
As by Leo Isaurus, and his son, and his sons son in the East; By Charles
the great, and his sons son, in the West. These partly gathered Synods for
the crossing of certain superstitious worshippings, partly they either wrote
books themselves, or caused books to be written by others, in the cause of
truth. So when either the Empire had such a head as Otho the great, or Hen^y
the second, and fourth, or the two first Frederickes; or France, such a King as
Philip the fair: To speak nothing of our late English Wor^hies; then they did
not suffer themselves to be out-faced with counterfeit Titles, neither could
they endure to hear, either that the Imperial Crown was beneficium Papale,
as Pope Alexander the third would have it; or that the Crown of France was at
the Popes disposing, as Boniface the eighth vanted; Much less such swelling
words of vanity, nay, of intolerable insolency, as Innocent the fourth
delivered to the Ambassadors of King Henry the th^rd, Nonne Rex Angliae
vassallus meus est? and vt plus dicam, Mancipium? that is, Is not the King of
England my vassale, nay, I will say more, bondman, (or bond-slaue?) witness
Matthew Paris. They did not only dispute the case with him, Math. Parisi^n.
as Michael did with Nicholas the first, and a successor of Michael with
Innocent the third. (Their Epistles, some of them answering and crossing one
another, are to be seen in the Decretals,) but also went more roundly and
roughly to work with them, taking them down a pin or two lower, and
sometimes putting them besides the Cushion, and placing others in their room.
It imports therefore the cause of Religion mightily, that Kings be wise and
skillful in Gods Book; that they be able to discern what is Gods right, what
their own* yea, that they can distinguish wisely between the Vicars of
Christ, and the angels of Satan; between the Keys of the Church, and
counterfeit Pick-lockes, as Doctor Fulke calls them. For where wisdom is not,
and does not abound there, there is much going out of the way there, there is
often f^lling into the ditch. Inscitia matter omnium err^rum, ^.
says Fulgentius, that is, Ignorance is the mother of all errors. So Bernard
calls Ignorance the mother of all vices; So Justin Martyr, Let knowledge be
thy heart, and truth thy life. And Clement Alexandrinus, seven Stromate;
Knowledge is the food of the soul, (...), that is, Ignorance is the staruing
of the soul, or the disease called Atrophia, to eat, and to be never the
near, or better for the eating. Thus we are to hold in Thesi of the singular
use that is of wisdom, as necessary as the air we draw in, as fair as the
morning star* nay, as the Sun when he rises in his might: So of Folly or
Ignorance, that the same is as dark as the night, as foul and as ugly as the
face of hell. This (I say) in Thesi. Now for application a word or two. I doubt
not, but as in the Roman Commonweal, under Marcus Antoninus, when that
saying of Plato was considered of: It goes well with Commonwealths, when
either Philosophers be made Kings, or Kings addict themselves to Philosophy:
There was a general applying of it to their State under that Marcus; and as in
Athens, when a speech out of a Poet was recited, touching the sweet-singing
Grassehopper, all with one consent applied it to Socrates: And as in the fourth
of Luke, when that sentence was read out of Esaias, The Spirit of the Lord is
upon me, wherefore he anointed me, Esaias 61.
he has sent me to preach the Gospel to the poor, etc: The eyes of all in
the Synagogue were fastened upon our Savior, and all bare him witnes^e, and he
said, that that day, that Scripture was fulfilled in their ears. So as many as
do hear me this day, do rejoice in themselves, and congratulate to their
Country, that his Majesty is not as many other Princes are, that have need to
be called upon, with the words of the Prophet Jeremy 31. Chapter, Know the
Lord, Jeremy 31.
or that has need to ask after the old way, which is the good way, etc. as it
is Jeremy the 6; Jeremy 6.
but that has known the Scriptures from his youth, as Saint Paul speaks to
Timothy, and is able both Preacher-like, to exhort by wholesome doctrine, and
Doctor-like, to convince them that are contrarie-minded. Flesh and blood has
not revealed the same, it came not either by education, or by Institution, or
by reading, or by Conference, (though these be excellent helps, and happy they
be that find them, or use them,) but by the Spirit of our Father which is in
heaven, even as it is also said, Zach. 4. Neither by an Army, nor by strength,
but by my Spirit, says the Lord Almighty. Therefore, as Christ says, Zach. 4.
Blessed are your eyes, for they see, and your ears, for they hear: for
verily I say unto you, that many Prophets, and righteous men, Luk^ 10. and M^th
13.
have desired to see those things which you see, and have not seen them, and
to hear those things, which you hear, and have not heard them: So we of this
Land, are to hold our selves happy, and thrice happy, that the Lord has given
us a King after his heart and our own heart; that can govern with Counsel,
and rule with Wisdom, that has the Spirit of the living God resi^^t in him,
and his senses exercised in the knowledge and fear of the Lord; that needs not
to be taught, but that can teach, nor to be exhorted, but only c^ngratulated.
This is not to flatter, to give the King his due, specially when the giving of
due, does give encouragement, and implies exhortation to persevere in
well-doing. Did not our Savior praise Nathaniel to his face? John 1. 1. Reg.
10.
And who such a pattern of veracity and plain dealing as he? Did not the
Queen of Sheba praise Solomon to his face? And what Queen more renowned in
the Book of God then she? Therefore that which I have done, I might do, and
others may do, and much more abundantly, all the while we do not stretch our
selves above the line, nor speak any thing but the truth, as the Apostle
speaks. I insist no longer upon this point, touching godly wisdom; I
proceed now to the other touching Prudence; and I will but touch it. For who am
I, that I should take upon me to inform so high, and so incomparable-wise a
Presence, vt si caecus monstret iter, as the Poet says; and as if a man should
light a candle in the Sun; as said the Orator? Yet as Augustine some-where
has, Meum dicere sit, verba doctoris exponere; Let me be allowed to speak, my
speech shall be but the expounding of the words of the (true) Teacher; And as
Hierome to Demetrius; Pugilum fortitudo clamoribus incitatur, that is, Though
Champions fight never so stoutly, yet their courage is much inflamed by the
showtings and acclamations of the standers by: So if I taking the view, and
practice of the present estate, for the Idaea and pattern of mine advice, do
pray and exhort and beseech, and with all humility, that that which is done,
may be continually done, and sincerely, and zealously, I shall do but that
which stands with duty and good fashion. Vela damus, quamuis remige nauis
eat; Bargemen use many times to hoise up the sails, though the Boat go fast
enough otherwise. Prudence, (if I have observed ought,) has three special
parts or properties, that is, A good insight in matters; Secondly, A good
foresight of dangers, to prevent or divert them; Thirdly, A good oversight, I
mean, it ouerseeth and ouerlooketh them that are trusted. 2. Sam. 14.
David had a good insight into matters: he was as an Angel of God, seeing good
and evil, as the wise woman of Tecoa told him; 1. Kings 3.
So had Solomon, he discerned which was the true mother, and which was the
counterfeit. It was not strange, that Elisha did see in Hazael a traitorous and
bloody mind; 2. Kings 8.
traitorous toward her Lord, and bloody toward the people of God: for Elisha
was a Prophet: neither was it very strange, that Justin Martyr espied in
Crescens, to wit, an implacable hatred, that would not be satisfied but with
his death, for as yet some relicts of the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit
remained in the Church, as Eusebius writes. But it was most strange, that
S^lla saw in Caesar being but a boy, multos Marios; and that Cato and Catulus
espied in him being but young, an aspiring spirit to oppress the common
Liberty. This insight is necessary in some measure for Kings and Governors,
for if they have but a tender heart, and shallow reach, like Re^oboam in the
holy Story; like Romanus Iunio^ in Zonaras; if they have not a la^ge heart like
Solomon, (like I say, I do not say equal:) then it fares with the
Commonweal, as it does with a headstrong horse that wants a good rider, or
a ship of great burden, that has not a good Pilote or Mast^r, they are
easily f^yled or wracked. There have been Kings, that have bin witty; some, to
paint well, like Adrian, some, to sing well, like Nero; some to drive the Wagon
well, like the said Nero; some, to throw the Dart well, and shoot well, like
Domitian and Commodus, etc. What did this help them for the better ordering of
the Common weal? Nothing. A g^od King differs little from a Shepherd, which
knows his sheep, and knows what grounds be wholesome for them, and what
not; From a good house-holder, that provides that his servants have their due,
and looks that they do their duty. Lastly, from a good father, which marketh
the disposition of his children: some he draws on by fair means, others he
holds short by fear. Thus wisdom has an eye-si^ht to the present estate;
and to the present humors of them it deals with. So secondly, it does
foresee dangers, vigilantly and carefully. Babylon was taken certain days
before many were ware of it; It is true, it was a very vast City, but yet the
estate cannot be excused for their security. So Honorius the Emperor lying at
Rauenna, had so little care of his chief City Rome, the glory of the West, and
the Chamber of the Empire, that when word was brought him of the taking of it
by the Goths, he thou^ht his Fencer called Johannes Mona^hus and Zonaras
report it otherwise, that he had a Hen* called Roma, of whom he was
extraordinarily careful. Papt^sta E^^atius, that his Co^^ was ^^lled Rome. 2.
Sam. 4. Pl^tarch in Lucullo. Ioshuah 2.2. S^m. 16. 2. Kings 6.
Roma had been taken, and that that had bin all the loss. So Saul was not so
wise as he might have been, in that he had so bad watch and ward about him,
that David his enemy could approach to the place where he lay, and take what he
listed, in so much that he escaped by the mercy of his Enemy, and not by his
own^ providence. On the other side, Lucullus was happy, that had so faithful a
Chamberlain as he had, that repelled Captain Olthacus, from entering his
chamber, though he pretended most earnest business; and indeed his business
was but the same that Baanah and Rechab in the 2. of Sam. had to Ishbosheth,
namely, to kill him. If these Princes, Saul and Lucullus, had foreseen danger,
they had not in likelihood fallen into such danger. I^suah had his Espies in
Jericho, so had David his Hushai in Absalons Court, ( Iehoram needed not any,
for Elisha the Prophet was unto him in stead of all Intelligencers; he could
tell him what was done in the King of Syria his Chamber.) So the Romans had
their politic Agents in Antiochus, and Prusias and other Kin^s their Courts,
and so no doubt these had theirs likewise in Rome. A King of this Land is
censured by a stranger (Bellaius) for being prodigal of his Treasure, to get
intelligence. Well, be it, that he did cast away some hundreds of his Crowns
upon Cheaters and coozeners, yet it cannot be denied, but that he fished out so
much as made for his safety* and safety is bought good cheap, though a man pay
dear for it. So our State was traduced in our late Queens time, of famous
memory, by certain blacke-mouthed Priests and Jesuits, (men of corrupt minds
and reprobate concerning all truth of faith, and truth of Story,) for dyuing to
deep into the secrets of other Commonweals, and for setting them together by
the ears, forsooth to secure themselves. A slander, a vile slander, our State
did blow the coals any-where, nor stir them neither, but finding them
flaming and on a light fire, and not being able to quench the flame, they were
careful to provide that the sparkles might not flee-ouer into our Land, to set
things in a combustion here: and this was wisely done, and this was necessary
to be done. Foresight breeds prevention, and prevention of scattering
dangers, brings home safety; this is the second point of Prudence. The third,
and last that I will speak of, (there be more, but I can handle no more at
this time,) is the ouer-seeing, and ouerlooking of them that are trusted:
Putifar looked to nothing he had in his house, but put all things under the
hand of Joseph, as is to be seen in Genesis. Genesis 39.
So 2. King 22. and 2. Kings 12. The King is there said, not to take any
account of them that were trusted with the repairing of the Temple, for they
did it faithfully. But in my judgment, these and such other examples, (if
there be any such,) are set down in the Scriptures, rather to commend the
special honesty of them that were trusted, then the great prudence of those
that did trust. 2. Kings ^.
I am sure Elisha called his servant to account where he had been, though he
had served him long: Genes. 27.
And Isaac his son, how he got the Venizon so soon, though he thought him
to be his eldest son, whom he most loved: 1. Sam. 27.
And so did Achish his mercenary David, where he had been rouing, though he had
made him keeper of his head: And so did Solomon Shemi, 1. Kings 2.
how he durst pass over the brook Kedron, being confined to Jerusalem,
though his father had sworn unto him. And to be short, so the King in the
Gospel, those servants to whom he had committed Talents; Math. 25. Luke 16.
and again the rich man that steward, which had wasted his goods. Frontinus in
his third book writes of Iphicrates, Frontinus.
that being besieged in Corinth, he thought good to survey his watch, and
finding a watchman asleep, he made no more ado, but thrust him through,
using these words; I have done him no wrong; as I found him, so I left him: I
found him asleep, and I have left him asleep. But in the later place he
spoke not of the bodily sleep, but of the sleep of death. So Luitprandus
writes of an Emperor of Constantinople, Luitprandus.
that his manner was many times to survey the watch of that City, and those
whom he found vigilant and faithful, to reward, and the negligent and corrupt,
to punish. It is certain, that, Licentia sumus omnes deteriores* And as it is
ill for the body of the Commonweal to be under such Officers, sub quibus
omnia liceant; So it is ill for the Officers themselves, to have too much scope
under the chief Magistrates, by the Judgment of Saint Augustine, who
approves the saying of Tullie, August. 5. de Ciuit* Dei c, 27.
which he utters; O miserum; cui peccare liceat! that is* He is not happy,
but wretched, that has a license in his pocket, as it were, to commit a sin,
and a protection in his bosom, from suffering punishment. I press this point
no further: We have seen what virtues are required of Kings in my Text,
namely, Wisdom and Prudence. Wisdom in Gods matters; Prudence in State
matters. Touching the latter, Prudence, what be the parts of it; namely,
Insight, foresight, and ouerseeing; These things be necessary at all times, but
more specially at one time than at another: the Psalmist does insinuate, by
saying in my Text, [ Now therefore be wise, O ye Kings,] As i^ he said;
How-soeuer you have long time stood out, and said, We will not have this man to
reign over us, yet now at the length embrace him for your Messiah, and King;
How-soeuer heretofore you have refused to take up his yoke upon your shoulders,
and to learn of him to be gentle and meek; yet now at the length, turn unto
him, and humble your selves under his hands, that he may exalt you. Briefly,
Howsoever heretofore you have despitefully entreated them that were sent unto
you, yet henceforth be no longer mockers, lest your bonds increase; whilst it
is called To day, submit your selves unto him, and crave pardon and remission;
Now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation, now, or never, etc. If
ever there were a time, when this alarum-bell was needful to be rung, I
think it as necessary at this time, as ever: For when did the Devil rage more
fiercely, having great wrath, because his time is short? when did Antichrist (
Primogenitus Diaboli, as Polycarpus called Marcion) storm more tempestuously,
being full of wrath for two causes, that is, for being stripped of his ends in
England, (for England had been a plentiful Granary to him, as Sicily had
been to Rome, nay, a very Paradise, by the Popes own confession, as
witnesses Matthew Paris?) Secondly, being not only outed by Proclamations and
Edicts, but also confuted and confounded by a Princely and golden Pen; golden I
call it, not as the Prophet Esaias called Babylon golden, or goldseeking, but as
Pythagoras his verses were called golden, (...). Lastly, when did his
Emissaries, Seminarists, and Jesuits, take on more impatiently? These, because
they cannot accomplish their traitorous designs of troubling our Estate, that
they may fish in troubled waters; those, because they cannot compass their
long hopes and desires, to be planted in our Land, and to eat up the fat
thereof. The danger therefore being as great as ever it was, and peradventure
greater, it stands them upon that sit at the stern, to look about them, and
to be wise: To be wise as Serpents, but innocent as Doves; concerning
maliciousness to be children but in wit to be perfect, to observe the haunt
of the old Foxes, and the young Cubs, for they destroy the Vines, and make the
grapes to be small grapes, etc. Now the beginning of wisdom, is the fear of
the Lord, (that is, a right belief in him and a due serving of him,) a good
understanding (or policy, it is the same word that is in my Text,) have all
they that do thereafter, the praise thereof endures for ever. It is indeed
not only the beginning o^ chief point of wisdom, but it is Alpha and Omega,
the first point and the last, yea, it is vtraque pagina, both the sides of the
leaf, as Pliny speaks. There be many high hills in such a Country, many
strong holds in such a Country, etc. said Aratus to Philip the second of
Macedon; but there is no such sure hold for a Prince, as to be beloved of his
subjects: it is a good speech and a true, touching earthly defense, none like
to it; for where affectionate and firm good will is, there is continual
watching and warding for the safety of the Prince; there, there are Hawks
eyes, and standing-vp ears, to sound and descry dangers, and to expel them.
Briefly, there are Laterum oppositus, as he said, yea, offering up of strong
cries and tears to God, that is able to save from death, that they may be
heard and delivered in that they fear, as the Apostle, almost in so many
words, speaks to the Hebr. De nostris annis tibi Jupiter augeat annos. God
lengthen your years, though it should be with the shortening of our own;
thus in the time of Paganism they prayed for their Emperor, Tertul. Apolog.
as witnesses Tertullian. The like they did in the time of Christianity, as
the same Tertullian acknowledges, Tertull. ad Scapulam.
We offer sacrifice for the Emperor, says he, but to his Lord, and our Lord:
(he does not say to any Saint,) and we do it Puraprece, he does not say with
any visible sacrifice. They talk in fabulous Stories, (such as Wittikindus,
and Gregory Turonensis are,) that such a City could not be taken, because the
body of Saint Author lay there; such an one could not be taken, because the
body of Saint Ambrose lay there; such could not be taken, because such Saints,
and such Saints prayed for them. Strong illusions of Satan, or rather gross
and palpable credulities in men, of a degenerous mind, that had sold themselves
to believe lies. The truth is, the prayer of a righteous man can do much with
God, if it be fervent ((...), James 5.
if it be operative, or have (...), that is, an efficacy in it.) But the
Apostle speaks of the righteous that are living, not that are departed, as is
apparent in the Text; As also Eusebius did, when he said, that a righteous
prayer (...), that is, such a thing, as there is no fighting or standing
against. It is such a thing indeed, when it is offered by a faithful people,
for a faithful Prince. It pierces the heavens, and thrusts into the Throne
of grace, and will not be repelled, till it has obtained at Gods hands, both
the safety of the Prince, and the revenge of the Elect. Prayer therefore is the
best guard that we can yield unto our King, and piety is the best Armor that
his Majesty can put on. Other habiliments, munitions, and policies have their
place, and are profitable for somewhat, but godliness is profitable for all
things, having the promise of this life, and of that which is to come. 1. Tim.
4.
[ Be wise now therefore O Kings,] and Princes, serve the Lord in fear, and
rejoice before him in trembling; kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and kiss
the Son, and he will be well pleased; but kiss him with the lips of your
heart, wi^h faith and with love, Be pi usly wise, and wisely pious, (in Colendo
sapere debemus, and in sapiendo colere,) as says Lactantius. Lactan. li. 4. c.
3.
So shall the King have pleasure in your beauty, for he is your Lord God, and
you must worship him: So shall he give his Angels charge over you, to keep you
in all his ways; So shall he bless your going forth, and your being forth;
your coming home, and your being at home; yea, the Lord shall so bless you,
that you shall multiply your years upon earth, and see your childrens
children, and peace in Jerusalem, and joy upon Sion all your life long; which
God the Father grant for his Son Christ's sake, to whom with the holy Ghost,
be all honor and glory, Amen.

A SERMON UPON THE FIRST TO THE HEBREWS. THE ELEVENTH SERMON.
HEBREWS 1. verse 1, etc. God, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners
spoke in times past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, (Arab. Gnalei alshan,
that is, by the tongue of the Prophets,) 2. Has in these last days spoken to
us by his Son, whom he has appointed heir of all things, by whom also he
made the worlds: 3. Who being the brightness of his glory, and the express
Image of his Person, ((...)) and upholding all things by the Word of his power,
(Sir. Bechaila Demelletheh, that is, by the power of his Word) when he had by
himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on
high, etc.


AMong all the passages and portions of Scripture, which yield fit matter of
discourse, (and which do not, even from the beginning of Genesis, to the
latter end of the Revelation) there is none, in my judgment, that affords
greater store either of heavenly doctrine, or of spiritual comfort, than this
does that I have in hand. For when the,,Apostle says, that God has revealed
himself unto us in his Son, and that he appointed his Son heir of all
things, and that his Son is such an one for power, for person, for nature,
for glory; what a flood, or rather Sea of Divinity does it contain? Again,
when he tells us, that the Son of God has,,purged our sins by himself,
and is sat down on the right hand of the Majesty, (...), that is, that he
is advanced on high, and is able perfectly to save them that come unto him,
what hope are we to conceive thereby, yea, strong confidence, yea, vndauntable
consolation, that we cannot want, whilst our Savior has it, and cannot be
lost, whilst he lives and reigns? The Prophet Ezekiel, and Saint John in
the Revelation, speak of a tree, Ezech. 47. Revel. 22.
the fruit whereof is for meat, and the leaves for medicine. So Nauigators
tell us (and many that be alive have seen it with their eyes, and felt it with
their hands, and with their mouths have tasted) of the excellency of the tree
that bears the Nutmeg, the bark, the husk, the filme, the fruit, all
aromaticall, all good for the Brains, or for the Stomach, or both: So the
Pomegranate is a very extraordinary fruit, the hard rind being dried, is
medicinable many ways; as for the juice and kernels, they are not only
wholesome, but also delightsome, yet for all that, it is observed, and the
Jews use it for a Proverb amongst them, that There is no Pomegranate so
sound, but it has some rotten kernels in it, fewer or more: and we also use to
say, Every Bean has his black: And Plutarch reports it to have been the
speech of Simonides, Plut. li. de v^d. ex inimicis capi^ada.
that as every Lark has his tuft, so every man has his imperfection. Now it
is not so in the Word of God; every part of it is, Homogen^ous, every part like
it self, as being delivered by one Spirit, and leuelled by one rule. You know
what is delivered by the Prophet; Psalm. 12.
(All) the words of the Lord are pure words, as the silver that is tried in a
furnace of earth, and fined seuen-fold: and by Saint Paul, that the Law, (even
the Law) is holy, and the Commandment holy, and just, Romans 7.
and good; But as it is a fault in the building of a City, to make the gate
vaster, than for the proportion of the Perimeter or compass thereof, (Shut
your gate, said a Philosopher to the men of Mindas, Diogenes La^rt. in Diogen.
lest your Town run out at it,) so long Pre^aces in a small scant of time
and a great field being to be surueyed, are very unseasonable, to speak the
least. It was said of long time by Callimachus, Athenaeus, l. 3.
(...), that is, a great book is as bad as a great deal of evil; the like is
to be said of a long tedious Preface. For our Text* it contains (at once,)
two several declarations: the one of the excellency of the Gospel above the
Law, from the beginning of the first verse, to the middle of the second: The
second declaration is, of the excellency, or rather superexcellency of our
Savior above Moses and the Prophets, yea, above every name that is named both
in heaven and in earth from the middle of the second verse, to the latter end
of the third, (where my Text ends,) and so forward to the end of the Chapter.
The excellency of the Gospel above the Law, is set down in these three
points, that is, God spoke unto the faithful under the old Testament by Moses
and the Prophets, worthy servants, yet servants; Now, the Sonis much better
than a servant, and he by whom, and for whom a house is built, than an
vnder-workeman that works by the day. (What is Paul, 1. Cor. 3,
what is Apollos? So what was Moses, what were the Prophets, but Ministers by
whom the Church then believed?) This then is one prerogative of the Gospel.
The second is this, God spoke to the ancient Church, (...), that is, at sundry
times, or by sundry parts, (now one pi ece then another,) the word is
indifferent for either sense; they that translated this Epistle into Hebrew,
(for it is extant in Hebrew,) are for the former, (Cammeh pegnamim,) but the
Syriacke and Arabicke are for the latter; well, since as I say, the word will
bear both* and both are consonant to the circumstances of the Text, we may be
bold to make use of both. So then, whereas the body of the old Testament was
long in compiling, (much about a thousand years from Moses to Malachi;) and
God spoke unto the Fathers by starts, and by fi^^* one while raising up one
Prophet, another while another; now sending them one parcel of Prophecy, or
Story, then another: when Christ came, all was brought to a perfection in one
age: the Apostles and Evangelists were alive some of them, when every part of
the new Testament was fully finished. Thirdly, and lastly, the old Testament
was delivered by God (...), that is, in diverse forms or similitudes, as the
Syriacke and Arabicke Paraphrasts would have it, (that is, if I understand
them; sometimes in the likeness of a man, sometimes of an Angel, sometimes of
fire, sometimes of a wind, etc. but this is rather (...), than (...),) or
rather, as it is generally taken in diverse manners of utterance and
manifestation, as sometimes in a vision, and by dreams, and sometimes in dark
words, and sometimes under this type and that type, and sometime mouth to
mouth, that is, plainly and familiarly, (see Numb. 12. Job 33. etc. Numb. 12.
Job 33.
But the delivering of the Gospel was in more simple manner, either by the
tongues, or by the pens of them that held an uniform kind of teaching, such
as was best for the edifying of Gods people in all succeeding ages. Thus we see
the excellency of the Gospel above the Law, and this out of the first verse,
and half of the second. Now, the superexcellency of Christ above Moses and the
Prophets, is to be gathered out of the words that follow in my Text* whereof
every branch contains an Antithesis between Christ, and the forenamed Moses
and the Prophets. Christ was made heir of all, so were not they; by Christ the
world was made, so was it not by them: Christ was the brightness of Gods
glory, etc. so were not they: Christ vpholdeth all things, Christ purges us
from our sins, etc. so did not they, so can they not do: Therefore Christ
beyond all comparison more excellent, and more eminent. Now, let us take a more
particular view of these several points in order as they lie, and see what
doctrines and exhortations, conuictions and reproves we may extract out of
them. To make haste, our journey being long, for doubt lest the Sun come
down upon us, before we come to our iourneies end, Judges 19.
as it did upon the Leuite, Judges 19. this first note with me, that if God
that spoke in old time to the Fathers by the Prophets, did also speak to them
upon whom the ends of the world were come by his Son; then one and the same
God is Author of both Testaments, both Old and New: Then the Manichees did not
(...), but delirare, that is, did not trifle, but were stark-mad, that taught
there were duo principia, two principal beginnings, or Gods; the one Author,
of the Gospel, the other, of the Law; the one, of good, the other, of evil.
What if in natural things it be thus, that out of one hole there issues not
sweet water and sour, as Saint James says; and that men do not gather grapes
of thorns, or figs of thistles, as Christ says? Iam. 3. Math. 7.
Yet for all that, the God of Nature is not subject to the Laws of Nature; he
can do whatsoever he will, Psa. 115. He can make the waters of Marah that were
bitter, Psalm 115. Exodus 15. 2 King. 2.
sweet to his servants; and the waters of Jericho, that were unwholesome, to
become wholesome to the Inhabitants; yea, make one and the same shower of
rain, to become comfortable to the Roman Army, (upon the prayer and instance
ofa Christian Cohort, Dio Capitol. Tertul. Eusebius. Orosi^^.
that was among them,) and to be pernicious unto the enemies, witnesses thereof
Paynim writers, not only Christian. 2. Cor. 4*
God that has first caused light to shine out of darkness, he still forms
the light, and creates darkness, makes peace, and creates evil; He the
Lord does all these things, the Lord, (...).
and not Lords, one, and no more, (...), that is, In Jupiters Hall-floore there
are set two barrels of gifts; the one, of good gifts or blessings, the other,
of evil gifts or plagues. Thus spoke Homer falsely of Jupiter: it may truly
be spoken of the true God Jehovah, that he has in his hand two cups; the one
of comforts, the other of crosses, which he powers out indifferently, Psalm*
145. Psalm 18.
for the good, and for the bad. He preserves all them that love him, but he
destroys all the wicked. With the kind (or merciful,) he will show himself
kind, and with the froward, he will show himself froward. Now, this is not to
make God the Author of evil, Augustine. 1. de liber. arbitr* c. 4.
but of Justice, which is good, quorum Deus non est author, eorum est iustus
vltor, says Augustine. 2 These. 1.
God is not the author of sin, but he punishes the sinner justly. It is
just or a righteous thing with God, as to recompense rest to them that are
troubled for Christ's sake, so to them that trouble the Saints, and obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, to recompense to them vengeance in flaming
fire. I grant that the wicked of all ages, have exclaimed, as they do,
Ezechiel 18. The way of the Lord is not equal, Ezech. 18.
(as it is usual also at this day with offenders and their friends, to cry-out
against the Law, that it is bloody; and against the Judges, that they are
cruel,) yet for all that, God will be justified in his saying, and overcome
when he is judged; Psalm. 51. Romans 3. Math. 27. Luke 23. Iam. 1.
And Judas himself will at the length confess, that he has sinned in
betraying innocent blood; and so will the thief upon the cross, that he and
his fellow did justly suffer for their offenses. Therefore let no man say, when
he is tempted, I am tempted of God, for God cannot be tempted of evil,
neither tempts he any man: but every man is tempted, when he is drawn away
of his own lust, etc. So it is, Bap litmop pathechin lo: that is, When a man
offers himself to be defiled, they open unto him, (that is, the Diuill opens
unto him) a Proverb among the Rabbis, as is to be seen in Ab. Ezr. upon Exodus
10. When the Oyster opens himself to the Sun, Ab. Ezr. in Exodus 10. v. 20.
(being tickled with the warmth thereof,) then his enemy the Crab-fish steals
behind him, and thrusts in his claw, and will not suffer him to shut again,
and so deuoureth him; the resemblance is in Basil. The like is written of the
Crocodile, Basil.
that being so strong a Serpent, as he is, and impregnable, yet when he is
gaping to have his teeth picked, by the little bird called Trochil, his enemy,
the Ichneumon, Plinius.
creeps into his body and cease not to gnaw upon his intrails, till he does
destroy him. We need not go far for more examples to this purpose; Think
upon the Vrchin, and the Snaile: while the Vrchin keeps himself close in the
bottom of an hedge, he is either not espied, or contemned, but when he
creepes forth to suck the Cow, he is dogged, and chopped in; so the Snaile,
when he lies close with his house upon his head, is esteemed for a dead thing,
and not looked after, but when in liquorishnesse to feed upon the dew that lies
upon the herbs, or upon the sweetness of the Rose-bush he will be pearking
and peeping abroad, then the Gardener finds him and pasheth him. The lesson
is, We must not yield to the sweet baits of the flesh, but we must rather
mortify our members upon the earth, Coloss. 3.
and ever beware that we seek not our death in the error of our life,
otherwise, if we wilfully offer our selves to be led as an Ox to the
slaughter, and as a Sheep to the shambles, what marvel if we have our throats
cut, or be led away captive of Satan at his will? Facile est vincere non
repugnantem, that is, It is an easy matter to overcome him that makes no
resistance: Cicero. Iam. 4.
But, Resist the Devil, and he will fly from you. I told you somewhat even
now of the Crocodyle, and this I am to tell you farther (and it is remarkable)
that though he be most terrible, and fierce against one that shows himself to
be afraid of him, Solinus.
yet if any dares look upon him, and stand against him, from him he will run
away most cowardly. Therefore men and brethren, Be strong in the Lord, and in
the power of his might, Ephesians. 6.
put on the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to stand in the evil day,
and specially against the strong wiles, and wily strength of the Devil. For
after concupiscence that reigns in our members, the same Crocodyle who
haunteth both dry places and wet places, (he is (...), it is so written of
him,) the old Serpent and Satanas, is the greatest tempter, the greatest enemy.
He was a tempter from the beginning, as appears, Genesis 3. A murderer from the
beginning, John 8. A liar, Genesis 3. John 8. Revel. 12.
and the father of lies, in the same place; the deceiuer of the whole world,
Revelation the 12. The accuser of the Brethren, which accuses them before God
day and night, in the same place. Ephesians. 2. 2 Cor. 4.
Briefly, he is called the spirit that rules in the air, Ephesians. 2. And the
god of this world, 2 Cor. 4. The god of this world, because he corrupts it,
not because he made it. Alas, Math. 8.
he cannot make one leg of a Pigge, nor enter into the body of a Pigge,
before God give him leave. Possem dicere porcorum setas, Tertullian.
etc. I can be bold to say, (says Tertullian) that the very bristles of a
Swine are numbered, how much more then man's hair, how much more then man's life?
Therefore the Manichees must look for another Creator: then Satan, and they,
and all ought to be content with one and the true living God, even the Father
of whom are all things, and we of him, and the Son, in whom are all things,
and we in him, and the holy Ghost, through whom are all things, and we through
him. (...). Pythagor.
that is, If any will say, I am God, let him ma^e such a world as this, and
then brag, and say, This is mine, this is of my making. A good speech for
such a one as Pythagoras was, an Heathen man; and with that I end against the
Manichees. Now for the confirmation of our faith against the Mahometans, limbs
of Satan in the East, and Traditioners (Romanists) limbs of Satan in the West:
me thinks our Text does minister unto us strong Arguments. For if the Doctrine
of Christ, that is, the Gospel, be delivered to us by the Son of God, who
received the Spirit with out measure, John 3. John 6.
John 3. Whom the Father sealed, John 6. Whom he commands us to hear, Math.
17. Math. 17.
Then we are bound to hearken unto it, yea, then we are bound to be content
with it. Math. 20.
They will reverence my Son, said the House-holder in the Gospel; The Father
loves the Son, Math. 20. John 5. iren. li. 4. c. 10.
and shows him all things, John 5. Qui^ impossible erat sine Deo discere
Deum, per Verbum suum fecit homines scire Deum, that is, Because it was
impossible without God to learn God, therefore by his Word (the Son of God
is called the Word of God,) he made men to know God. This was the Prophet which
was to come into the world, John 6. The Messiah, John 6.
touching whom the very woman of Samaria was resolved, that when he should
come, he should teach us all things, John 4.
John 4. who not only himself wrought great miracles in the days of his
flesh, (by the testimony not only of the Evangelists, whom we ought not to
judge, but by them judge all other men's writings, as Augustine wisely and
soundly says,) but also of Josephus the Jew, August. 2. contra Cr^scon. cap.
31.
and many Gentiles, whom I could produce, if it were needful: but moreover
enabled his Disciples and Apostles to confirm the Word with miracles
following, see Mark 16. verse last, Mar. 16.
and Hebr. 2. verse 4. to speak of no more places. As for Mahomet, Hebr. 2.4.
though he were impudent, and a blasphemer, yet he was never so impudent in his
blaspheming, as to take upon him to be the Son of God; neither was he heard
of, nor borne in the world, before it was almost six hundred years after
Christ; See Luke 24. and Act. 24. ver. 14. and Act. 26. ver. 22. also Romans ^.
v. 21. also Act. 28.23.
neither could he say, as Christ and the Apostles did, that he taught no other
thing but that which is written in Moses, in the Prophets, and in the Psalms,
but he did plainly (...), that is, broach another doctrine, nay, a contrary
doctrine* to that which holy men of God being moved by the holy Ghost, (as it
is out of controversy,) wrote and left unto us, (to be the ground and pillar
of our faith, as Irenaeus speaks, Irenaeus lib. 3.
) as might be showed by an hundred particulars, neither, lastly, did he once
go about to make good his doctrine by miracles, (being a new doctrine, and
therefore the miracles which were wrought by the Apostles and Prophets could
not serve to strenghten it,) but only by the sword, and an arm of flesh,
(...), (they be the words of the Alcoran,) that is, he came not to give the Law
by miracles, but by the sword, and how then can such a doctrine be embraced by
any, save such as are plainly bewitched or out of their wits? for to use only
natural reason to natural men, how can God be thought to be of one mind for
twenty or five and twenty ages together, (for so long he governed the Church by
Prophetical and Apostolical doctrine,) and then upon the sudden change his
mind, upon the starting up of a Start-vp, neither learned, nor wise, nor
virtuous; only he had a great Army, Aliquos Marcionitas and Valentinianos
liberanda veritas expectabat, etc. Tertul. de Proscript.
and had some success against the Emperor, Scilicet illum expectabat
liberanda veritas, a likely matter, that the truth should be held captive, till
Mahomet set it at liberty! No, no, the strength of Israel, the God of the whole
earth is no changeling, neither is there with him any shadow of change; Genesis
18. Iam. 1.
He is Amen, that is, true and stable, and though heaven and earth perish, yet
no tittle of the Law or Gospel shall fall to the ground, till all be
fulfilled. God has spoken in these last days by his Son. He has spoken by
him; it is not said, that he will speak by any after him, that will oppugn
him or correct him: Therefore away with Mahometisme; It is enough, to say of it
as the foresaid Tertullian said upon the like occasion, Tertul. de praescript.
Nobis curiositate non est opus post Christum Iesum, nec inquisitione post
Euangelium, that is, Having Christ Jesus, we need not be further curious; and
having the Gospel, we need not be further inquisitiue; thus he. The same
reason does militate against the Romanists; who although they seem to
attribute much to the Gospel in words, yet in effect they deny it. For they
are not content with the written Word, but they stand upon unwritten supposed
verities, which they may multiply at their pleasure, as well as they do
magnify them, making them to be of equal authority with the written Word, (so
do they of Trent speak,) insomuch as, if we will believe them, we shall not
know what to believe, nor what to affirm. For whatsoever is questioned
between them and us, touching either Purgatory or prayer for the dead, or
praying to Saints, or praying in an unknown tongue, or touching the Mass, or
Chrisme, or the Ceremonies of Baptism, etc. All these points, and an hundred
more, which they can no more find in the written Word, than they can find
water in fire, fire in a poole of water, they poast over unto Tradition,
appealing unto it; which is as much, as if they should turn us to seek them
upon the backe-side of the book. For what is Tradition else, but the report of
men; and what are men, (all men, saving they which were privileged with the
privilege of infallibility, the Apostles and Prophets I mean, which neither
were deceived in matters of faith, neither could deceive,) but deceitful upon
the weights, and in plain English, liars? I mean subject to error and
mistaking. We must take their credit for doctrines, affirmed by them to have
been preached by Christ and his Apostles, fifteen or sixteen hundred years
agone, when they cannot be believed touching that which themselves, or their
confellowes preached two or three years since, except there be notes kept of
it; nay, he has a good memory, that can repeat in the afternoon as much as
he heard in the fore-noone. Behold, we count them for no better than madmen,
that will make claim to a piece of land, for the which they have nothing to
show but bare words; (as I heard my neighbor say this or that, or mine uncle,
or my father, etc.) whereas the party that they would get it from, has
Evidences and Records ancient, and fair without any show of rasure, without
any suspicion of forgery: And can we think our Adversaries to be well in their
wits, that would wrest from the Laity, the Cup of the Lord, against so fair
a Record as this? 1 Cor. 11.
As often as yet shall ^ate of this bread, and drink of this Cup, etc? (Thus
Saint Paul writing to the Church of Corinth, consisting of Laickes as well as
(Ecclesiastickes:) also, from the Clergy they would wrest marriage, against
this Record, Marriage is honorable in all, (in all persons, not in all things
only, Hebr. 13.
as it appears by the An^uhesis, Adulterers and Fornicators, he does not say,
Adulteries and Fornications.) And again, To avoid fornication, 1 Cor. 7.
let every man have his wife, and every woman her husband, (if Ministers be
men, then they may be married.) So further, from the vn^earne^ they would wrest
the use of the Scriptures, they will not suffer them to use them in their
mother tongue, unless they have a License, (by as good reason they might
forbid them to look upon the Sun, or to draw in the air, without a
License,) contrary to the Commandment, Deuteronomy. 3^. When a^l Israel shall come to
appear before the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 31.
etc. thou shall read this Law before all Israel, that they may hear it, etc.
He was to read the Law, therefore it was written; he was to read it before all
Israel, therefore it was written for all Israel. So in the Gospel, When a
young man would know what he might do to attain eternal life; our Savior
answered him, saying, What is written in the Law? Luke 10.
(...) read thou? Behold, he does not send him to the ^radition of the
Fathers, but to the written Word, that he should believe and live according to
that rule. But now for^ou^ Adversaries, (i^ ye hap to confer with them, or
shall have a desire to look into their books,) you shall find, that the
claim^ that they make by the Scriptures, (for any thing of moment in
Controversy between them and us, either touching the head of the Church, or
the visibility of the Church, or the keys of the Church, etc.) is but dicis
causa, for fashion-sake; their sure-hold and fortress they fly unto, is
Tradition. Now what is this else, but to bring all things to their own
Consistory, (as they say,) and to make themselves Judges in their own cause,
and to measure themselves by themselves, as the Apostle speaks; 2 Cor. 10.
August. 2. contra Parmenian. cap. 13.
yea and to symbolize with those Heretics, whom Ticonius (allowed by
Augustine for this speech) notes thus to speak, Quod volumus sanctum est,
that It is holy, because we would have it so; and so, it is true, because they
say it is a Tradition: But well speaks the same Augustine, August. in John.
cap. 2.
Contra insidiosos errores Deus* voluit ponere firmamentum in Scripturis, etc.
Against deceitful errors; God thought it good to place a sure foundation in
the Scriptures, against which no man dares to speak, that would be counted a
Christian: Thus Augustine. And to the same purpose Chrysostom, who lived but a
little before him: Chrysostom. de S. adoran d spirit.
Where have ye read this, says he? Forasmuch as he has not read it written,
but speaks of himself, it is evident that he has not the holy Ghost; And to
be short, Iren. li. 2 sa. 59.
Irenaeus, who lived before them both, shall be instead of all others. To
stick unto the Scriptures which contain ( Lat. are) a certain and an
undoubted truth, that is, to build ones house upon a strong and firm Rock;
Thus he: whereby ^e ^heweth that they that build their faith upon any other
foundation (as namely, upon Tradition,) they build it but upon sand, which will
not abide the least blast oftentation, nor the least push of strong reasoning,
but will soon fleet, and fall to the ground. To show the vanity and
uncertainty of Tradition, let this one Story that I shall recite unto you
suffice, and then I will proceed to that which remains. In the Primitive
Church, by the report of Eusebius, Eusebius. l. 5. c. 23.
there was a sharp contention, and between such as would not be counted babes
or obscure fellows, but Fathers and Pillars, touching the celebrating of
Easter. The Eastern Church went one way, and the Western another; And what
was the cause of their jar? The Eastern Church pretended a Tradition, as
from Saint John the Evangelist, that he (forsooth) should command it to be kept
upon such a day. The Western Church a Tradition, as from Saint Peter, that he
should ordain it to be kept such a day, upon a Sunday by all means. What
shall we say to this? were Saint Peter and Saint John divided, that yea, should
be with them, nay, and nay, yea? No; but their Disciples misse-heard them, or
misse-remembred them, or misse-reported them, and hereupon they brake forth
into quarrel. Now, i^ in the best times, when many, that had heard the
Apostles or Apostolic men, were yet alive, when the extraordinary gifts of
the holy Ghost, as the miraculous curing of the sick, and the casting out of
Devils, etc. were yet to be seen in many, by the testimonies of Iustine
Martyr, Irenaeus, Tertullian, etc. if this were done, (say I) when the Church
was yet a Virgin as it were (by the judgment of Polycrates in Eusebius,) what
can we look for in the latter perilous times, Eusebius.
when she had abandoned her self to Spiritual fornication? (I mean not only
to superstition, but also to Idolatry?) Is any man's word to be taken, that
Christ spoke thus, or thus, by his Apostles, when he has not their writing to
show? Thus much against Papists Traditions; now in the words that follow, I
pray you observe with me, how Angelically or rather Divinely the Apostle does
mount, and cause^h his speech to grow (Sermo crescit) in describing the Son
of God by his estate, by his Acts, by his Nature, Person, etc. He has taught
us, says the Apostle, by his Son; would ye know what Son? Not an ordinary
Son, such as we are, but the Heir and Owner of all things; nay the Creator
of heaven and of earth, nay, the very brightness of Gods glory, and the
ingraued form (or express Image) of his person, (distinguished only in
person, not separated or diverse in nature, nor inferior to him.) Is this all?
No, he preceedeth, bearing up all things by his mighty power, (therefore not
only the Creator, but also the preserver of the world.) Is that all? No, it
had been to small purpose, at least, to small benefit to us, if God should
make us and preserve us only, and there stay: but that which is a greater
matter for us; he has redeemed us, by purging us from our sins, yea, and for
the full consummation of his victory, and our Redemption, he sits at the
right hand of the Majesty in the highest places, from thence to oppugn our
spiritual enemies, and from thence to reach-out his hand to help us and
supply us. And what can be spoken more fully, more richly, more comfortably?
Christ called the two sons of Zebedee, sons of Thunder. Augustine speaking
of a certain Sentence of Ambrose, Mar. 3. Augustine.
exclaimeth, o sensum hominis Dei, ex ipso haustum font gratiae Dei! that is,
O sense of a man of God, drawn out of the very fountain of the grace of God!
Hierome calls Hilary, a Rhodan, that is, a most swift river of Eloquence.
Hierom. Theod^r. 2. therap.
Theodoret calls Moses (...), that is, an Ocean of Divinity. I cannot tell
what I may call this third verse else, but a very depth of mysteries, a
fountain of Water of life, that can hardly be sounded to the bottom. I find
that the Jews have a book which they call, Tse^ormor: that is, a bundle of
myrrh; that they have another which they call, Tsemach David, that is, The
branch of David; that they have another also, which they call, Orach Chaiim,
that is, the pathway of life. False titles, the books be not (...), they do
not deserve such glorious names. But surely he that should say, that this one
verse deserves all these Elogies and Titles, should not speak a whit out of
the way. For it is no less than a bundle of most fragrant and odoriferous
flowrs, refreshing the inward man, and preserving the whole soul from
putrefaction; it describes also the true branch, (you know, Christ is called
so by the Prophet Zechary,) so expressly, Zechar. 3.
that few places of the Scripture may be compared with i^; Lastly, it shows
the path of life, namely, wherein our true Life consists, to wit, in the
Sacrifice and bloody Offering o^ Jesus Christ, which purges us from all our
sins. But let us come to the particulars that remain yet "to be handled. The
first is, that God has made hi^ Son Heir of all things. This place is
abused by two sorts of Heretics; Anabaptists, and Romanists; I will but point
at their err^rs. The former urge, Christ is made heir of all things, therefore
faithful Christians only, (they mean specially such as be of their stamp,)
have interest in the things of this world, all others are but usurpers, Psalm.
115.
and therefore may lawfully be stripped of them. But they should know, that the
heavens, even the heavens are the Lords, the earth has he given to the
children of men; to the children of men, promiscuously, he does not say
precisely to the children of God; indeed he that made Abraham and Isaac rich,
which were faithful, and the Fathers of the faithful, made also Laban, and
Nabal, which were profane; he that causes the Sun to shine, and the rain
to fall upon the just, did, and does the same for the unjust. Briefly, he that
gave Caesar, Austustin.
a merciful Prince, gave before him Marius, a cruel Tyrant; Caesar was not to
be iustled with, being chosen by the people, and Marius was to be stooped unto,
while he had Law on his side. Now, whereas they would make their claim by
"Christ, Christ was heir of all things, therefore they rightly believing in
Christ, are the only true heirs, and owners. You know what Christ himself
confesses, that his Kingdom is not of this world, John 18. Math. 20.
and that he came not to be ministered unto, but to minister; and therefore, if
they will be heirs unto him, they must be heirs of his Cross, See Math. 16.
(He that will be my Disciple, must take up his Cross, and follow me.) Christ
was heir of all things, (...), not (...), for a spiritual use, not for a
temporal: In such a sense as Saint Paul speaks, All is ours, we Christ's, and
Christ Gods. 1 Cor. 3.
But the Romanists are they, that we are more troubled "with; therefore a word
or two to them. Christ is made heir of all, therefore his Vicar must be
confessed so to be; therefore he may plant and pluck up, build and destroy,
he may do what he will. Why? the Apostle says plainly, that we have this
power, (he speaks of himself and other Apostles, and consequently their
Successors:) to build and not to destroy, (and how then can they take upon them
to destroy, 2 Cor. 10.
or demolish?) And the Law says, that benefits from the Crown are strictae,
nay, strictissimae interpretationis, because in such grants, so much is taken
away from the public, (which is chiefly to be tendered,) as is imparted to
the Private. Therefore they must show express words in their Patent to carry
it, or else they do but trifle. I grant, they do pretend Texts for their
claim, as for example, All Power is given to me both in heaven and earth,
Matthew 28. Math. 28. Esaias 60. Revel. 19.
Also The Nation and Kingdom, that will not seru^ thee, shall perish, and
those Nations shall be utterly destroyed. Also, he has on his vesture, and on
his thigh a name written, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. But what of this?
These places show that Christ is superexcellent, and that his Dominion is over
all, and that, they that rely not upon him, cannot be established; But what
makes this for the man of Rome, that he should be Paramount for authority, and
that his doctrine should be held irrefragable, and his Commandments for little
less than Divine? Truly no more then that reason of Peter Pinak Archbishop of
Lions, out of the sixth of Matthew, was sound, The Lilies of the field neither
labor nor spinne, therefore the Crown of France that has for her Arms the
Lilies (or Flowers de Luc^,) is not to descend to the Spinsters, that is to the
Female: or that of Boniface out of Genesis 1. In the beginning God made heaven and
earth, In principio, not in princi^ijs; Genesis 1.
therefore there must be one universal Head, and all Sovereignty must be
derived from him; or God made two great lights, the greater light to rule the
day, and the lesser to rule the night; Therefore, He of Rome is so many degrees
greater, and higher than the Emperor, because the Sun is so much and so much
bigger than the Moon; Or lastly, (for there must be an end of fooleries,)
because God says in the Psalm, Thou have put all things under his feet, all
sheep, Psalm. 8.
and Oxen, etc. the fowls of the air, the fish of the Sea: Therefore he of
Rome must wear a Triple Crown, one part in respect of his Dominion over
Angels, signified by the fowls of the air, the second in respect of his
Dominion over earthly creatures, yea Princes, signified by Sheep and Oxen, (a
very honest resemblance,) the third in respect of his Dominion over Purgatory,
which he may exhaust and clean rid by his Bulls, if they be well paid for
them. I will not stand to refute these, not errors, but fopperies. Perfidiam
eorum exposuisse, superasse est, Hieronym. and Marcel.
Note and recite their errors, and you confute them sufficiently. "Come we now
to that which follows; [ By whom also he made the world.] The Apostle seems
to speak thus; Is not this a sufficient argument of the greatness of Christ,
that the Father made him heir of all things? This then will satisfy you, or
choke you, if you will not be satisfied, that by him he made the world, that
they both concurred in the making of the world; so says Saint John, All things
were made by him, John 1.
and without him was nothing made that was made. And Saint Paul, By him, (the
Son of God,) were all things created, Coloss. 1.
which are in heaven and which are in earth, things visible and invisible* etc.
And Hebrews 1. verse 10. Unto the Son he says, O God, thy Throne is for
ever, Hebr. 1.10.
and ever, and thou (Lord) in the beginning have established the earth, and the
heavens are the works of thy hands, etc. So then Christ made heaven and earth,
therefore God, for it is above the power of a creature to make such Creatures,
yea, to create any thing at all, that is, to produce a thing out of nothing;
for ex nihilo nihil fit, of nothing comes nothing naturally; as a Carpenter or
Mason, cannot make a house or wall, unless he has timber and stone, or the
like: So it is impossible for any creature, be he man or Angel, to form any
material thing otherwise than ex praeiacente materia. Therefore the Prophet
Jeremy gives it for a rule, and puts it down in Chaldee, even in the
Hebrew Text he speaks Chaldee, (to teach the Chaldeans among whom the Jews
were to live in banishment, or if they would not be taught, to vpbraide them to
their teeth in their mother tongue; at least if the Jews should forget their
Hebrew tongue, yet they should not forget this Chaldee lesson, Elahaija di
shemija veark^ la ignabadu ^ebaddu me argna vmin techosh shemaija elleh, Ier.
10.11.
that is, The gods that have not made the heavens and the earth, (even) they
shall perish from the earth, and from under these heavens. But now, on the
other side, Christ made the world or worlds, ((...), let me help the
unlearned, and make them that are learned already, more learned, as the Hebrew
word Chelea in the old Testament, that signifies properly the lasting of the
world, is sometimes there taken for the fabric of the world, so is it with
(...) in the New, it surely signifies properly the lasting, or continuance of
the world, yet in this place, as in some other, it is taken for the very mass
or frame of it) therefore God without question, and because God, therefore to
be feared: for he that made us of nothing, can consume us to nothing, if he
hold but up his finger. Then further we are to adore him and to worship him, as
it is written, Let us kneel before the Lord our maker, for he is our God, and
we the people of his pasture, etc. Psalm. 95.
And yet further; then we must serve him in holiness and righteousness,
Ephesians. 2.
as it is written, We are his workmanship created, (Gr. formed (...),) in
Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has prepared, that we should walk
in them; Lastly, then we must love the brethren, and not be bitter unto them;
we must not be every one a wolf to his neighbor, according to the Proverb,
Homo homini Lupus, but every one (as it were) a God unto him, (Homo homini
Deus,) forasmuch as God has made all of one blood to dwell upon the face of
the earth: And as the Prophet says, Have we not all one Father, has not one
God made us, why do we transgress every one against his Brother, Act. 17.
Malac. 2.
etc? This much, and a great deal more, we are to learn hereby, that the Son
of God is our maker. Now from his Divine estate and acts, the Apostle rises
higher, to his Divine Nature and Person in these words, [ Who being the
brightness of his glory, and the express Image of his Person, etc.] The Jesuits
that write the life of their Founder Ignatius Loiola, report, that Christ,
forsooth, appeared to him at the Elevation, as he was at Mass, (in a Church at
Venice, as I remember,) and there he discerned the Hypostaticall union of two
natures in Christ, and the real distinction of the three Persons in the
Godhead. Do you believe them? No^, nor I think their own disciples do
believe them, more in this, than they believe their Saint Thomas of Aquine,
telling them, that the Crucifixe commended him in these words, Been scripsisti
de me Thoma, Thomas thou have written well of me: well for their kitchen, but
not well for their conscience, for the edifying of it in holy faith, in holy
doctrine. Miserable companions! was it not enough for them to be grievous to
men, but they must grieve our God also, Esaias 7.13? was it not enough for them
to beguile the people with lying vanities, Esaias 7.
but they must abuse them also with lying miracles or apparitions? saying with
the lying old Prophet, 1 Kings 13. 1 Kings 13.
An Angel spoke unto me in the word of the Lord, when there was no such
matter, and with the false Prophets, Jeremy 23. Ierem. 2^.
I have dreamed, I have dreamed. But what says the true Prophet in the same
place, The Prophet that has a dream, let him tell a dream, (let him deliver
it for a dream, and for no better,) and he that has my Word, let him speak
my Word faithfully, what is the chafe to the wheat, says the Lord? God has
no need, neither does he like, that one should make a lie for his sake, Job 13.
Job 13. Romans 3.
Neither that his truth should abound to his glory by any man's lie, Romans 3.
This one part of my Text, does more clearly open the truth, and may more
soundly settle our consciences, than a thousand Legend-tales. The Apostle
says, that Christ is (...), that is, the brightness of his glory. It is well
translated, as well as it might be in so few words: but the word (...),
signifies somewhat more than brightness, even such a bright thing, as has a
luster cast upon it from some other thing. For as (...), does not signify the
act or quality of singing, but a song (the song it self,) and (...), does not
signify the act or quality of imagining, but the thing that appears to the
imagination, (^pect^um visum,) so (...), is the thing that has brightness in
it, and (...), is that which receives his brightness from another. So then
now you see what a fit word the Apostle made choice of, even such an one as
then, which none could have been devised, by many years study, more pregnant
to express the everlasting generation of the Son of God. John 1. Luke 1.
For though Christ be the true light that enlightneth every one that comes
into the world, yet as he i^ the second Person in the Trinity, h^ has this
light of his Father, and he is, as God of God, so light of light, even a light
springing from the Father. For this cause he is called by Saint Luke, (...),
that is, Dayspring or Sunne-rising, yea, he is called so by Philo the Jew, in
his book of the c^nfusion of tongues, Philo (...).
(...), that is, The Father of the world, ( Gr. the Father of things that be,)
made his Son to spring forth or arise, as the morning or Sun does; a
strange testimony of one that was borne Jew, and dyed Jew. Hierom. li. de
Eccles. Script.
For though Hierome does reckon him among Ecclesiasticke writers, yet we do
not find that he joined himself to the Church of God or turned Christian; But
the truth is, that he lived in the time that the Apostles did, and therefore
might learn of them to write more piously; as Theodoret, I remember, does
observe, that the Philosophers that wrote after the Gospel was promulgated,
did correct many of their errors, and every where inserted many Sentences
savoring of truth and godliness. But to return to Christ the true Light; He
sprang from the Father, but not as our light does from the Sun in time, but
before all beginnings; neither yet as a quality, (our light is a quality,) but
as being a substance, and the Author of all substance and being; neither was
he ever separated from the Father, as the light of the Moon is separated (at
the least, to our appearance,) from the Sun in the night, and the light of
the Sun from the Moon in the day; but He is and was always in the Father,
and the Father in him, and both in the holy Ghost, and the holy Ghost in both,
Vnum, non vnus, tres, non tria, that is, One thing, not one Person, three in
number, not three in nature. Prosper in E^igram.
So says Prosper Aquitanicus, (that worthy Scholar of that excellent Master
Augustine,) Cum Pater in Ve^bo sit semper and in Patre Verbum, Sitque i^^m
Verbi spiritus atque Patris: Sic de persoxis tribus est, tibi non dubitandumV
number vt docta fides confiteare Deum, that is, For as much as the Father is
always in the Word, and the Word in the Father, and one and the same Spirit
common both to the Word, and to the Father; thou must in such, O learned faith,
(he means a man that has a learned faith,) be far from doubting of the
three Persons, that thou do conf^sse one God. So said Nazianzen before him,
(...), Nazianz^n. de Sacro Baptism.
etc. I do no sooner think upon one, but I am compassed about with the light
of three; I do no sooner distinguish the three (Persons) but I am brought
back unto one (Godhead.) So, before them both Iustine Martyr, (or a learned
ancient man bearing his n^me,) in the best times, (...), Justin. Martyr. in
exposit. fidei.
that is, The Son being a light, shone forth out of light by way of
generation: The holy Ghost being also a light, went forth out of light, not by
way of generation, but of proceeding: So Matthew of Vandome, though he lived in
a very corrupt age, yet (that you may acknowledge it to be true which the
Apostles affirm, Acts 14. Even that, that is verified of the later times of
darkness, that they testified of the former dark times, Math. Vandome in
lib. To^iae. Act. 14.
to wit, That God left not himself without witness,) he writes most soundly
in this argument, Et Pater and natus, sic Spiritus est Deus vnus, Non plures,
tres sunt, non tria, tres and idem, that is, Both the Father, and the Son,
and the holy Ghost are one God, not more Gods, three (Persons) nor three
things, three, and yet the same thing. Thus they. And as Saint Paul says of
Epim^nides, Tit. 1.
This testimony is true; so may we say of all these men's sayings: (I could
produce an hundred such testimonies, if it were needful,) from the first unto
the last, that they are faithful and true. But now if you ask with Nicodemus,
How may these things be? John 3. John 3.
How can God have a Son? how can he that is a Son, be God? I answer, that
this is a secret that the very Angels, if they did desire to behold, cannot
comprehend, so says Nazianzen, (...), etc. Nazian. orat. 1. de fi^.
Let the generating of God be honored with silence. It is a great matter for
thee to know (or learn, (...),) that he was begotten, (...), but as for the
manner how; we will not allow the Angels, much less thee, to conceit. Will ye
needs have me tell you how? The Father knows that did generate; The Son
knows who was generated* that which is above this, is hidden by clouds, which
it is a hard thing for thy dull sight to pierce through; Thus Nazianzen,
godlily, modestly, wisely. To the like purpose speaks Hilary, Hill. 2. de
Trinit.
The mystery of this generation I do not know, nec requiro, that is, neither
do seek after, and yet I will comfort my self (with this,) Archangeli
nesciunt, etc. The Archangels do not know it; the Angels have not heard it,
the worlds d^e not understand it; the Prophet has not perceived it; the Son
himsel^e has not uttered it; cesset dolor querelarum, that is, Be not longer
grieved, nor complain of the matter. Thus much we are to believe, and God
forbid that we should live longer than we do believe it, that our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ ^s the Son of God, and therefore God. For if he that is
beg^tten of man, is man, then he that is generated of God, is God, (by the very
light of reason,) even very God, as Saint John calls him, 1 John 5. Even God
blessed for ever, as Saint Paul calls him, Romans 9. This also you are to
understand, 1 John 5. Romans 9.
that in this generation nothing corrupt, o^ carnal, or after the manner o^
this world, or temporal, is to be imagined; God forbid, God forbid; but that
the Father did beget or generate, that is, did truly communicate his substance
unto the ^onne, that is that whereby the Son is a Son, after an
unspeakable manner, nay, after an incomprehensible manner, I say, above all
conceit or reach of man or creature, and before all time, yea, and before all
eternity. The same may be further considered of by the adiunct or property that
follows, namely, that he is called the Character of his Person, that is, the
stamp, print, and form of him. Would you see the form or fashion of a man's
seal? the print in wax does show it, that is his character. Would you see the
image of a man's mind? his speech does declare ^t, that his character (index
est enim sermo,) says one, (...), says another.) So, would you see the Image
of God the Father? look upon the Son, in him you may see him, he is his
Character; you know what is written, John 14. when Philip had said to our
Savior, Lord show us the Father, and it suffices, Jesus answered and said,
Philip, he that has seen me, has seen the Father, John 1.
etc. Thus it is, No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son
of God which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him. How? by his
words of doctrine revealing Gods will, by his works of wonder manifesting Gods
power, but specially by taking our nature upon him in becoming man, thereby he
manifested himself, and consequently his Father unto us, by uniting his
manhood unto his Godhead in identity of Person, as from everlasting his
Godhead was united to the Father in identity of nature. By this means it is
come to pass, that he said well, that said, ( Irenaeus reports it to be the
saying of some ancient Father, Irenae. l. 4. ca. 8.
Been qui dixit ipsum immensum Patrem in filio mensuratum, that is, The Father
which is immense (or that cannot be measured,) is measured in his Son. The
S^n as he is God, is the Stamp of his Fathers Person, and is the same in
nature: The Son as he is man, is the Stamp of his Fathers power, wisdom, and
will, but different in nature; For he is not man alone, nor God alone, but
(...), Man-God, God-man, in whom are hid all the Treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, Coloss. 2.3. Coloss. 2.9.
nay, in whom dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, that is, really,
truly, substantially: Bernard. 5. de considerat.
Scrutari hoc temeritas est, credere pietas est, nosse vita est, and vita
aeterna, that is, To search this (too curiously) is rashness, to believe it is
godliness, to know it is life, and life everlasting. Christ then is the Image
of God, begotten of his Father, that is, having that whereby he is a Son
communicated unto him by the Father before all worlds, and as he is man made
after the image of God, as all men be, but in a far more excellent degree of
perfection beyond all comparison; And indeed if our Savior Christ had not bin
both God and man, he had not bin a fit Mediator, I mean, he had not been a
fit Person to reconcile man and God together; for as Fulgentius well says,
Deus verus and viuus, imo Deus veritas and vita, Fulgent. de I^^^rnat. Christ.
etc. that is, God being true and living, or rather being truth and life
eternal, if he had not been true man, he could not have tasted of death, and
if the same that tasted of death had not been true God, and life eternal, he
could not have overcome death. Thus Fulgentius. To which purpose I could
produce many other Fathers of like note and worth; as also I could reckon up
many other causes why it was necessary for our Mediator to be both God and man,
but the time being past, I cannot stay longer upon that point, and for that
that remains of my Text, I think it better to leave it unhandled, than to
handle it insufficiently; Praestat de Carthagine tacere, quam pauca dicere. To
God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory,
world without end, Amen, Amen.

A SERMON UPON THE TWENTIETH OF THE PROVERBS. THE TWELFTH SERMON.
PROVERBS 20. verse 8. A King sitting in the Throne (or Seat) of Judgment,
scatters away (or fanneth) away all evil with his eyes.

Hebr. Melec iosheb gnal cisse-din mezareh be gneinaiu col ragn.


HERE we have an excellent Person, and an excellent function, and an excellent
work, and an excellent Instrument or mean. The Person is a King, the function
or exercise isto sit onthe Throne of Judgment; the work or effect is, the
scattering away of all evil; lastly, the instrument or mean is his eyes. For
the first, Glorious things are spoken of thee, thou City of God, it is said of
Jerusalem, Ps. 87. And so, Glorious things are spoken of Kings, in the Book of
God, we may say: For their innocence, they are called Lambs; for their care,
Shepherds, for their louingnesse, Nursing-fathers, for their bounty and
liberality, Franke-giuers, Benefactors, (Nedibim, (...),) for their authority,
Leaders, nay, Controwlers, such as have a negative voice (gnotserim) nay,
Alkumim, such as is no standing with, or against; lastly, (for the profit that
we reap by them,) Physicians, nay, Saviors, nay, Gods after a sort. Cantic.
3.11.
Behold King Solomon, with the Crown wherewith his mother crowned him in the
day of his espousals, Cant. 3. And so, Behold every true successor of Solomon,
with the Crown that the heavenly Father has adorned him in the day of his
coronation, it may be said. This, out of the Book of God. Also in the book of
Nature, I mean, in the writings of mere natural men, we find the like
titles and Elogies given to Kings and Princes. A good King differs not from a
good Shepherd, said one; from a good Father, said another. He is the Image of
God, the lively Image of God, said another; A seeing Law, a speaking Law, said
another; Briefly, he is a breathing Law, Clem. Alexan. 2. stromat.
a Law that has life and soul in it ((...)) said another, even Zeno, in Clem.
Alexandrinus. Finally, Saviors they have b^ene called, and by such as would
not be counted flatterer^, Flamminius Soter, Antiochus Soter, etc. Now these
Titles of high renown and honor, have been given to Ki^gs, and such as had
Kingly authority, both by them that spoke so as they were moue^ by the holy
Ghost, and by them that spoke so as nature dictated unto them; not to the end
they should be high-minded* and utter such swelling words of vanity, as either
the King of Babel does, Esaias 14. I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my
Throne above the stars of God, Marcell lib. 17. de Sa^ore.
etc. Or as the King of Persia does in Marcellinus, Sapor Rex Regum, particeps
siderum, frater Solis and Lunae, etc. that is, Sapor King of Kings, companion
to the stars, brother to the Sun and to the Moon, etc. these were words of
men of corrupt minds, and which made their madness known to all men: but for
two causes chiefly were those titles given unto them: First, to move them to
be thankful to God, who had so highly advanced them, even above all that is
called high in this world. Agapet ad Justinian. cap. 21. pa. 38.
The King has none above him upon earth, said Agapetus to Justinian. Secondly,
to incite us to yield all honor, and fear, and reverence, and obedience unto
so divine a calling. Of the calling and duty of Kings, I cannot speak, I need
not speak, 1 S^m 18.
I cannot speak worthily, fitly. Seems it a light thing to be son in Law
to the King? A light thing, answered David, unto those that motioned him a
match in King Saul's house* and so a Preacher may say, Seems it a small thing
to speak of Kings matters in the Kings Court, and not be confounded? 1 S^m. 6.
Why, the men of Beth^hemesh for daring to look once in the Arc, were
destroyed with a great destruction, 1 Samuel Yea, 2 Samuel 6.
Vzzah, for seeking to stay the Arc when it tottered, was smitten that he
dyed, 2 Samuel Yea, Theopompus and Theodectes, for aduenturing to write of holy
matters contained in the holy Scriptures, with an unhallowed pen, lost their
wits and sight for their labors, neither was it restored unto them, until
they recanted their presumption, Iose^h lib. 12. cap. ^.
witness Josephus, upon the report of Demetrius Phalareus. (...), etc. even to
speak true things of God, is (many times) very dangerous, says Epiphanius out
of Origin. Gods matters, and Princes matters be not the same, I grant, yet are
they very like, and as God will not hold them guiltless that break their
bounds, approach too near to the mount of his secrets: so Kings have no cause
to thank those that be audaciously officious. But the best is, a Preacher
needs not to speak one word of instruction, either to our King, being
present, or for our King being absent.

He is as an Angel of God, knowing good and evil, as the woman of Tekoah, and
Mephibosheth told David: He can speak of trees, from the Cedar tree that
grows in Libanon, to the Hyssop, 2 Samuel 14. and 2 Samuel 19. 1 Kings 4.33.
that springs out of the wall, 1 Kings 4. I mean, he is skillful and expert
in all Arts, in all Sciences, in all Faculties; and in the chiefest faculty of
all he can speak, and judge, and write, and moderate in the most difficult,
and arduous points, even from the divine Attributes of the Trinity, to the
deepest mysteries of the Revelation; even from Antichrist that sits upon the
Throne, to the begging Friar, that goes from door to door; even from
concupiscence that enters with us into the world, unto Purgatory, that is made
the end of all flesh, or most flesh, (...), said one. Homer.
And so his Majesty can say with Jacob, (when Joseph took upon him to advise
him,) I know, I know; And again, Genesis 48.
it may b e said of him, as Saint Paul said of Agrippa, The King knows of
these things, and none of these things are hidden from the King. Act. 16.
Erasmus speaking of Basil, surnamed the Great, says of him; that there is not
one (in the Latin Church,) fit to be compared to him; but if we will make an
equal match for him, (says he) we need to join the worth of two together,
the smooth (sweet) style of Lactantius, and the Scripture-learning of Hierome.
Extat hoc Erasmi iudiciumpraefixum Gregori^ Nazianzeno, Grae^o impres. Basil.
per Her^^gium. An. 1550.
To this effect Erasmus in imitation of him, as I think, (a worthy modern
writer says the like of S^aliger, the father) that to parallel him aright and
not to do him wrong, we had need to join the worth of two together, namely,
the wit of Xenophon, and the valor of Masinissa. And even so, if we will
counterpoize the sufficiency of his Majesty for matter of learning and
knowledge, we must take the worth of a great many of Princes, to wit the
Poetical vein of such a one, and the eloquence of such a one, and the
Philosophy of a third, and the Divinity of half a doozen of the best; This is
the Kings honor before all Nations, and this is our Crown of rejoicing on the
behalf of our King before men and Angels.

I will therefore speak no more of the dignity of a King, nor of the worth of
our King; and I have showed reasons, why I need not to deliver one word of
instruction for him. But now for our duty, (which I said was a second reason,
why such excellent titles were given unto Kings,) the same we might be put in
mind of, by all the several appellations of Kings, which I reckoned up, but I
will only insist upon two; the appellation, or title of a Shep-heard; and the
appellation or title of a Father. So then in order; If Kings be Shep-heards,
then we that are subjects are sheep, then we had need to have two properties
(at the least,) of sheep, the one mentioned in the 10. of John, the other in
the 53. of Isay. In the 10. of John, it is said, that the sheep do follow
their Sheep-heard, Ioh. 10.4, 5.
for they know his voice, but they will not follow a stranger, etc. Let us be
of the same mind. There is a stranger of Rome, no less to be shunned, than
the strange woman, the same naughty-packe mentioned in Proverb Cap. 2. and Cap.
7. who with great craft causes simple-ones to yield, Pro. 2.16. and chap. 7.21
and 22.
and with her flattering lips she enticeth them, so that they follow her, as
an Ox that goes to the slaughter, 2 Pet. 2.
and as a fool to the stocks for correction. He promises liberty, but is
himself the servant of corruption; another Gospel, which is not another
Gospel, but therein he goes about to deceive. Galat. 1. Zachar. 11.
He is an Idol Sheep-heard, preaching not at all, nay professing that it does
not belong to him to preach, therefore no Ecclesiastike Sheep-heard, (
Euangelizare pascere est, to preach the Gospel, that is, to be an
Ecclesiasticke Sheepe-heard; Bernard. de considerat.

See Pliny lib. 8. ca. 30. Esaias 52. Ierem. 51.


says Bernard) and though he counterfeit the voice of the Sheepe-heard, yet he
is but an Hyaena, and would tole men out of their houses to devour them. Come
out of Babylon, O my people, says God by the Prophet; and so the voice of
every Preacher should be, O ye that are in Babylon, come out from thence; ye
that are out, keep your selves out, lest ye be partakers of her plagues.
Revel. 10.2.
He of Babel, He of Rome (Rome is called second Babel, Babel first Rome by
Augustine,) howsoever he counts himself Vicar, August. 18. de Ciuit. Dei ca.
2.
at the least, to the Angel of the great Counsel, and puts his right foot
on the Sea, and his left on the earth, (like the mighty Angel, Revel. 10.) As
though all power were given unto him, both in heaven and in earth; yet he is
but an Angel of the bottomless pit, ( Reu. 9.) and the very Abaddon, son of
perdition, destroying, Revel. 9.11.
and appointed to destruction. Behold, I have warned you. This for one note
taken from Shep-heard, and sheep, by way of correlation: Another note shall be
this; The sheep is dumb before his Shearer; and opens not his voice: so
ought subjects to part with that they can spare for the supply of their chief
Shep-heard, Esaias 53.7.
without clamor, yea, and without grudging. The sheep may trust their good
Sheep-heard, he will tondere, not deglubere, he will charge his Officers, as
the Emperor did his Lieutenant in Egypt, Tiberius.
that they should sheare, and not swallow up, or (as another reports,)
sheare, and not shave; he ventureth his life many times for their good, as
David put his life in his hand, and encountered, first, the Lion, then the
Bear: he commiserateth them when they are in danger, and rueth their ruin
when they have miscarried, as the same David, when he saw the Angel with the
sword drawn, cried out, What have these sheep done, Quid meruistis Ones,
placidum pecus, etc? Let thy hand, O Lord, be upon my self, 2 Samuel ^4.
I have sinned: As Augustus also, when he heard of the overthrow given unto his
Forces in Germany, under the unhappy conduct of Varu^, he ran his head
against a door, saying, Read Vare Legiones: Have thou lost my Legions, Varus,
Sueton in Augu.
so many thousands of my men, every one being as dear unto me as a child?
woeworth thee Varus, that ever thou were borne, unhappy I that I committed such
a charge unto thee. And does not this commiseration and passionate spirit
deserve the fleece? What speak I of the whole fleece? a piece of the fleece, a
lock in comparison? Marcellinus writes thus of the Egyptians, Erubescit apud
Egyptios, siquis non inficiando tributa, Marcell. li. 22. Tully.
plurimas in Corpore vibices ostendat, that is, the Egyptians hold it for a
mark of degenerousnesse, and a disparagement, not to be able to show many
blows, many marks of blows on their bodies received by denying of Tribute.
Thus he. Aequius erat hoc voluntate fieri, said one, and so say I; for if there
be first a willing mind, T^lly.
it is esteemed according to that a man has, 2 Cor. ^.
and not according to that which he has not. But if it be by constraint or
unwillingly, this is not so thank worthy, either with God or with man. For
this cause Saint Paul signifies, that he would not press Philemon too far,
that the good-turne might be voluntary, and not as it were of necessity: And
the rule is right, (...), either willingly, or not at all. I hope it will never
be verified of so noble a Nation as ours, which is laid to the charge of the
Corinthians, though upon another occasion. Now there is altogether, (or by all
means, 1 Cor. 6.
) a defect among you, yet there is no Nation so perfectly wise, but they may be
told sometimes as Jacob told his sons, G^nes. 43.12.
Peradventure there was some mistaking, some error. In the 2. of Sam. the 19. 2 Samuel 19.
When the men of Israel had bethought themselves, how vnrespectiue they had
been toward their King, their good King David, they bled inwardly, as it
were, and were at strife among themselves, who should show most forwardness to
make him amends; and so it may be thought, that whatsoever unhappiness has
happened, I know not by what mistaking, or misleading, yet when we shall be put
to it again, there will appear so strange an alteration of minds, that if
the enemies of the truth, and of our State, did before clap their hands for
joy, because of our di^^raction, they will as fast, and as passionately wring
their hands for sorrow of heart, to hear of our joining together as one man,
with one heart, and with one shoulder, Z^ph^^. ^^
as the Prophet speaks to bear common burdens, and to give content unto our
Prince. Philemon.
Saint Paul speaks thus of Onesimus, Peradventure he went aside for a season,
that thou might receive him not now a servant, but more than a servant, a
Brother beloved specially to me. And Tully, I remember says of his return
from banishment, that the same was so glorious, that I am afraid, said he, lest
some do think that I went into banishment of set purpose, so to be welcomed
home with those applauds and acclamations. And so who can tell, whether this
toughness, which happened, not to all Israel, but in part, will not redound to
the greater advantage of the King, 2 Cor. 7.
and the greater honor of the Realm; godly sorrow causing an earnest
endeavor, yea, indignation, yea, fear, yea, longing, yea, zeal, yea, a kind
of reuenge-taking of our selves, so that we shall not be utterly ashamed? So
much of the notes that arise hereby, that a King is called a Shep-heard. The
other title that I promised to gather matter of duty from, is the title of
Father, A son honors his father, and a servant his Lord, says the Prophet
Malachi, Malac. 1.
and besides, it is not scripta, but nata Lex. If then the King be a Father,
where is his honor? if Lord, where is his fear? this may be demanded and
challenged by him and for him. Now by honor, I understand not so much that
which is outward in words, and in gesture, words full of all reverence, gesture
full of all submissiuenesse, bowing of the knee, bending of the body, etc.
(Albeit a man cannot stoop too low to Majesty, for in whom all authority is
founded, as it were originally, and to whom it is reduced reciprocally, to him
no honor, (civil honor,) may seem to be given superfluously:) But that
honor specially, which Saint Paul understands when he says, Honor
Widows, that is, do for them: and which is to be understood of the
commandment, 1. Tim. 5.
Honor thy Father, and thy Mother, that is to say, do for them, Mar. 7.12
by the interpretation of Christ himself, 2 Cor. 12.14.
Mark 7. I grant it is said, 2 Cor. 12. Children ought not to lay up for the
parents, but parents for the children. But I answer, that there the Apostle
does argue Ex abundanti, and rather shows what affectionate parents do bind
themselves unto voluntarily, (making their affection a Law to themselves;) than
what may be required of them of duty, if they will stand upon their right. The
truth is, that as no natural father, will suffer his child to want, if he have
to give him: so every natural child will Fraudare genium, pinch his own
belly, yea, and the bellies of his children too, rather than he will not yield
supply unto his father. Solin.
Was not the fact of a young woman in Rome, who beguiled her child sucking on
her breasts, day after day, for many days together, that she might bring her
breasts full of milk to her father to suckle him, which otherwise should have
been starued to death; was not that fact of hers, I say, honored and rewarded
by them that knew not God, and thereupon a Temple erected to Pity? and this
was done to an ordinary father, to a private father. What then is to be done to
the Father of the Country, and to such a Father, that a man may say of him in
some respect, as Tertullian does of the Father of Fathers? Tertull. de
p^^itentia.
Tampater nemo, tam pius nemo: Not such a Father again to be found, none so
pitiful. We read of one that was called Pater Patriae, (an hundred were so
called in process of time, but he that was first honored with that title, he
was truly honorable,) of another, that was called Pater pauperum, of another
that was called Pater Reipublicae, of another that was called Pater literarum,
that is, a Father of learning, ( Francis the first of France, was so called.)
Thus these Princes were dignified with several titles for their several
virtues; what then is due unto him in whom all these virtues do shine, and in
a good measure; due (I say) for honor, for supply, for support? I speak this
to do mine own duty, not to insimulate any, no, norvpon any weak conceit, as
though my poor speech might be holden any way necessary; O no, his Majesty's
own worth is an hundred times a greater motive, than any words that can
proceed from a far more sufficient man than I am. His Majesty is interessed
and rooted (as is fit) in the hearts of his loving subjects, no less than
David was in the hearts of his, when the holy Ghost said of him and them, as it
is in the 2 Samuel 3. All the people knew it, and it pleased them; 2 Samuel 3.36.
as whatsoever the King did, pleased all the people. Before I end this passage,
I think it not unfit, as a stander-by, to help to remove three or four
stumbling blocks, and I hope it will not be imputed to me. The speech of a
great Prince of old time, (even of Traian) is well known: Fis^us, said he,
that is, Aurel. Victo.
the Exchequer or common Treasury, is like the spleen of a man; for as when
the spleen waxes big, and swells, the other parts do pair, and fall
away, so if the Exchequer do stroute, and be stuffed with silver and gold, all
parts of the Realm besides will be impouerished, and as it were,
hunger-starued. Thus Traian. Now say I, Howsoever this comparison has been
applauded unto, (neither do I think it simply to be condemned, specially for
some States, and some commings-in,) yet I do not think it to be so fit
generally. In my judgment, the Exchequer, or such a place, may fitly be
compared to the ventricle, to that which we call the stomach; for as if the
ventricle be not plied with necessary meats and drinks, the Messaraike veins
sucking continually from it and from the bowels, and the Liver continually
sucking from the Messaraikes, and the Capillar or small veins (dispersed over
the body) sucking from the Liver, there must needs ensue first, a hungrynesse,
secondly, a faintness, thirdly, in time a waste, and lastly, an untimely
death: so if the Treasury should not have as great commings-in, and supplies,
as it has so kings and euacuations, if it should not have as well Oesophagum
to bring in, as Pylorum to send forth, and venam portam, as well as ve nam
cauam, it cannot be but the whole Estate will be greatly enfeebled, that I do
not say endangered. Philopemen was a great Soldier, (Scholars know out of
Liuie and Plutarke,) yet because he was bare for money, he was gibed at by his
Aemulus, that he wanted a belly, (he had a head and legs, and arms, but his
belly was pulled-in.) Maximilian the first, T. Fla^^inius. Lege Cuspini^ in
Ale^xio Co^^eno 377. Guicciard. lib. 3. in An. 1519.
was an extraordinary worthy Prince, as all confess that write of him, (at the
least whom I have read,) yet because the Empire did not supply him with
treasure, and besides, himself was not the best husband, but very profuse, (if
Guicciardines taxation be just,) he undertook many things and brought little
to effect, whereby he greatly eclipsed his glory. The Hebrews have a Proverb
Hacceseph iagnanch ^th haccol, that is, Silver answers all things, yea, and
makes all things to hold correspondency with it; And the wise Grecian said,
(...), that is, Money, money that is a man, without it a body is no body. This
made Aurelian the Emperor his Council to tell him, that if he would bear
himself worthily and according to his estate, he must be furnished with two
things, (...).
with gold and with iron, with gold, to reward his faithfull-ones, and
neere-ones, and with iron, to beat down his own and his Countries enemies.
Both those are necessary, very necessary, and it is hard to say, whether more.
It is certain that many States have recovered that by gold, which they lost by
the sword, (by the sword of the en^my, or by handling their own sword
dastardly or unskillfully;) Again, many have lost that for want of gold, which
they got by the sword; even children can instance these points. Therefore as
Joseph is commended for his good husbandry, 1 Genes. 4.
in that he gathered together an infinite deal of corn, and laid up the same
in storehouses, against the years of dea^th: And as Calebs daughter is
commended for her good huswifery, Ioshuah 15.
in that she would not suffer her husband to be content with the fields
allotted unto him, but she would needs beg of her father the springs of
water, 2 Chronicles. 32.
for the continual watering of the same: Briefly, as on the other side
Hezekiah is commended for his good policy, that he caused the people to stop
all the fountains, and the river that ran through the midst of the Country,
that the enemy might be distressed for want of water: So if we will not have
the river of our hope turned away by the enemy, nor otherwise dried up, if we
mean either to win or to save, we must be willing, most willing to furnish the
State with store of treasure beforehand, that there be ^o want when time
requires* I confess, that Eusebius reports of Constantius Chlorus, that he
should say, Eusebius. 1. de vita Constantin. c. 10.
that he cared not to have treasure in his own coffers, all the while his
friends (his loving subjects) had money in their coffers or purses, because he
could command the same: But I think it was spoken more confidently than
prouidently; for howsoever it may be as certain that is in friends hands, as if
it were in our own, yet it is not so ready; and that even Constantius himself
did find, for he was feign to detain with him the Ambassadors of Dioclesian
(to whom he uttered that confident speech) for a good time, before he could
amasse that together that was worth the showing, as is to be seen in the same
Eusebius. So it is, Quod a multis fit, negligenter fit; It is commonly said,
that is, That which is to be done by many hands, it will be long before it be
done; and so, that which is to be gathered from many hands, will be long in
gathering. If any thing be to be received, we strive who shall be foremost,
fearing all will be gone before we come; but if any thing be to be laid out,
we strive to be hindmost, hoping the burden will be borne before we come. Now
by this staggering and looking one upon another, (as Jacobs sons are said to
have looked one upon another, Genes. 42.1.
when they knew not what to do for want of corn,) there happens delay, and
delay proves many times dangerous. Deuteronomy. 17.17.
Neither is that in the 17. of Deuteronomy. Where Moses says, The King shall not
gather unto him much silver and gold, against that which is proiected; for in
that place, not so much the having as the coveting, nor the coveting simply, as
to covet with an evil covetousness, to set our nests on high, as the Prophet
speaks, Habak. 2.9. James 4.3.
to covet to bestow upon our lusts, as Saint James speaks, to covet to make
ostentation of our wealth, as Hezekiah did, (and by his example Aquinas does
explicate Moses.) Lastly, 2 Kings 20.
to covet and to gather by extreme exactions, such as Rehoboam would have used,
1 Kings 12. Plutarch.
and Marcus Antonius de facto did use, imposing upon Asia two maine Tributes in
one year, who therefore was told, (but mannerly and perswasiuely, not rudely,)
that if he would have two such Tributes in one year, he must help them to two
Haruests in one year. But English Tributes, moderate Tributes, such, I say, as
have these three properties intimated by the very Etymon of the three Chaldee
words (signifying Tribute) Ezra 4. Mindah, belo, halac: namely, that first they
be Mindah, that is, Ezrah. 4.13.
in a measure, and moderate, according to Saint Paul's rule; Make your
Collection as God shall have prospered you, 1 Cor. 16. 1 Cor. 16.2.
And as it is in the 11. of the Acts, Act. 11.29.
They decreed to send to the Brethren that dwelt in Judea, (...), that is,
According to every ones store. Secondly, they must be halac, that is, go over
the Land in general without partiality, according to Saint Paul's rule. Again,
2 Cor. 8. Not that others should be eased, and you pressed, 2 Cor. 8.13.
(or wringed) but that there be an equality. Lastly, they must be Belo, that
is, inueterate or ancient, so far and so long as the common State requires,
no more, (For, salus Regis, salus Reipub. salus Reipub. summa Lex, that is, The
safety of the King is the safety of the Commonweal; the safety of the
Commonweal, is a Law above all Laws,) such Tributes, I say, Customs,
Subsidies, Fifteenes, call them how you will, are as necessary many times to
uphold a State, as the outward air which we drawe-in is necessary for
respiration, and for the refreshing of the vitals, and as the blood in the
veins is necessary for the conseruing of life. It was said in old time,
Archidamus.
(...), that is, You may not define, and stint the charges of war. And the
like may be said of the charge of a King and Kingdom, that they can hardly be
rated or stinted. Besides those that are ordinary, (albeit who can recite half
the ordinary charges of either?) how much are they forced many times to bestow
(...), that is, upon the secret purposes and advantages of the State? Plutarch.
in Pericle.
as Pericles brought in his account to the Athenians, how much in exploratores;
as Consalvus brought in his account to his master of Spain, Arnold. Ferron.
Gallie. verum. lib. 4.
witness Arnold Ferron. Now in these cases is it for Sophocles his sons to
implead, as it were, their father for dilapidating? or are we not rather to
request him with all instance, (as Saint Paul was requested (...), by his
sons whom he had begotten in the Gospel, 2 Cor. 8.
) that he would receive a blessing of us? and are we not to yield willingly to
bestow, and to be bestowed again, (as the same Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 12.
) for his sake? Lastly, I grant that when the holy father of Rome (I call him
holy, as the falling-sickenesse is called an holy sickness ((...)) made this
argument, namely; The Church of Rome is mother to the Church of England, and
consequently, I, (said he) the father thereof; therefore, since children are
not to suffer their parents to want, you must supply me with two Prebends, out
of every Cathedral Church, and with two portions out of every Religious house,
etc. I say, when he made this argument unto them, they denied the argument,
Math. Paris. in Henrico 3.
and contradicted his agents. And no marvel, for as when Rabshakeh bragged
that his Lord the King of Assyria had prevailed against such a God, and such a
God, and the other God, Hezechiah answered, Truth: for they were not Gods, but
the work of men's hands: 2 Kings 19.
so say I, that the English had great reason to deny to aid the father of
Rome, and the Church of Rome his spouse, all the while he is not our true
father, but a father in Law, or rather against all Law; nor she the true
mother, but a stepmother, a putatiue mother, like her in the 1 Kings, that
would have had the child to be divided. For all the world he has showed
himself such a kind of father, 1 Kings 3.
as Saturn was, who devoured all his children that he could come at, and whom
Rhea hid not from him: and she such a mother as Medea in the Tragedy, who
murdered all her sons that she had by her husband Jason, and were sorry she
had no more to murder, that she might vex him and grieve him more. But as
Moses said, Our God is not as their god, our enemies being witnesses: Deuter.
32.
so we may say, Our father and King is not as theirs, heaven and earth bearing
record, for their King is, King of the Locusts, Revel. 9.11.
Reu. 9. and himself the great Locust: but our King is a King of peace, and of
bounty; to speak the least, and, facilis placidusque pater, veniaeque paratus,
as the Poet said. So much of the person of the King. I come now to the function
and to the effect, and to the instrument, and I will but touch them slightly,
lest I should be tedious. A King sitting on the Throne of Judgment, etc. The
Jews write themselves, and others write of them, that while their Commonweal
stood, they had three kinds of Courts, or places of Judicature ( Batteidin,)
the one in every City, where three chosen for the purpose sat and examined
petite or light matters, matters of trespass and of debt; this was the least
Court, but there were many of them; The second was a greater Court, and
authorized to try matters of life and death, the same consisted of the number
of twenty three, and was scattered thorowout the Tribes, and there were more
than one for a Tribe; The third and greatest and most solemn, consisted of
seventy, or as some would have it, of seventy two, those received Appeals from
the other Courts, and besides debated of matters of the State, and of the
Church. This Court was holden at Jerusalem, and in respect thereof it is
thought, the Psalmist speaks so as he does, Psalm. 122. For there Thrones are
set, Psalm. 122.5.
even the Thrones of the house of David. He does not say Throne, as of one, but
Thrones, as of many, by reason of the multitude of Judges which made up
Sanhedrin, as the Talmudists corruptly call it, of the Greek word (...).
Howbeit, as Genes. 37. Genes. 37.7.
Joseph's sheafe stood vp-right, and all the other sheaues did compass it
about, and did reverence unto it, Ezech. 1.2.
and as Ezech. 1. it is said of the wheels, that when the living creatures
went, they went, and when those stood, they stood, etc. for the spirit of the
living creatures was in the wheels: so we may say, that all the forenamed
Courts, both greater, and smaller, were subject unto the King's Bench as it
were, as receiving their authority, and commission from it, and so to be
commanded by it, and not to exercise any jurisdiction over it. Baronius in his
Annals, (a book more painful than faithful,) speaking of the Sanhedrin,
Baroni suis Annal. An. Christ. 31. number. 10.
(that great Court holden at Jerusalem,) says, that it had power not only to
determine spiritual matters, but also to question and convent even Kings; he
instanceth it, Horum namque iudicio Herodes Rex postulatus est, and for this
(and Herod's cruelty especially,) he cites Josephus in the Margin: I cannot say
of this allegation as Saint Paul says of Epimenides his testimony, Tit. 1.
This Testimony is true: for indeed his allegation is not true, Herod was no
King then, when he was conuented, nor son of a King, Joseph. Antiquit. lib.
14. cap. 18.
but subject to King Hyrcanu^, who caused him to be sent for upon complaint,
and was content that he should make an escape, because a kinsman of Caesar's had
written for him: but that Herod was King when he was conuented, or that that
Court had power over Kings to convent them, this we find in Baronius only,
but it is not to be found in Josephus. The truth is, Qui Rex est, Regem Maxim
non habeat, that is, He that is a King, must not have one above him; for such a
one is a King only in name, but in truth a subject; for unto Kingly authority
or Soueraignety, it is essential to be supreme and absolute; absolute, I say,
from the prescript of all persons, but not from the observing of his own
Laws, unto the which he graciously submits himself. 1 Kings 10.
For this cause King Solomon erected a Royal Throne, as of Iuory and gold: to
signify the sincerity of his proceeding, and how far it should be from
corruption; and with Stays and Lions, to signify that he would maintain
Justice, even by force and power, if it were impugned: So with six steps or
greeces, and no fewer, to show the eminency of his Court, above all other
whatsoever Courts and Consistories, and that the stateliness of the making
might procure awe and reverence to it from all degrees and callings: his
meaning was not, by erecting that Throne to suppress all other Courts, (by no
means, for that had been to pull down the whole burden upon his own back,
which Moses the man of God disclaimed, Number. 11.12.
as being too heavy for him,) but to teach us that all other Courts were
subordinate to it, as to the Court of the Lord Paramount, (...), I mean,
Homer. (...).
that all other should receive orders and injunctions from it, but not presume
to give orders and rules to it. So then, as wheresoever the King makes his
abode, there the Court is said to be, (the Court Royal,) so wheresoever any
Court of Judicature is holden by the Kings authority, there the King himself
may be said to sit interpretatiue. It is not therefore meant in my Text, that
the Kings personal presence is always necessary for the scattering away of
evil, but that his authority should be there, and that worthy and sufficient
men be appointed by him for the mannaging of the affairs of Justice. Where the
King sits himself, if he so please, or provides that wise and incorrupt
Magistrates do fit, there all enormities and abuses are easily chased away,
and scattered: The Kings wrath is as the r^aring of a Lion: Prouer. 19.12. Romans
13.
The Magistrate under him bears not the sword in vain. What if the wicked be
mighty in power, in wealth, in kindred, in friends, in alliance? yet he tha^
sits upon the Throne, is mightier than they. What if they be as thorns that
will not be taken up with the bare hand? Yet the Magistrate being fenced with
Iron, or with the shaft of a Spear, 2 Samuel 23.7.
(2 Samuel 23.) will be too hard for them, and they shall be destroyed in the
same place. It is hard kicking against the prick, says our Savior: Act. 9.
and it may be well said, If a man fall upon authority, it will bruise him, but
if authority fall upon a man, Romans 3.
it will grind him to powder. For this cause we must be subject not only for
fear, 1 Pet. 2.
but also for conscience sake, nor only to the King as to the chief, but also
to Rulers, as to them that be appointed by him, for the punishment of those
that do ill, and praise of them that do well. His pleasure, if it could be
known; should be a kind of law unto us, his law when it is promulgated, should
tie us by a kind of oath of Allegiance: Tertul. de Coron. milit.
Laudo fidem (says Tertullian,) quae ante credit obs^ruandum esse quam
didicit, I like of such a faith, as believes it ought to observe this or that,
before it has learned the evident reason thereof. This has place in some
mysteries of Religion; and so in some State-matters, a kind of simple obedience
is many times necessary, but Tergiuersation, and reasonings, and murmurings,
and contentiousnesse, they must be done away with all unquietness. What a
motive is this to induce us to study by all means, to give content to our
higher Powers, for that we may say of them truly, which the flattering Orator
said of the Roman Governor falsely, Act. 24. By their means we enjoy much
peace; Act. 24.2.
and many worthy things are done to our Nation by their providence: and for
that we may say with the words of my Text, that they sitting on the Throne of
Judgment, do scatter away all evil? What do they do? They scatter away.
What do they scatter away? Evil, all evil. It is said of Christ, that he
has his Fan in his hand, and will thoroughly purge his floor, etc. Math. 3. The
like office is here ascribed to a King, Math. 3.12.
a good King, that he has his Fan in his hand, and before he do scatter, he
does Fan, sift, winnow, try, for that is employed in the original word Zarah;
so then, he does not scatter away all causes and persons that are brought
before him, the righteous as well as the unrighteous; like the cruel Tyrant
that cried out, A Calvo ad calvum, To the pot with them, every mothers son:
and as Benhadad proclaimed, 1 Kings 20.
Whether they be come out for peace take them alive, or whether they be come
out to fight, take them yet alive, (make bondmen of them all, spare none.) And
briefly, as Henricus Stephanus writes of a Judge, that his manner was when an
old fellow was brought before him, (upon suspicion of felony,) to say, Away
with him, hang him, he has committed many a felony, I warrant you; if a young
fellow were brought, Away with him too, hang him, he will commit many a felony,
if he be suffered. I say, good Governors do not go thus rashly to work, and
as it were, by wholesale, Ierem. 15.
but they will separate the precious from the vile, as the Prophet speaks,
and weigh all things in the balance of Prudence, and will order their
Judgment with discretion; as Isaak would not bless his son, Genes. 27. 1
Kings 3.
before he had felt him: and Solomon full wisely found out the true mother, by
tendering an offer; and Claudius the Emperor, Suetonius.
almost as wisely, found out the true son, by making the like offer, witness
Suetonius in Claudio, Chapter 15. Thus by searching, they found out who has right
on his side, who not; who deserve punishment, who reward: then accordingly they
proceed to Judgment, and scatter away all evil. [ All Evil.] If all evil,
then the evil that is in the Tribe of Leui, as well as in other Tribes. Here
then the Kings Supremacy over all persons is proved: again, if all evil, then
the evil of impiety against the first Table, as well as of iniquity against
the second Table; here then the Kings Supremacy in all causes is vouched. Act.
18. and Act. 25.18.
What if Gallio and Festus in the Acts of the Apostles, did put from them, or
did not care to meddle with Church Matters and matters of faith? They were both
Pagans, and neither of them a member of the Church, much less, head of any
Church. So what if Constantine the Great took so little upon him in the
Council of Nice? (albeit that Council and others were conuocated by his
authority, and in that Council, he commanded the books of the Old and New
Testament to be produced forth trial of controversies.) What if Valentinian
the second did endure to hear of Ambrose, Ambros. lib. epist. 5. epist. 33
Ad Imperatorem palatia pertinent, ad Sacerdotem Ecclesiae; that is, The
Emperor has to do in his Palaces, but the Bishop or Priest in Churches? why?
Constantine and Valentinian were both Neophytes, or young Scholars in the
faith, and neither of them as yet baptized. Should this be a bar, either to
Theodosius the Great, or to Martianus, or to Justinian, or to Carolomannus, or
to his nephew Charles the Great, or to the Othoes, Fredericks, Henry's, or to
the Kings of France, England, Scotland, Denmark, Swedeland, or to such Princes
and States that have Iura Regalia, that they should not make Laws for the
advancement of the true faith and Service of God, for the abolishing of
Idolatry, for the curbing of superstition, for the rooting out of Heresies, for
the punishing of blasphemous and seditious Heretics? Briefly, for the
maintenance of the Ministry, and for the inioyning of Ministers to their duty,
and so forth? What reason in the world against this? or that Princes should
look for a Commission, and as it were an Oracle from Rome? This for
instruction. So for Institution or admonition, a word or two had need to be
spoken: 2 Pe^r. 3.
for as S. Peter prophesied, that in the last times there should come mockers,
walking after their own lusts, and saying, Where is the promise of Christ's
coming (or presence?) so peradventure in this profane age, some will demand
profanely, Where is the truth of Salomons assertion? He says, That a King
sitting in the Throne of Judgment, scatters away all evil. Now it is
evident that the King sits on the Throne of Judgment, by himself and
others carefully, and Justice was never better administered, and without respect
of persons or Country, and yet we see not all evils scattered away. For when,
say some, was there more impiety, iniquity, impurity in the world? -- Quando
mayor avaritiae patuit sinus, alea quando hos animos? etc. that is, When was
there more covetousness, more deceiving, and cogging, when was there more
gluttony and drunkenness, chambring and wantonness, strife and envying? neither
can they be content to be drunk with wine and strong drink as in former ages,
but they must be drunk every day, and almost every hour of the day with
smoke; a sin that our Elders heard not of. Matthew. 11.
Neither are they that wear soft clothing in Kings Courts only, as it is said
in the Gospel, but they iet it not only in soft clothing, but in cloth of
gold and of silver, even in towns and villages, and many have more upon their
backs, then they are worth in their coffers. Further, every man hunteth his
brother as with a net, Micah 72. Matthew. 16.
as the Prophet says: Every one catches his fellow servant by the throat, as
one does in the Gospel. Finally, Ierem. 23.
the Land is full of Adulterers and mourns, because of oaths. (...) a word,
by lying, and killing, Hosh. 4
and theeuing, and whoring (...) break forth, and blood touches blood. I
answer, first, (...) Israel, aliud Dilectio, though Israel has not attained,
yet the election has obtained: Romans 11.7.
howsoever many wicked wax worse and worse, yet there is a remnant of Grace,
which have been, and are daily reformed by exemplary Justice. Secondly, Aliud
officium, aliud finis: It is one thing to do ones duty, and an other thing to
attain his desired end. Non semperferiet, quodcunque minabitur arcus, Horace.
the arrow does not always hit the mark; yet if the Archer do take his aim
aright, and level straight, howsoever the weather shall blow his arrow aside,
he is excused. Thirdly, Aliud Cura, aliud Curatio, that is, A care is one
thing, a curing is another, as Bernard says, Bernard. 4. de consider.
Curam exigeris, non curationem, a care is required of thee, not a curing;
though Israel be not gathered, or be never the better, yet the Magistrate (like
the Minister, See Esaias 49.5.
) shall be glorious in the sight of the Lord, and his God shall be his
strength. Lastly, as the ancient Father said touching the fulfilling of the
Law, Then every thing is said to be done, when whatsoever is not done, is
pardoned. So it may be said touching reformation; then every evil is said to
be scattered away, when whatsoever is not scattered, is punished. Is Idolatry
winked at? superstition smiled at? impiety laughed at? blaspheming of the holy
name of God, counted nobleness? be malefactors boulstered, protected? be they
not hunted after, that they may be taken? when they are taken, be they not cut
off, except their life will do more good than their death? then all evil is
scattered, all kinds of evil, although not every particular evil; for that
never was, nor never will be. But b^ what means is all evil scattered? for
that only now remains to be handled. Solomon says, that a King does it [
with his eyes:] we use more frequently to say that the hand or the arm does
scatter; but because the eye gives counsel as it were, and direction, the
honor of the action is attributed to it in my Text. Well then, as the King is
to have many hands more than Briareus which was ^entimanus, so he is to have
many eyes more than Argus, which had Centum luminibus cinctum caput. He is to
have an eye of severity, and an eye of clemency, and an eye of Majesty, and an
eye of Prudence, and providence, these in his own head; and an eye of care and
of circumspection in those great ones that are about him. An eye of severity is
many times necessary, vt poena ad paucos, exemplum ad omnes, as one said, that
is, that the punishment may reach to a few, the example to all. Synesius epist.
12. L^ge. Eusebium Ecclesiast. hist. li. 10. cap. 4.125. and Baron. in Anno
Christi 57. number. 106.107, etc. page 525.526, etc.
In this respect Synesius Bishop of Ptolemais, said, that the same (...), (the
public sword of Justice) is as necessary for the purging of a City, (and so of
a Commonweal) for the scowring of all evils and mischiefs out of it, as the
great Basins which were wont to be set at the entrance of Temples, was thought
necessary for the scowring and making clean of their hands that were to enter.
Howbeit, though much is done by severity, yet not always, nor by it only;
sometimes there is as much good done by clemency; as for example, I make no
doubt but that Aurelian the Emperor, (of whom I spoke before, Vopis. in
Aureliano.
) did as much good, (at the least, won as many hearts,) when besieging the City
Thyana, and threatening, because of their standing-out, to destroy as many as
looked upon the wall, when he had taken it indeed, and his Soldiers gaped
after the prey, and thirsted to shead the blood of the Citizens like water, he
commanded all the dogs of that City to be killed: and this was all the blood
that he would suffer to be shed. I make no doubt, I say, but he did as much
good by this example of Clemency, Vopisc. in eadem.
as when he caused the legs of a Soldier that had abused himself, by abusing
a woman, to be tied to the tops of two young saplings bowed-downe for the
purpose, that by the recoyling and spirting up of the same, he might be rent
asunder, as he was. Also, if another example were necessary, I am persuaded
that Papyrius Cursor, that famous warrier, did as much good by the like example
of Clemency that he showed, when calling hastily for the axe of Justice, (as it
might be the axe of the Tower,) and an offender that stood by looking for
nothing but present death, Liuius lib. 9.
he caused the Executioner to let fly at a root or stub that marred the way;
and so ended the execution. I say, I am persuaded he did as much good, (I am
sure he got more love) than when he would have had his Magistrum Equitum to be
put to death without mercy, because he fought with the enemy without his
warrant, Liuius lib. 8.
though it were to a public advantage. The truth is, that both Severity and
Clemency have their place and use, but they that propend unto Clemency get more
love, and they that propend unto severity, are holden to be rather Necessarij
than Boni, (as it was said of one,) how much good soever they may otherwise be
thought to do. The third special eye, is the eye of Majesty, and the same is
of great force to scatter away evil. Job 29.
The young men saw me, and hid themselves, and the aged arose, and stood up,
said Job of himself: and the like do diverse report of Cato the younger, that
the wantons of Rome were more afraid of him, than they were of all their gods:
for if he were present, they would forbear to speak or do things uncomely
upon the stage, but their gods they reverenced not; and so it is written, that
the very cast of Alexanders eye (in his image) made wicked Cassander to startle
and to blench; what would he have done, if he had been alive? Plutarch.
but I may not stay longer upon this point: Besides these eyes that I have
recited, the King has the eye of Prudence and Pr^uidence in his own head, and
of care and circumspection in his Council and Nobles, these are trusted to
look unto things thorowout the Land, even from Dan to Beersheba, Ne quid
respub. detrimenti capiat. Certainly, if he had but a small Barge to manage,
and a handful of men to guide, a few eyes, and the same his own, might serve
the turn: but now a great vessel, even a Galliasse, or rather Galliasses are
committed to his charge, therefore he had need of more eyes than his own,
though he should have not only an eye upon his Scepter, (which was the devise
or Emblem of the Kings of Egypt,) but also seven eyes upon one stone, as it is
in Zecharie, and seven eyes like the Lamb, as it is in the Revelation.
Counselors therefore, Zechar. 3. Revel. 5.
Lieutenants, Rulers, Magistrates, men of worth, men fearing God, and hating
covetousness, as Moses speaks, are necessary every where: where these are
sufficient and faithful, there all things are carried well, whether the King
be stirring or at his rest: but if these any where should either be ignorant
and insufficient, according to the saying of the Prophet, Who is blind as my
servant? etc. or corrupt and unfaithful, Esai 42.
according to the saying of the same Prophet in the same place, Seeing many
things, but thou obseruest them not. There the complaint of Dioclesian would
soon be taken up, Vopiscus.
Bonus, cautus optimus, venditur Imperator, that is, The good Emperor, yea,
the exceeding good Emperor for all his wariness is sold by them. But as
Christ says in the Gospel, Blessed are your eyes, for they see, etc. So we of
this Land have cause to bless God, Matthew. 13.
and think our selves most blessed, in that God has given us a King after his
own heart, and after our own heart, who does rule with wisdom, and govern
with Counsel, who sitting in the Throne of Judgment by himself, and by
others, does with the eyes of Majesty, gravity, severity, clemency, prudence in
himself, and of circumspection and vigilance in others his Delegates, so
scatter away the evil of public scandal and enormity, out of Church and
Commonweal, what by preventing them, that they grow not unto a head, what by
cutting them off, when they are grown, that there is great hope in the mercies
of God in Christ, that the evil of public calamity will be blown away, and
scattered from us long and, even unto many generations. This God the Father
grant for Jesus Christ's sake; to whom with the holy Ghost, be honor and glory
for ever, Amen.

A SERMON UPON THE THIRTEENTH TO THE ROMANS. THE THIRTEENTH SERMON.
ROMANS 13. verse 3. Rulers are not a terror to good works but to the evil.


AS Saint Paul says of himself, that he was in a straight between two,
having a desire to depart and to be with Christ, Phil. 1.
which was best of all; and having again an inclination to abide in the flesh
for the good of the Saints: So I can say truly, that I stuck much and
staggered at the first, whether it were fit for me to show my self in this
place at this time or no. Certainly it were great pity, (and argues but
small charity) for a man, then to deny his voice unto the Church, when in all
likelihood he may do it most good; (...), that is, Eur^p. H^^ub.
Let two men make a speech tending to one purpose, the one of them being young
or obscure, the other a man of years and of place, though their speeches
should be never so like one to the other, yet they will not make the same
impression, nor work the like effect. Therefore the Learned know, that in a
City of Greece, when a base bad fellow made a good motion, which imported
greatly the public, there stepped forth a bold plain man, and advised that a
man of credit should take the word out of his mouth and urge it, that so it
might find the better acceptance. This therefore was a motive to me one way, in
respect of my years and place, on the other side, we have this treasure in
earthen vessels, 1 Cor. 4. Hieronym. ad Furiam.
(even the best of us have so,) and as Hierome says, Velimus, Nolimus,
senescimus, age steals upon us and begrayeth our head; so the infirmities of
age do likewise attend us, nay accompany us, and grievously beset us; Hereupon
it comes to pass, that one complains of the want of voice, another of
memory, another of pregnancy, all of vigor and spirits, Virgil. aeneid^ 2.
Sic fatus senior telumque imbelle sine ictu Coniicit, The old man threw a
dart, it had been as good he had thrown a kecke or a straw, Hom. (...).
(...), Your strength is decayed now, you are not the same that you were; Now
in this case, were it not better to avoid blame, than to deprecate it, as a
wise Roman once told one? In the primitive time Prelates were so far from
deprecating or excusing their boldness to preach, Cato Mayor.
that contrariwise some of them took it offensiuely, if any offered to preach
in their presence. But what were their preachings? surely, rather confessions
of their faith, to show that they were Orthodox, than labored dis^ourses, to
make demonstration of their learning and eloquence. In the later corrupt times
under Antichrist, they took a shorter and an easier course, when they came to a
Cathedral out of their Diocese, they did not seek by sermoning or preaching
to give their consent to the doctrine there established, but gate leave to say
Mass at the high Altar, which cost them but a little pains, and which many of
their grooms could do as well as themselves. Dixit adhuc aliquid? nil sane;
quid placet ergo? Lana Tarentino violas imitata veneno, that is, Did he make
any speech? No, What did ye like in him then? He had a goodly gaudy Robe.
This was not Honorificare Ministerium, but ( Se, Bernard.
) which Bernard by all means condemns. Well, in this distraction, and
mismaze, I think the middle-way to be the best way, that we neither venture too
far, or too often, lest we be taken tardy, and lest it should be said of us, as
it is in the Gospel; This man began to build, Luke 14.
but could not go forward, nor yet be too long silent, lest we should seem to
have forgotten our first love, Revel. 2.
as it is in the Revelation, and lest the younger sort take example, nay
warrantize from us to slack their pains. For a man of place, if he offend,
commits a double offense, by fault, and default, that is one way, and the
same an hurt to himself: Again, by the hurt he does unto others by his ill
president. This is enough and too much for a Preface* For my Text, it
contains briefly, an answer to a secret objection that might be made. The
Apostle had said before, even in the last words, that went before my Text; that
they that resist the power, shall receive unto themselves damnation. Now
hereupon some might infer, (as flesh and blood is apt to wrangle,) What? and
must we then, vltro os praebere, must we give our backs to the smiters, and our
cheeks to the nippers, as Esaias speaks; must we suffer our selves to be led as
an Ox to the slaughter, and as a fool to the stocks, as it (...) in the
Proverbs? Why have we arms given us, Proverb. 7.
if we may not lift them up to defend our selves? Why eyes, and feet, but to
espy the danger, and to avoid it? If the case be such between the Magistrate
and the inferior, it is no matter how soon we be out of the world, praestat
semel mori quam semper mori. Thus some whom S. Paul thus coldly, and mildly
answers in my Text. The matter is not so difficult as you think, neither the
remedy so far off, if you would look about you; It is not in heaven, that you
should say, who shall ascend thither and fetch it us, neither is it beyond the
Sea, that you should say, who shall bring it us thence? But what says the
Scripture, The Word is very near unto us, we may help our selves, and save
our skins if we will. Do well, embrace holiness, purity, righteousness,
keep your selves innocent from the great offenses, free from presumptuous
sins. Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, obedience, honor, fear,
etc. then there is no danger nor fear. Rulers are not fearful to them that
do well, but to them that do ill. To this effect speaks Saint Paul in my
Text; Agreeable to that which Saint Peter has, Who is he that will harm you,
if ye be followers of that which is good? 1 Pet. 3.
My method shall be this, First, I will consider with you, what Rulers be here
meant? Secondly, to what persons, and for what causes they be fearful.
Touching the first; Some Romanists will have no way but that Saint Paul
speaking of Rulers and Powers, as he does here in this Chapter, does comprehend
not only Civil but Ecclesiastical Rulers: Even such as the Apostle speaks
of 13. Helr. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for
they watch for your souls, as they that must give account, Hebr. 13.
but herein I make no doubt but they are deceived. First, Chrysostom,
Chrysostom.
(to whom themselves attribute much, and indeed he deserves respect from all,)
commenting upon this place of Saint Paul, ranketh Ecclesiastikes, even the
greatest of them, among them that are to yield obedience to the Higher powers:
therefore themselves cannot be the Higher powers here meant: For as no man can
be father and son in one respect, no more can he be Superior and inferior.
Now Chrysostomes words be these: Though thou be an Apostle, though an
Evangelist, though a Prophet, (...), that is, Yea, whosoever thou art, thou
must be obedient to the Higher powers. He adds a reason, for obedience does
not overthrow piety, that is, It is no disgrace to the highest degree in the
Church, to yield obedience to the Prince, and to his authority, to this effect
Chrysostom, out of whose words we may conclude thus with Bernard: Bernard.
If an Apostle must be subject, then the Apostolic, he I mean of Rome, that
claims from the Apostle Peter, he must be subject much rather, for Peter
could not leave to his Successor a higher and freer estate than he had
himself; But this he left unto him, Solicitudinem Ecclesiarum, as the same
Bernard says, a care for the Church. Bernard is bold, and adds, Planum est
Apostolis interdicitur dominatus, that is, It is evident, the Apostles are
forbidden to domineere. Go your ways therefore and usurp unto your self,
Bernard. 2. d^ considerat.
being a Successor of the Apostle, a Lordly domineering; you must leave one of
them, either Lordlinesse, or Apostolickenesse, you may not use both. Thus
Bernard* But we have a greater testimony than of Bernard, or of Chrysostom
either, the very letter of my Text, if you look unto it thoroughly, does
plainly euict, that the Apostle speaks precise^y of the obedience that is
due to the Civil Magistrate. Hilarie has a good rule, Dictorum intelligentia,
aut ex praeposilis, aut ex consequentibus expectetur, Hilar. 9. de Trin.
that is, The meaning of Texts of Scripture ought to be gathered, either from
that which went before, or from that that follows after; and to like purpose
speak the Rabbis, He that takes upon him to interpret a place in the
Scripture, and does not mark Mah tegamalah, umah lemattah, that is, What is
above, and what is below, he peruerteth the words of the living God. What is
above ye have seen already, and ye have heard the Collection of Chrysostom,
and of Bernard, namely, that subjection from the Highest Minister of the
Church, without any exemption, or privilege for them at Rome is required. Now
the same appears more plain by that which follows. For does not the
Apostle make it manifest in the fourth verse, that he speaks of that Ruler
that bears the Sword? Now to whom does that belong? does it belong to any but
to the Civil Ruler? Indeed Boniface the eighth, he flourished, and braued it
with his, Ecce duo gladij, Behold here are two swords, said Peter, therefore
said Boniface, I am the highest Prince, not only the highest Priest, Emperor
at the least, specially in the vacancy. Also John Archbishop of Millaine,
showed himself with a Cross in one hand, and a Sword in the other, as though
it belonged to him to play Rex, and to play the warrior; but indeed these were
exorbitances, and enormities from the prescript of Christ, M^tth. 19. 2 Cor.
1^. 2 Cor. 1^. Ephesians. 6. Heb^. 4.
from the beginning it was not so: They should have remembered that the weapons
of our warfare are not carnal, yet mighty through God, to the pulling down of
strong holds, etc. and the sword that they should have taken, was the sword of
the Spirit, the Word of God, which enters in, to the dividing asunder of the
soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, etc. This would better become
the Successor or follower of Peter, that was bid by his Lord to put up the
material sword into his sheath. But we may say unto him as Bernard said to one
of his predecessors, In his successisti non Petro, sed Constantino, that is, In
these things you show your self not the Successor of Peter, but of
Constantine. This therefore is one reason, whereby we may prove the Civil
Ruler precisely to be meant, for that he is said to bear the Sword. Another,
and the same a strong one, may be gathered out of the sixth verse, where the
paying of Tribute is mentioned. Now Tribute is not due to any but to them that
have Iura Regalia, which no Churchman ever could claim by virtue of his
Priesthood, or Father-hood either. There was once in England a young Earl
made of an old Bishop, which same had Palatine power, which was little less
than Regal; but he could not say as Saint Paul says, I was freeborne; But as
the Heathen Captain said there, Act. 2^.
with a great sum obtained I this freedom. So in the days of the Conqueror
and his sons, Kings here: The man of Rome claimed Tribute from hence, because
(forsooth) some of his Predecessors had Peter Pence from hence; but he was
answered, that alms, and benevolence was one thing, Fealty and Tribute,
another thing: If he would have more than Charity, he deserved to have even
that taken from him. The truth is, that at the first, the Church had for her
maintenance, (...), and (...), that is, Beneuolences and Collections.
Afterward, when Emperors and Kings embra^ed the faith, they were made
partakers of the good things of the Land with the rest of their subjects, and
before many of them, and by name they were endowed with Tithes, and Glebes,
yea, and Lordships also in Francke-alme, which they might claim and sue for as
their dues, and so they did from time to time, and recovered: but Tribute,
Custom, fear, honor, (vassalish-feare, vassalish-honour,) those belong
properly, originally, fundamently, only to Soueraignety. So then, having
proved sufficiently, that by Rulers in my Text, Civil Rulers are precisely
meant, let us see more distinctly and particularly, what kind of Civil Rulers
they be, that be meant. Tertullian in his book against Hermogenes, adoreth the
fullness of the Scripture: and so he might, for therein all things are found,
Quae continent fidem moresque vi^endi, that is, August. de doct. Christ.
Which contain faith and manners, etc. Chrysostom maruaileth at the
discretion of the woman of Canaan, for that neglecting to make the Apostles her
spokesmen, she pressed forward, and petitioned Christ himself. For how many
do forsake Christ, the Fountain of living water, and dig unto themselves
pits, Ierem. 2.
broken pits that will hold no water? I mean, how many do seek help of
He-Saints and She-Saints, who if they were alive, would be angry with them for
seeking their intercession, as though Christ sitting at the right hand of God,
and making intercession for us, were not able enough, and as though being
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, and crying all day long, Behold
me, Behold me, as it is in the Prophet; And, Come unto me all ye that labor
and are laden, Esaias 65. Math. 11.
as it is in the Gospel, he were not propense enough of himself to relieve
us. For my part, I profess, that I stand here admi^abundus, and adorabundus,
to consider how wisely, fully, and cautelously the Apostle bears himself in
his teaching, and phrasing, both in this verse, and that which went before. If
he had said, Let every soul be subject to the Emperor, (and that, no question
was a special part of his meaning,) then he might have been thought, not to
have provided for those which lived then, or might live hereafter, under other
kinds of Sovereigns, as Toparches, Terrarches, Monarchs, and in popular
States; therefore he speaks in the abstract, [ Higher Powers.] That the
Exhortation might reach to the chief Rulers in all ages and Countries. Again,
if he had named the Dignity and calling only, [ Higher Powers,] and not spoken
at all in the Concrete, Rulers, Ministers of God, Reuengers, etc. then humorous
fellows might cavil, that little or nothing were due to the persons of the
Magistrates, whatsoever were due to their calling (as at this day, some law
less fellows stick not to say, Put your Office aside, I am as good your
self:) Therefore as he calls them before, Powers, so here he thinks good
to call them Rulers, which comes to the same effect. Only this I must tell
you, that some very probably do here restrain the word to inferior
Magistrates, that bear ^ule and use the sword by Commission from the Highest.
Indeed the Syriack Paraphraste translateth the word (...), in my Text, by
Daiinei, that is, Judges, and so does the Arabicke too, by Al-chacam, Judges:
The original whereof signifies, Wisdom and Learning, wherewith Judges are
generally supposed to be furnished. So they as S. Paul says out of the Law;
that out of the mouth of two or three witnesses, 2 Cor. 13.
every word shall be established: So since we have the judgment of two kinds
of Learned men, (that I may not say two Churches, the Syriacke, and the
Arabick^,) that by Rulers, Judges are here meant, I think my self
sufficiently warranted to apply my Text, and to peculiarize my speech to this
Honorable Assembly. To proceed therefore, you know it was said in old time,
What is a Magistrate else, but a speaking Law? Again, What is the Law else,
but a dumb Magistrate? It is even so; if the Magistrate were always skillful
and upright, there were but small use of Law; Again, if the Law were as
active, as it is equal, (being made by common consent, and upon mature
deliberation,) there were no great need of Magistrates. Therefore these things,
be marvelous equally and profitably tempered, that both the Magistrate must
consult the Law for direction, and again, The Law must crave aid of the
Magistrate for execution. Ho^ace.
-- Alterius sic Altera poscit opem res, and coniurat amice. The necessity of
Magistracy appears hereby, that it was ouer-ruled long ago, (even in Nerva
his time) that it is better to live in an Estate where the least offense, or
the apparency of offense, is punished most rigorously, than under such a one
where a man might do what he would without fear of punishment. For
rigorousnesse or Tyranny is but like a tempest or whirlewind, that throws
down here and there a fruitful tree, and here and there peradventure a great
tree, but confusion, or Anarchy like a deluge sweepeth all away, all the
increase of the earth, and all the increase of Cattle, and depopulateth whole
Towns and Countries. Saint Paul says, Who planteth a Vineyard, and eats not
of the fruit thereof? 1 Cor. 9.
or who feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of the flock? Again, He
that sows, sows in hope, and be that thresheth, thresheth in hope, that he
may be partaker of his hope. It is not so where there be no Magistrates, for
there the Proverb is fulfilled, that is extant, John 4. That one sows, and
another reapeth; And there the Amalekites, I mean irregular and unthrifty
persons, children of Belial, they lie upon the Land like Grasse-hoppers for
multitude, and eat up every green thing, and whatsoever is for sustenance, as
it is in the 6. of Judges, or like the Sabeans, Job 1. Judge 6. Job 1.
They drive away our Oxen, even when they be at the plowe, and our Asses as
they are feeding. Therefore blessed be God for Laws, which are the rule of
Justice, and blessed be God for Magistrates, (Judges by name) which are
administers of the Law, for by their help we enjoy or recover every man his
own, and dwell in safety under our Vines and Fig Trees, from Dan to
Beer-sheba, from one end of the Land unto the other, as in the days of
Solomon. But on the contrary side, where there be (...) only, stragglers, here
to day, and away to morrow, where no man hearkneth to another, and no man
cares for another, as it is in the Tragedy; there Viuitur ex rapto non hospes
ab hospite tutus. There by lying, and swearing, and killing, and whoring, Oui^.
Hos. 4.
and stealing, they break forth and blood touches blood, yea, there truth
fails, and he that refraineth himself, makes himself a prey, as it is in
Esaias. Esaias 59.
The necessity therefore that we stand in to have Judges, being so great, and
the commodity we reap by them being so singular, how beautiful upon the
mountains ought their very feet to be that bring tidings of their coming, and
with what alacrity should we receive them, even as Angels of God, at the
leastwise, as the Deputies of our great King? What if they have ready the
vengeance against all wilful and obstinate disobedience? yet unto the godly
they appear, tanquam sidus salutare, as a comfortable star, and will help
such to right that suffer wrong. What if they have in one hand a cup of
trembling, the dregs whereof they cause the wicked of the Land to drink off,
and sup up; yet in the other, they have Manna, and a white stone, and of the
fruit of the Tree of life, that is in the midst of the garden, Revel. 2.
(as it is in the Reave.) and the same they reach forth unto the innocent, and
will not suffer a hair of their head to perish? And can such men be terrible
unto any? they are not, but only to those whom their own conscience does
first terrify. Iu^enal.
-- Prima est haec vltio, quod se Iudice nemo nocens absoluitur, that is, This
is the first torment that evil members do suffer, that their own conscience
does first scarre them, and set before them the things that they have done: and
then you know what Saint John says: If our heart (or conscience) condemn us,
1 John 3. 1 Cor. 4.
God is greater than our heart, and knows all things, and Saint Paul, God
brings to light the hidden things of darkness, and makes manifest the
Counsels of the heart, and then every man has praise of God, (1 Cor. 4.) It is
meant, every man that does well has praise of God. It is written of
Alcibiades, that hearing, that a shrewd indictment was framed against him,
(when he was abroad in the service of his Country,) he betook himself to his
heels, and being encountered and demanded by a friend of his, What he meant to
shame himself and wrong his Country? Will ye not, said he, commend your cause
to your Country, and trust it? Indeed, (said Alcibiades,) I Will trust it far;
but when my life lies upon the stake, I will trust neither (...), nor (...)
neither, neither my native Country, nor my natural mother, lest in stead of a
white Counter, she should cast a black-one into the bag, and so help to cast
me away. Alcibiades, though he had been much honester than he was, yet might
misdoubt the sequel of a trial in Athens, where the state was popular, and
where matters were carried many times rather according unto passion, than
according unto merit. Manus sustulerunt, Psephisma natum est, and then away
with him, away with him. So the worthy Roman Orator, Cicer^.
that had made his Country as much bound unto him, for saving it from
destruction, as himself was bound to his Country for his breeding and bringing
up, might well be allowed to flee out of it, when his capital enemy ruled the
roast, and was Tribune: (the Tribunes of Rome being of that Sovereign
authority, that agreeing together, they might command the death of the greatest
and most Peerless Peer, as appears by Pliny, lib. 7. cap. 45. Pli^. li.
7. ca. 45.
where he speaks of Metellus Macedonicus. This was a pitiful Estate, where
they that were appointed for the safeguard and protection of the virtuous,
proved many of them, authors of their bane and ruin. But yet it was not so bad
as under Marius, when he returned from banishment: for being attended and
accompanied by a company of Cutthroats, he gave them this watchword, that
whomsoever he spoke not unto, or nodded at least, when he met him, they should
repute him for an enemy, and kill him without mercy or judgment. Who would
care to live under such a government, where living never so well, his life
might so easily, and so wrongfully be taken from him? This may move us,
beloved, to bless God for our times, for our godly Governors, for our wise
Governors, under whom, if they may have their will, nothing but a man's own
offense can condemn him. If they may have their will, I say, for sometimes
there arise up false witnesses, which depose things they know not, and which
were nothing so, and so bring a true man to his end. 1 Reg. 21.
Was not Naboth the Iezrelite overthrown by such a practice, 1 Reg. 21? Was
not Stephen by the like, Acts 6.7? I forbear to recite Athanasius, and
Narcissus with many other out of the Ecclesiastike Story, which were some of
them brought unto their death, other-some endangered by false witnesses. There
is scarcely any that hears me this day, so void of experience, or so young,
but he has heard of some that suffered for a supposed offense, which not they
but others had committed, and confessed so much at their end elsewhere. This
is much to be lamented, but cannot by any means be remedyed for that which is
past, nor prevented for the time to come, except there were a Law made, that
whosoever, either by forswearing himself, or procuring others to do the like,
shall be the cause of death to an innocent man, shall suffer the punishment
that he brought upon the other. This is that which is expressly commanded,
Deuteronomy. 19. Life shall go for life, eye for eye, etc. where he speaks of the
punishment due unto false witnesses. Deuteronomy. 19.
I read that in Tenedos, (a small Island, but there was sharp Justice, it
appears,) there was a Law, or Custom as strong as Law, that he that accused
another of a capital crime, should have a naked Axe holden over his head,
wherewith he was to be beheaded, if he did not prove his accusation. Now this
was very hard, that it should be death to accuse one wrongfully; for it is
necessary that there be accusers in a State, that they which be perfect may be
known, and they that are faulty, may be found out; as it is very behoouefull
that there be dogs about a house to give warning of thieves, or suspected
persons; yet as these, if they catch a true man by the bosom, deserve not
only to be rebuked, but also to be banged, yea, and to have their legs broken:
so it is not unjust, that the very accusing of a righteous man, if it be
prosecuted with eagerness, and upon no probable ground, should be chastized,
and fined deeply; but now when a man shall advisedly and maliciously forswear
himself, and procure perjury from others, to compass and procure the death of
the innocent, (whereby the said innocent perishes,) then methinkes it were
pity, that he that was the author of death unto another, should himself suffer
less than death: for he comes within the compass of the eternal Law of
God, mentioned in Genesis, He that sheadeth man's blood, by man shall his blood
be shed. Genes. 9.
(By man? By what man? A private man? No, but, gnal meimar daijanaija, that is,
By the word or commandment of the Judges, as the Chaldy Paraphrast does rightly
understand it,) and it is the voice of nature, (...), If a man suffer according
to that which he has done, much good may it do him. Thus much Adoni-bezeck, a
man out of the Church, Judges 1.
confessed, Judges 1. that is, As I did to others, so God has requited me, I
cut from others their thumbes and great toes, and therefore I am justly served
to have mine cut off. And therefore no marvel if Samuel told Agag; 1 Samuel 15.
As thy sword has made women childlesse, so shall thy mother be childelesse
among women. This then is one mean to make Rulers, even good Rulers to be
fearful, even to well-doers, because they may be carried away by false
oa^hes: Another way to make them fearful, is, when he that is accused, is a
plain simple man, and cannot speak for himself, and his accuser has a
shrewd head, and an ungracious tongue, wherewith he is so potent, that he is
able to make that which is false, probable, and that which is probable,
necessary; and consequently bear down his adversary ((...)) that is, An
eloquent man will make one that is faultlesse, seem to be faulty. Now what is
to be done in this case? I know, that the Law does not allow him that is
questioned for his life, either Advocate, or Counselor; for it is presumed,
that innocence, even alone, is hard enough for a hundred oppugners; And indeed
Plutarch affirms (...), that is, That which is just, cannot be overcome: but
yet he adds in the same place (...), that is, if it be well pleaded. Now
then, if a man standing by should step forth, and say, I saw this man so many
score miles off from the place wh^re, and when the deed should be done,
therefore he cannot be the offender. If, I say, he should allege this, or the
like circumstance being grounded upon truth, should this man be challenged as
speaking against the King? I trow no. He does not speak against the King, that
speaks for his true subject: but he speaks against the King, that would
have his true subject to be hanged. Tully auerreth, that he that was seven
hundred miles off, two days before the thing was done in Rome, could not
possibly be present at the doing of it. This went for a good plea then, and
carried. And truly, if any man at any time shall know so much, or to the like
effect, for the justifying of him that stands at the Bar, as he is bound in
conscience to reveal it, (for this is to open the mouth for the dumb,
Proverb. 31.
as Solomon speaks,) so I make no doubt, but the Reverend Judges would gladly
hear him, and allow him. Thirdly, there is another mean to make Judges
terrible, even to good men, when one either corrupted by money, or bearing a
secret malice unto a prisoner, finds means to be one of the Jury, and the
prisoner suspecting nothing, does not challenge him; now this is Ouem Lupo, as
they say, for the Iuror craftily crept in, makes a vow with himself either to
hang the prisoner, or to starve his fellow Jurors, at leastwise, to weary them,
and to make them dance attendance after the Judges into another County: This is
hard, but I think it is not rare, for my self have heard one confess, that
being unequally yoked with a tugger, he was feign full sore against his will,
to bring in an innocent man guilty, for fear of some mischief toward
himself. It was weakly done by him, to yield at last; for where is fortitude,
and the patience of Saints, but to stand for Truth and Justice, even unto
death? Blessed are the dead that die so, for no question they die in the Lord.
But yet this shows what men be, if the Judge do not carry an eye and a hand
over them. It is certainly the extremity of iniquity to vow the destruction
of the guiltless: and who can promise himself security, if such kind of
persons be not looked unto and weeded out? By such Bonus, cautus, opt^mus,
venditur Imperator, the Judge though he be pious, and prudent is bought and
sold, and made partaker of other men's sins, nay, the executioner of the
malice of the wicked upon the the innocent, except he repriue them: And so I
make no doubt, but you, my Lord, do upon the least suspicion of foul play;
and this is your honor before all men, that you are not swift to shead blood.
Plutarch writes of Marius, (of whom I spoke before) that when he heard his
adversary Anthony was taken, he clapped his hands for joy, and could hardly be
restrained from leaping from the table where he sat at supper, to see
execution done in his own sight. The like is written of Nero, that he showed
himself joyful, when he heard of the breaking of his Laws, because then he
had both matter for his cruelty to work upon, and means to fill his coffers
by confiscation. To be short, the like is written of Caligula, that other
monster, that because he would have his Edicts violated, he caused them to be
set up in dark by-corners, where they could hardly be seen, and to be written
minutissimis literis, in the smallest glosing hand, that they could hardly be
read, that so men might be ensnared at unawares. Bl^ody men which were desirous
to have that done, which if they had had ought of humanity in them, they would
have studied to have prevented that it might not have been done! But they have
received the wages of their cruelty, even in this world, for their name is
become a wonderment and a Proverb, and an hissing, even unto all generations.
On the other side, they that have been merciful, have left a good memory
behind them, and all men speak of their praise, yea, though they were
otherwise defective and faulty. Claudius was a weak man, (More foolish than my
son Claudius, his mother used it as a Proverb, when he was a private man:
and afterward his inconsideration ((...), is much taxed,) yet how is the
clemency he showed to one Titus Iunius remembered? This Titus Iunius, (belike
some decayed Nobleman,) being amongst the guests that the Emperor had, (as he
usually had many,) and supping at his Table, either at, or after supper, Tacit.
annal. lib. 17.
slily conueyes away a piece of plate; the Emperor observed it, or was made
acquainted with it, yet would have nothing said unto him then, but the next
time when he came, when all the other guests were served in plate, he caused
him to be served in earthen-ware, and thus he was judged of all, and rebuked of
all, and this was all the punishment he suffered. So they that know Story, know
that Gallienus was a bad man, and a worse Governor, yet an act of clemency
that he did, gat him much love, and covered many of his vices. The act of
clemency was this: There was one that sold unto his Lady a counterfeit jewel,
instead of a jewel of great price, and so coozened her of much money, she
complains to the Emperor, and will have the Law executed in all rigor; to
make the matter short, he seems to give way, and commands the offender to be
carried toward the Lions den, and when he looked for nothing but death, and
that a cruel one, by the teeth of a Lion; Behold in stead of a Lion rampant,
there was let forth a Capon, and all men maruelling at it; the Crier was ready
to proclaim, Impostur am fecit and passus est, Behold, the reward of a
coozener, he coozened others, and now he is coozened himself, he was made to
believe that he should die the death, and now he is suffered to live, and has
a Capon for his supper. This one fact of Gallienus purchased unto him exceeding
much good will and great honor, and this shows that nothing is better
pleasing unto men, (if they be not turned savage) than clemency. On the other
side, let a man have never so many virtues, yet if he be severe, too severe, he
may be feared, but he will never be loved, no, nor much honored neither.
Aurelian may be an example hereof, who for all his valor and prowess, wherein
he did excel all the men of his time, got in the end, but this dry cold
commendation, that he was a Prince rather necessary than good: What then, do I
speak against Justice, which is the strength and Bulwarcke of a Commonweal?
No, nor against severity neither, that is to say, straight Justice, which is
sometimes necessary: but against whom? against them that are frozen in their
dregs, Zephan. that is, curded or thickened upon their lees.
and seem to say in their hearts, the Lord will do neither good, nor evil,
that is, against Atheists; against them that enter into houses, and carry away
captive men and women laden with sin, and reconcile them to a Foreign Power,
whereby they overthrow not only the faith of many, but also their Allegiance,
that is, against treacherous seducers. Thirdly, against them that have been
before you twice or thrice before, and have proceeded from bad to worse, from
pilfering to robbing, from robbing to killing, etc. against these there is no
Law too sharp, and concerning them you may say as Hieronyme writes to Amandus,
Hieron. Amand^.
Non parcimus, vt parcamus, saeuimus vt misereamur, that is, We do not spare
these that we may spare the Commonweal, we show no mercy unto these, that we
may show mercy unto the Commonweal. And as Solomon said of Ioab, 1 Kings 1.
who had killed two men one after another, and both of them better than
himself, His blood be upon his own head, I and my fathers house are
guiltless; Or as the same Solomon said unto Shemei in effect; Ibid.
Thou know I pardoned thee once before, when thou did villanously abuse my
father, (this because my father would have it so,) Thou know that I did
straightly charge thee, that thou should not go out of Jerusalem; Why then
did thou not take warning? Why have thou not kept the oath of the Lord, and
the commandment which I laid upon thee? Go^ Officer, fall upon him, and kill
him. Who can deny, but the condemnation of these men was just? So was also
Adoniah his, 1 Kings 2.
who having been pardoned for his ambitious and seditious practices before,
fell into the like offense again, and so received the wages of his iniquity?
But now when a man is overtaken with a fault, (as the Apostle speaks,) and
offends by infirmity, not with a high hand, as Moses speaks; that is not
(...) arrogantly, presumptuously, Gal. 6. Number. 15.
(as Shelomoh expounds it) not (...) with an uncovered face, that is,
impudently, (as Onkel^s takes it,) I say, when a poor David, as it were,
would borrow a sheep of carlish Nabal, that would be loath to give him a
sheepes-head to save his life, and the lives of his hunger-bitten children: I
grant theft, is theft by whomsoever it is committed, 2 Thessalonians. 3.
and every one should eat his own bread, and they that cannot dig, should
not be ashamed to beg, and if one will not give, another will peradventure; but
yet the belly is an unruly evil, (as Saint James says of the tongue,) and it
is (...), a pernicious evil, that forces a man to remember it whether he will
or no, James 3. Odyss. 11. Job 1.
as Homer says: And skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give
for his life; the Devil himself confessed. Now in this case of necessity,
Saul was cruel, that would have Jonathan put to death, 1 Samuel 14.
for taking a little honey upon the point of his Spear, when he was ready to
faint, 1 Samuel 14.
1 Samuel 14. and men do not despise a Thief, that steals to satisfy his
soul because he is hungry, as Solomon says, Prouer. 6.
Proverbs 6. In my conscience I am persuaded, that whomsoever your Honors
forgive upon these terms, the King forgiueth, and whomsoever the King
forgiueth, God forgiueth, yea, and God will forgive you the rather, for
forgiving. O, but the Law is against it, and Judges are but the mouths and
interpreters of the Law; and as the great Warrior writes, Aliae sunt parts
Imperatoris, Caesar.
aliae Legati, that is, The General may do that, which the greatest Officer
under him cannot; So Judges are tied to the prescript of the Law, and mercy
they must leave to the Sovereign. I answer, that if the King has prescribed
them a straight observing of the letter, and have left nothing to their godly
discretion, and conscionable consideration, than I have no more to say; they
are tied by their Allegiance to yield absolute obedience. Obedience in this
case is better then sacrifice, 1 Samuel 15.
yea, better than mercy it self, which is the best sacrifice. Otherwise, if
the King say thus unto you, I have appointed you in my place, to minister
Justice unto my people, and you may meet with many circumstances, which the Law
that is general cannot provide for; look what your heart tells you, that my
self would do if I were there in person, that stick not to do, I will allow
you, or excuse you; then me thinks you have your Dormant-warrant, as it were,
and then you shall please better in losing a point of the Law, than in
straining it too hard. This is true, that as the Magistrate must be very
unwilling to draw blood, (like as the Physician proceeds unwillingly, ad
vrendum and secandum, that is, To use the hot-iron or the knife,) so he must
always beware, lest the complaint of Lucan be taken up against him, Lucan.
Excessit medicina modum; The purgation was too strong, he drew too many ounces
of blood from the patient. Oh, that it might be many times said of a Circuit,
which was once said of Archidamus his victory, yea, of Alexander Seuerus his
Reign, that it was (...), without shedding of blood. The cause hereof is not
want of bowels in the Judges, who, I persuade my self, desire to be merciful,
as their heavenly Father is merciful, and do bleed inwardly, when they are to
give Sentence, with such commiseration, as God shows himself to have, Hos.
11. Esai 27.
Hos. 11. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, Israel?
how shall I make thee as Admah? And in Esaias 27. Who will set the briars and
thorns against me in battle? So the Judges speak, Oh that our Sentence
tended to the destruction of things without life, or at the most of dumb
creatures, and not of reasonable creatures, Act. 1^
made of the same blood that we are, and partakers with us of the heavenly
calling! But how then can the Commonweal be vpholden? for thus it must be,
exemplary Justice must be showed, or else all will go to havoc. Thus they
complain, and therefore the fault is not in them, that their Circuit is not
without blood, but the fault is in the multitude and heinousness of offenses,
which makes them against their will to charge and command, as the Roman did
in old time; I, Lictor, colliga manus, caput obnubito, infelici arbori
suspendito; yea, and this makes them that are condemned, many of them, to
confess as the Poet did, Ipsaque delictis victa est Clementia nostris: Our
offenses were of that nature, that clemency it self could not pardon them.
Nothing in a manner can be required or desired either of the good Judges of
this tim^ and namely, of these before whom I speak, except it should (...)
this, 2 Cor. 6.
(See how my mouth is open unto you, how my heart is enlarged, as Saint Paul
speaks) namely, that you would not suffer any to suffer death, whom their
book, if they could read, would save. For how few offenses be now left to the
benefit of the book? not Treason, or petite-treason, (God forbid they should,)
or murder, or stabbe, or rape, or burglary, or robbery, or horse or
mare-stealing, or purse-cutting, or picking, or any such grievous or odious
crime; only for the stealing of Ox or Cow, which cannot be driven far; or
of pigge, or sheep, which be but little worth; for these and such
petite-matters, they may have their book, yea, and they can have their book
but once in their lives neither; if they offend again, they die without mercy.
And shall the committing of a small offense, and the committing of it but once,
bring destruction upon a penitent person, that peradventure has wife and
children? and all, because he cannot read, which was not his fault, but his
parents, and which now if he could do, were to no purpose? for as the King of
Gath said, Have I need of mad men? so we may say, 1 Samuel 21.
Has the Church need of Stigmaticks, of such as have been burnt in the hand?
Ratio legis, anima legis, the reason, why a Law was made, that is the soul of
the Law, when the reason cease, the Law may be spared. In the former
Martial times, when every man Hebr. Stood, gnamadiem.
leaned upon his sword, as the Prophet speaks; Ezec. 33.26.
and bookishnesse was counted cowardlinesse, (as it is also at this day in many
parts of Turkey,) there was some reason to grant some privilege or immunity,
to such as showed any desire to be learned, to the end that learning might be
more generally embraced. But now the case is altered, there is not so much
doubt, lest too few should put their hand to this plow, as lest too many, and
the people are rather to be restrained from offering their sons to the
Church, Exodus 36.
(as Moses put back many of the peoples offerings for the Tabernacle, Exodus
36.) than to be incited forward: therefore they that are thought worthy to live
by their book, it is pity but they should live even without the book. So might
the Ordinary be eased of his duty of attendance, (which at the first, as it
seems to me, was voluntary, if he lusted, he might challenge for the Church,
but now is made necessary, and the neglect finable some-where,) but specially,
so might his Deputy be discharged from the sin of untruth, for calling evil,
good; a bad reader, a good reader; which he must be feign to do sometimes, or
else he will be called as Moses was by his wife, Exodus 4.
a bloody man, a bloody husband. But this can hardly be done without a
Parliament, I believe verily; yea, and I believe this too, that no man would
do it more willingly than your Lordship, if you had warrant for it; but now
until you have warrant by Parliament or otherwise, I hope I shall not offend,
if I request you, (and indeed I do request you,) to hold on your charitable
course of repriuing, yea, and to increase therein, even to repriue all such
that might be saved by their books, (if they could read.) Now whereas it is
objected that once in the Jail, and never good again, there they learn to be
their perfect craftsmasters in all kinds of lewdness and villainy, yea, by this
means the Country would be charged with keeping them, that is ouer-charged
already; I answer briefly, and for the former point touching their
incorrigiblenesse, this, Hebr. 6.
that I hope for better things, and things that accompany salvation, howsoever
some speak to the contrary. When I find in Saint Paul, Philemon.
that One simus a runne-agate, and unprofitable, became afterward profitable
to his master and to others, yea became a faithful Minister, (if the report be
true in the Canons of the Apostles, Can. 31.) When I find that Marie
Magdalene, Luke 8.
which had been possessed of seven Devils, (seven, that is, many, and many:
Devils; that is, foul vices, whereof the Devil was the instiller, and
perswader,) to become Christ's Oastesse, nay, Disciple, and to have a special
praise in the Gospel; Briefly, when I find the domestickes of Narcissus,
(Narcissus, as bad a man, and as odious, as any lived in his time,) who in all
likelihood were most impure, and abominable, seeing, and learning such things
of their master, who were most shameful, (for like pot, like cover, like
master, like man;) Then, I say, (to omit other testimonies that might be
produced to this purpose out of all monuments in all ages,) to be saluted by
Saint Paul, Romans 16. as being of the household of faith, and in all
probability true conuerts; Romans 16.
I will not despair of any man's conversion that breaths, while I breathe; he
may stand, for God is able to make him stand; he may escape out of the snares of
the Devil, 2 Timothy 2.
for God gives grace so to do; he may have a will and ability to do that
which is good, for God works both. Phil. 2.
This for answer to the former imputation of incorrigiblenesse. To the later,
of charging the Country by their living, and so consequently by their
maintenance in Jail, it is so sordid, that it cannot be touched without the
dishonor of the Country. It brings me into remembrance of the barbarous and
inhumane dealing of them of Sparta, (for which they were condemned by their
fellow-miscreants,) whose manner was, when any infants were borne lame or
unlusty, to cast them unto a by-place, (they called it Apotheta,) some pit or
ditch chosen for the purpose, that so their mothers, forsooth, Plutarch. in
Lycurgus.
might be freed from a great deal of pains in looking unto them, and
themselves from a great deal of misery to be endured in the world, but
specially that the State might be eased of a great deal of trouble and charge.
Brethren, let me speak unto you freely of the City of Sparta, (as Saint Peter
says Acts, 2. Let me speak unto you freely of the Patriarch David,) it had
been better that Sparta had been made a fish-poole, or been swallowed up of
an earthquake, as many better Cities have been, than that so many examples of
more then inhumane immanity should have been showed by it. To be short, it
puts me in mind of the vile speech of Plautus, so much detested by
Lactantius: Plautus had said, He does very ill, that gives an alms to a
beggar, Nam and illud quod dat perit, and illi producit vitam ad miseriam, that
is, For both that which he gives is lost, and by lengthening the beggars life,
he does but lengthen his misery. This speech of Plautus, Lactantius, as I told
you, does hold for detestable; Lactan. lib. 6. cap. 11.
and so he might well, for it is an enemy to charity, without which no man
shall see the Lord, and crosses, and confronteth the purpose and providence of
God, as much as sin may do; For God therefore causes some to be poor, and
some to be rich, that not only the poor might be more humble, and the rich
more thankful, but he by communicating the offices of giving and receiving,
Christian neighborhood and love might be the better maintained and increased.
Therefore let this be no motive unto us, to shift poor souls away, because
they seem to stand in our way, because we must be at some three halfe-peny
charge upon them, ((...), Aristophan. in Ran.
that is, Oh two halfe-pence, what force are ye of, to save or to kill, said
one in the Comedy!) but we must remember that we are commanded to cast our
bread upon the waters, Eccles. 11.
( Eccles. 11.) even where we think it cast away, and that we are promised
after many days we shall find it; Again, 2 Cor. 9.
He that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly, and he that sows liberally,
shall reap liberally. Albeit it would seem, a small liberality would serve
the turn, if good order were taken. For they that of themselves can be content
to work for their living in the Jail before their trial, when they are not
sure of life, why should they not be much more willing after their repriuall,
when their life seems to be given them for a prey? If the worst come to the
worst, they may be forced to work: for they ought not to look for more
favor, than they who are in an house of correction, where he that will not
labor, is not suffered to eat. Thus, 1 Cor. 7.
as Saint Paul says, concerning Virgins, I have no commandment of the Lord,
yet I give my judgment, as one that has obtained mercy of the Lord to be
faithful: So I have been bold, even without warrant or commission, to show
what I think to be the more excellent way, for merciful proceeding toward
them that be light offenders, and I wish with the Greek Orator, (...), and
with the Latin Poet, Viue, vale, si quid nouisti rectius istis, Candidus
imperti, si non his vtere mecum. Well, I have treated of Rulers, and showed,
first, that Civil Rulers are here meant, and not Ecclesiasticke; Secondly,
that in the judgment of the Syriacke and Arabicke Paraphrasts, Judges and the
like Magistrates are specially pointed at. Thirdly, that there is no reason,
that they should be esteemed for terrible, and that they are not of themselves
terrible to any, but only to such, as have a terrified, that is, a guilty
conscience. As for good men and innocent, to them they are not terrible, but
per accidens, namely; First, if false forsworn witnesses have their scope
against them. Secondly, if they being not well able to speak for themselves,
such as can help them, and give testimony to their innocence, should be
repelled. Thirdly, if any corrupt or malicious persons, that have vowed their
destruction, should be suffered to pass upon their trial, Lastly, if they
should not find favor to be repriued either in a doubtful case, (or for a
small offense) notwithstanding they cannot read. In this case in my poor
opinion, (I know not how politic it may be thought, but sure I am, it is
charitable,) mercy should Or glory, ((...)) Iam. 2,
triumph against Judgment, (as the Apostle speaks.) Thus far I have
proceeded already; now by the tenor of my Text I am tolled-on, to answer an
objection against Saint Paul's speech, namely, how he could say truly, that
Rulers were not terrible in his time, when Nero that ruled the roast then, was
such a monstrous Tyrant, Tertull.
even such a one, that Tertullian says, It was no discredit unto the
Christians, but rather an honor, that he was the first that lifted up his hand
against them; having first been at defiance with all virtue. This for the
chiefest Ruler; As for his Delegates, Sueton.
Scholars know out of Suetonius what was the Commission he gave unto them,
namely, to pill and powle, and ransacke, and take such order, (or rather
disorder,) that no man should think any thing he had to be his own, but that
all should be brought tumbling into the Tyrants coffers. And must not such
Rulers. High, and low, necessarily appear terrible? This is one point
therefore, that I might discourse upon, if the time were not past. Secondly,
having showed how Rulers are terrible to evil doers, I might take occasion by
that which follows immediately, to show how by their institution they are
comfortable to the pious and virtuous; but one contrary may easily be
understood by another; This for the latter point; and for the former you are to
understand, that Paul wrote not this Epistle to serve for Neroes time only,
but for all succeeding ages; And therefore though he were as bad as bad might
be, yet there might come worthy Princes after him, and again, though many of
his Officers were bad like their Master, yet he had many good. Howsoever their
persons were bad, yet their calling was sacred and venerable, and therefore
their faults to be winked at, and their manners to be endured. I forbear to be
further troublesome. The Lord give a blessing to that which has been spoken
already, Amen.

A SERMON UPON THE FIRST OF SAMVEL. THE FOVRETEENTH SERMON.
1 SAMVEL 25. verse 29. Yet a man is risen to pursue thee, and to seek thy
soul: but the soul of my Lord shall be bound in the bundle of life, with the
Lord thy God, and the souls, (Hebr. soul,) of thine enemies, them shall he
sling out, as out of the middle of a sling.


MY Text is a part of the Supplicatory Oration that Abigail, the wife of Nabal,
made unto David, when he was coming against her, and her husband and their
family, in fury and in wrath. In which Oration, she shows so much wise
eloquence, and eloquent wisdom, that neither Aspasia or Hortensia, so much
praised by the Grecians and Romans: No, nor the woman of Tekoa, and of Abel,
surnamed The wise woman, 2 Samuel 14. 2 Samuel 20.
2 Samuel 14. 2 Samuel 20. may in any degree be compared to her. My husband (says
she,) that did thee wrong in not doing thee kindness, is but a fool, (I am
sorry, and ashamed to say so much, but, Nuda nude loquor, It is in vain to
cast a covering upon that which will not be hid, Bernard.
) fool is his name, and folly is with him, and will thou put thy wit to a
fools wit? What wisdom? Secondly, My self, whom thou might think to
have more wit, (certainly I had better breeding, and another spirit has
appeared in me than in him,) was by great mis-hap out of the way, when thy
messengers came; and will thou turn casum in consilium, and punish mischance
for miscarriage? what equity? Thirdly, look upon thy self, and what is fit
for thee to do: the eyes of all Israel are cast upon thee, and hitherto thou
have been esteemed to fight the battles of the Lord, and will thou now fight
thine own battles, and revenge thy self upon an ill-nurtured clown? upon a
feeble woman? upon innocent hindes? what manhood? Lastly, if I, or my husband,
or our people have done thee any wrong, I am present here to make satisfaction.
Behold, I have brought thee a present of such and such things, (the best things
that we have,) for the relief of thy self and thy Soldiers; I have not sent
i^* but have brought it my self, who do beseech thee upon my bended knees, to
remit the ouer-sights of thy servants, even I beseech thee, who am one of thy
Votaries, and do pray God daily for thee, that he would settle thee in the
Kingdom whereto thou art already anointed; and can thou despise so great
affection? so great devotion? Thus Abigail; And who ever would have thought,
that such a woman could have been so unhappy, as to be matched to such a man?
and again, who would think that any man could be so vile and naught, as not
to be bettered by such a woman? but this is that, that Solomon says, Prou. 27.
Bray a fool in a mort^r, and his folly will not depart from him; and this is
that which we use to say in our Proverb, Where lands and goods are only looked
after, there the Devil may be thought to ask the Banes. It is to be presumed,
that Nabals wealth, and not his worth, was put in the Balance; this made
Abigail, Horace.
or her friends fond of him, Et been nummatum decorat Suadela Venusque, that
is, Is any man rich? Then he is a wise man, an eloquent man, a proper man, and
worthy a Lady. All that may be said for Abigail, and her friends, their excuse
is this, that peradventure they had hope to do some good upon him, to refine
him, 1 Cor. 7.16.
to remould him: For how know thou O woman, whether thou shall save thy
husband, and how know thou, O man, whether thou shall save thy wife? I
answer briefly, that S. Paul speaks in that place of such as are married
already, whom he would not have to think of parting or breaking, upon
whatsoever pretext or surmize of less belief, or worse belief. But if ye
ask his judgment concerning them that are to be married, he shows it
plainly in the same Chapter, verse 39. A widow is free to marry with whom she
will, verse 39. Te^tull. ad vxorem.
only in the Lord; that is, in nomine Domini, quod est indubitate Christiano,
that is, In the name of the Lord, which is without doubt, to a Christian. Thus
Tertullian in the second book to his wife, and to the same effect his disciple
Hierome. So, again the Apostle rules it, Hieron. 1. Con^. Iouinian.
Be not unequally yoked with infidels. We must not be yoked with them in any
near society or conjunction; then not in marriage, which is the nearest of
all. Touching the hope of doing some good upon them, I grant that Charity
hops all things, and consequently the best; 1 Cor. 13.
but yet wisdom fears the worst. And if two Apples be set together, the one
a rotten one, the other a sound one; the rotten one is not sweetened by the
sound, but the sound is tainted by the rotten. Understand what I say, and the
Lord give you understanding in all things. Have ye not heard of that foul Lake
in the Land of Jury, 2 Timothy 2.
called the dead Sea? It is observed by Geographers, that it is never the
sweeter, or the wholesommer, for all that the sweet river Jordan runs into
it. Do you not remember what Solomon says in the 10. of the Book of the
Preacher, Dead flies corrupt the ointment of the Apothecary? Mark, Eccles. 10.
the dead flies are not mended by the precious ointment, but the precious
ointment is marred by the dead flies. The note is this; Nabal the husband is
never the better for Abigail his good wife, for ought that does appear; but
Abigail the worse for Nabal it is to be suspected; therefore beware of such
conjunctions. Well having spoken so much of the speaker Abigail, and her mate,
let us come now to the speech it self, Yet a man is risen up, etc. Of this
speech there be two parts, An Indignation, and an Omination; The Indignation in
the former part of the verse, in these words, Yet a man is risen up to pursue
thee, and to seek thy soul. The Omination in the words that follow, But the
soul of my Lord shall be bound, etc. The Indignation was grounded (no
question) upon two apparent causes, to wit, Saul's ingratitude and envy, for
which Abigail does (...), that is, show her self agrieued and offended. Yet a
man, etc. The Omination has two parts, the former presageth, (wishes at
least,) all good unto David, and the later, Confusion to his implacable
enemies. Touching the first part, and the first ground of Abigails indignation,
to wit, ingratitude the same is a foul sin, I pray God it be not found in
the house of Jacob, as the Wise man speaks in another case; but it is to be
doubted, nay, it is certain, that it ever was, and ever will be among the
children of disobedience. It is strange, weeds do not grow in all grounds, if
in moist, then not in dry; if in dry, then not in moist; this commonly; neither
do they grow in all times of the year; some be not up before April, some be
not before May or June, and in Winter most of them do wither away, and are
gone: So wild beasts, and strange birds be in few places. If you will see the
Crocodyle, you must go into Egypt* if the Ostrich, into Barbary or Ethiopia;
if the Rhinoceros, you must go into India; if the Alce, unto Polonia, etc. In
a word, if you will see the Tsijm, you must go into the wildernesses, if Iijm,
into the Islands. In like manner, monstrous birds are very rare, (God be
thanked) scarce one in many years; How happens it then that ingratitude
should be so common, and fill so much ground, Towns, Villages, streets,
houses, and what not? It is observed by Naturalists, yea, Herodot. lib. 3.
and by Herodotus himself, that those beasts that be for man's meat, are very
fruitful, as for example, the Hare, who is of strange fecundity, (...), that
is, she is ever breeding, ever bagged; On the other side, the Lioness brings
forth but once, and then her matrix is spoiled, as also they write of the
Viper, that the brood destroys the damme. I know these things are contradicted
by some, but the current of antiquity goes as I have reported. For the point,
Ingratitude certainly is a very malignant beast, or rather monster, and
therefore we had need to pray against the increase of it, Hos. 9.
as the Prophet Hosea does against Ephraim, O Lord give them, What will thou
give them? barren wombes (or aborting wombs, (...)) and dry breasts. And with
the words of the Poet against an odious man, (...), Homer. (...). 3.
that is, O I would thou had never been borne, at the least, I would thou
had never been married, (that we might have no more of thy brood!) Now the
causes of Ingratitude do proceed, partly from the giver, partly from the
receiver; From the giver, if it be apparent, that he does it with an unwilling
mind, Guicciard.
as for example: It is written of Clement the seventh, that whatsoever he gave,
it was, as it were, extorted from him. Secondly, If he gave it with an
ill-liberall hand, as it is written of Galba, Plutarch. Creed mihi qu^uis
ingentia Posthume dones, Authoris per^unt garrulitate su^.
that he gave pinchingly, and minchingly, as though he had not been Emperor,
but a bare Steward. Thirdly, if he brag much of that which he has done for a
man, and do twyte and reproach the receiver, then they make themselves, after
a sort amends, and deserve but small recompense from the benefited. Hora^.
Pompey.
Haec seges ingratos tulit, and feret omnibus annis; It is written of a noble
Roman, that he never requested any thing, but with shamefastness; neither
granted any thing but with cheerfulness. It is dictated by a wise Grecian,
He that bestows any thing, Demos^hen.
should presently forget it; but he that receives it, should always remember
it. If these things were duly considered, there would be less ingratitude in
the world. Now as these causes of ingratitude proceed from the giver: so the
receiver has in him many times the causes thereof; but amongst those causes
none more general, or of more force than pride and ouer-weening. Remember the
example of Parry the Traitor. Our late Queen (of famous memory,) gave him his
pardon, after he was condemned to dye for a foul offense. Did he take it to
the heart? No, he made but a pegh at it, saying, She gave me that, that without
cruelty she could not take from me, I had served her long. So the Gunpowder
Traitors, (the memorial of whose confusion, as also Gods gracious preserving
of our Gracious King, and the whole State, we celebrate this Day with all
thankfulness,) had received great favors from his Majesty, liberty of body
to go whither they would, liberty of conscience to believe as they lusted,
liberty of access to the Court, without any touch of disgrace or exception
against their person for their Religion, but yet all this was nothing, they
thought they were worthy of a great deal more, even to be made Princes, at the
least Privy Counselors, at the least, to have up the Mass again, at the
least, to have a general toleration. Thus as Caesar Borgia, (a wicked son of
a most Atheistical father,) said and bragged, that either he would be Caesar,
that is, a Sovereign Commander, or no body, and so became no body: And as
Saint Augustine says of Adam, that by abusing his free will, he lost his
free will, and undid himself: August. Enc^^^. ad Laurentium, cap. 30.
So these Giant-like Conspirators, by not knowing themselves, and by proceeding
from Pride, to ungratefulness, from ungratefulness, to male-contentednesse,
from male-contentednes, to disloyalty, nay, hellish designs, undid both
themselves, and theirs for the present, and have left none other memory behind
them, but of infamy. But to return to Saul, he surely was very unthankful
toward David, but not unthankful only, but also envious. After the women
came forth with Tabrets, and such other kinds of instruments of melody, and
sang this song, 1 Samuel 18.
Saul has slain his thousand, and David his ten thousand, the Text says,
that Saul had an eye unto him from that day: without doubt, it is not amiss,
that the Prince should have an eye unto his subject, and the Master or Lord
unto his servant, though otherwise they trust them far: For the eye of the
Owner feeds the horse, and the feet of the Owner fatteth the ground, ( Pliny
reports these speeches to have been used with the Romans for Proverbs.
Pliny.
) Therefore the eye of inspection or circumspection is necessary. But now to
look upon one with an evil eye, as it is written of Laban, Genesis 31.
that his countenance was not toward Jacob, as in former time, to envy one
brother, or one neighbors well-doing; to make his virtues less than they be,
and his faults greater; to make his commings-in greater than they be, and his
charges less, to have the same eye that Saint Mark speaks of, Out of the
heart proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, Mark 7.
fornications, and (amongst other vices) an evil eye, (a strange Hieroglyph,
for an eye to come out of the heart, but the Hebrews did, and do express
thereby envy,) this is such a thing as God ever abhorred, and reasonable men,
not only good men, should detest: For why should any man's eye be evil,
because Gods is good? why should any grudge at the master of the house, for
using his liberty in his own, in dealing to some more, to some less, when he
that receives least, receives more than he deserves? Demosth. (...).
(...), that is, If any man have much; and do us no wrong (therewith) why
should we envy him? It was the voice of Nature in Demosthenes; yet for all that
the world is the world, like it self, ever full of envy, Genes. 37.3.
and monstrous envy. Joseph was enuyed by his own brethren, and not by one or
two of them, but by them all, for his gay childish coat his father had made
him: So we read that in Italy, a brother, and the same a Cardinal, plucked out
his brothers eyes, Carstin. Esb.
because they were more amiable than his. So I remember the time, and know the
place, when one Tradesman dashed out the brains of his neighbor, for none
other offense, as he confessed at the time of his execution, but that God
blessed the other more than himself. Lastly, he knows nothing in Story, that
does not know, that many battles have been wretchedly lost by the malignity of
Captains, which chose rather to undo their Country and themselves too, than
that such a Commander whom they enuyed, should get the glory of a field won.
This kind of envying, many Schoolmen have esteemed to be the sin against the
holy Ghost, Matthew. 12.
whereof it is said, that it shall never be forgiven. I dare not say so,
exceptit be joined with despightfull blasphemy, and final impenitency: yet
this I make no doubt of, that if it be not the sin against the holy Ghost, yet
it is a sin against the holy Ghost, and against the Father and Son too:
therefore heinous and dangerous. Jacob was not content to curse the wrath and
rage of Simeon, Genesis 49.
and Leui, Cursed be their wrath, for it was fierce, and their rage, for it was
cruel: but added moreover, Into their secret let not my soul come, my glory,
be not thou joined with their assembly: he meant, that by his good will, he
would have no commerce with them, but would shun and abhor them as noisome
beasts or serpents. And so, Brethren, do not ye think, that ye have done your
duty, when ye have cried out upon Saul, saying, What a cankered wretch was he,
etc? But be you ware that you do not imitate his evil deeds, lest ye be made
partakers of his plagues. He was very envious as ye heard, even now: and he was
very unthankful, as you partly heard before; and for both these he is girded
at by Abigail in my Text, as I think good now further to declare unto you. 1 Samuel 16.23.
[ Yet a man is risen to pursue thee, etc.] As if he said, Notwithstanding thou
wast his Musician and delightedst him with thy Harpy, nay, his Physician, and
easedst him in his mad fits, when an evil spirit sent of God vexed him, Yet he
is risen up to persecute thee, etc. Notwithstanding thou did put thy life in
thine hand, and encountredst the Philistine and destroyedst him, delivering
thereby Saul from a great deal of fear, and Israel from a great deal of
shame, 1 Samuel 17.
yet he is risen up again against thee, 1 Samuel 18.
etc. notwithstanding thou did marry his own daughter, and instead of
receiving Dowry from him, did pay him as it were for a Dowry, ((...),) two
hundred fore-skinnes of the Philistines, yet he is risen up against thee, etc.
Lastly, Notwithstanding thou did that, that few others would have done,
namely, to spare him, when thou had him at an advantage, and might have
nailed him to the ground, 1 Samuel 24.
and so gotten present possession of a Kingdom, yet he is risen up against
thee, etc. Thus she amplifieth or aggrauateth the offense, by the worthiness
of the person against whom it was committed: so does she also, by the
unworthiness of the person offending; [ A man is risen up,] She does not say
Geber, for that may signify a strange man, nor yet Ish, for that may signify
a worthy man, ( Benei-Ish, worthy men, extraordinary men,) but Adam, an
ordinary man, a natural man, one that is of the earth, that is earthly-minded
and appointed; and will thou fear such a one? But why did she not say that the
King was risen up against him? did she not take Saul for King any longer, now
he was become a Tyrant, and persecuted the faithful? Yes, no doubt, for the
Jesuits were not then borne, nor their doctrine broached, to wit, that
subjects may lawfully take arms against their Prince, as soon as they become
Tyrants, and enemies to the faith in the language of the man of Rome. This is
not that fire, that Christ says he came to cast upon the earth; the fire of
teaching the truth, the fire of rebuking sin, Luke 12.49.
the fire of conuicting errors, the fire of the Spirit that works all in all;
but this is that fire, that Saint James speaks of, that inflameth the course,
(or wheel) of Nature, and it self is inflamed of hell. Therefore as God says
to Adam, Dust thou art, Iam. 3.6. Genes. 3.19.
and to dust thou shall return; so we say of that devilish doctrine; From
hell it came, and to hell let it return. But yet why did not Abigail call him
King? was it of contempt? No, but of caution: for she was very wise, she lay at
the mercy of David, and knew that it was as easy for him to kill her, as to
speak the word, therefore she keeps her self in clouds and generalities,
for fear of offending before the time. [ A man is risen,] You know him as well
as I, I need not name him; and your enemies shall be slinged out, Psalm. 112.5.
whether they be of high degree or low degree, I will not meddle. This is not
to equivocate, as the Jesuits practice, yea teach, be it spoken to their
shame; But this is to order ones Hebr. iecalcel debarain bemishpat, that is, He
orders, (or measures) his words, (or matters) with discretion, (or
judgment.)
words with discretion, as the Psalmist speaks: For though it be never
lawful for a man to lie, as Augustine proves soundly, wittily, learnedly, in
his books to Consentius, yet it is lawful to conceal a truth, so far forth
and so long, that Gods glory be not impeached thereby, nor charity toward our
neighbor violated; upon these two points hang all the Law and the Prophets.
Well, we have seen against whom the offense of envious ingratitude was
committed, namely, against David, and by whom, namely, by Saul; now if we look
upon the Text again, we shall find the extent, or grieuousnesse of it, [ A
man is risen up to persecute thee, and to seek thy life:] Mark, Saul was not
content to hate David inwardly, but he proceeds to action, he persecutes him
also; he is not content to persecute him, or drive him out of the Country, but
he seeks his life. Thirdly, neither will he trust others to execute his
malice, but he follows the chase himself: This is unlimited malice, deep
malice, bloody malice; the like we read of him above in this holy Story, that
when word was brought him that David was sick, 1 Samuel 19.
he commanded him to be brought, bed and all: No question, but because he would
make sure work, and see the killing of him, himself. The like we read of a
great man in France, that when the noble Admiral was cast out of a Garret,
Commentar. Gal.
and his brains dashed out upon the pauement, he would not believe that the
Admiral was slain, before he had with his handkerchiefe wiped away the blood
from his face, and perfectly discerned him, then he shouted, It Is he indeed, a
happy beginning. But the eye of Jealousy that saw this, urged the arm of
revenge to cry quittance for it. But what had the righteous done, what had
David done, (to return to him again, Psalm. 11.3.
) that he should be tossed from post to pillar, nay, that his life should be
sought out for a prey? Truly, no other thing, but that that Abel did unto
Caine, of whom it is said, that he slew his brother, because his deeds were
good, and his own naught. The like is written of Caligula, that he hated his
brother, and quarrelled with him deadly, because he took counterpoyson, lest
he should be poisoned by him. Briefly, the like is written of Fymbria, that he
indicted Scaeuola a good man, for that by wrenching aside, he avoided the fatal
blow of the dagge. So except it were for this one fault, that David was not
willing that Saul should kill him, being uncondemned; other fault or offense
there could be found none. But now, what is become of David's good deeds, so
many, and so many? why be they not remembered? (...), Pin^ar.
that is, Old good turns sleep, and men be unmindful; if a man do twenty
good turns, they are written in the dust, Siquid benefeceris leuior ^luma est
gratia, at si os^^nderis plum (...) gerunt Plautus.
but if he cross us once, or do us a displeasure, the same is graven in
marble, and in great letters, that one may run and read them. Yet welfare
the Athenians, for they having gotten Pausanias within their danger, who had
done them many despights, yet calling to mind the good service he had done
against the common enemy, at a place called Plataea, they let him escape, and
bid him thank that place. Welfare also the Spaniards, who having taken Peter
of Navarre, a famous Engineer, (who had fallen from them to the French,) and
laid him up in prison, in one of the Castles at Naples, when they remembered
that they had taken the same Castle before by his prowess, they could not
find in their hearts to do him any violence, but suffered him to depart. But
Saul and his Court are like those Jews whom Christ reproues, John 10. John 10.
Many good works have I showed you from my Father, for which of these do you
stone me? As if he should have said; Suppose I had given you some probable
cause of discontent by a word spoken, should that make my good deeds to be
forgotten? as namely, Matthew. 11.
my giving sight to your blind, hearing to your deaf, life to your dead, etc.
were this honesty? So Abigail, 1 Samuel 19.10.
suppose thou had given him some cause of offense, as by departing the
Courtwithout leave, when thy life was sought for, 1 Samuel* 21.
by eating of Shewbread, and taking away a consecrated sword, 1 Samuel 22.3.
this when thou wast in necessity, fleeing to the Land of the enemy, when thou
could not be safe in thine own Country, should this make thy (...), thy
worthy deeds, thy martial acts, offensive, and defensive, to be forgotten, and
thy self to be reputed and condemned for a Traitor? This were hard, extreme
hard, Abigail might think, and we might say: and therefore Saul to be
condemned of most envious ingratitude. Now if it be such a fault for King Saul
to rise up against David, and to persecute him, and to seek his soul, who was
but his servant and his subject, what is it then for the subject to practice
against his Sovereign, and to seek to destroy him? This is not so much
ingratitude, as inhumanity, nay, impiety: For a kind of piety is due unto the
Prince; his person ought to be sacred unto us, yea, his Estate, yea, his
authority, yea, his honor. He is a kind of God upon earth, Menander.
(...), that is, That which is Sovereign, is thought to be God (in some sort.)
Now, a King is a lively Image of God, said the Heathen man: therefore not only
he that resists, Romans 13.
shall receive damnation, because he resists the ordinance of God, but also
he that offends against the Majesty of a Prince with his tongue, he offends
against the Majesty of God himself: for this cause it is said in Exodus, Exodus
22.
(Thou shall not rail upon the Judges (or Magistrates, Elohim,) neither shall
thou speak ill of the Ruler of thy people, (that is, the King especially.) And
Solomon in the book of the Preacher, Curse not the King, no, not in thy
thought, Ecclesiast. 10.
etc. for the fowls of the air shall carry the voice, and that which has
wings, shall utter the matter. Callimach.
(...), that is, If any man be disposed to fight against God, let him dare to
fight against my King. If any will presume to fight against my King, let him
presume to fight against God also. In which words he seems to confound
fighting against God, and fighting against the King, as though they were almost
alike heinous. Now, if every striving against the Prince, be most unlawful,
and deserves severe punishment, what is it then to do some act of hostility
against him; as for example, to blow the Trumpet of sedition, as did Sheba, to
leuy an Army against him, 2 Samuel 20.1.
as did Absalom, to lift up the hand against him, 2 Samuel 17. Timoleon and
Caracalla were of that mind.
as Achitophel counseled? I confess that there have been Princes, that have
been more tender in their ears than in their bodies; and whereas they have
pardoned such as had borne arms against them, yet they would not pardon such
as had been ouer-lauish of their tongues. It is not because a wound that is
made with a weapon, a plaster may heal: but for the gash that is made with
the tongue, Audacter calumniari manet Cicatrix.

Conuitia irascare agnitae videntur, spreta exolescu^t, Tacit. Annal.


there is no balm in Gilead, nothing will cure it so thoroughly, but the scarre
will remain. For all that, this is but the conceit of some few, and more
superficial than solid: for words be but wind, and neither break bones, nor
skin, nor hurt any others, but them that are content to be hurt; but blows
make a dent, that will not so easily be healed up. Therefore the Tenet is, that
they that do some act of hostility, be viler Traitors, than they that stay
themselves at words. Now, of these kinds of Traitors there have been too many
found in all ages and Countries, and against as worthy Princes as ever reigned:
Who might compare for policy with Augustus? for virtue with Traian? yet how
many Treasons in their time, though in their time Rome was as flourishing as
ever it was before, or after? So, to leave Heathenish times; Were not
Constantine, Theodosius, Justinian, Charles, Otho, so great, that they had the
name of Great, given unto them by common consent, as well for their worth, as
for their power, and had not all these their hands full, by means of seditious
practisers? As for Jews, surnamed the Pious; his portion was by much worse
than any of the former: for his own sons that came out of his bowels, made
head and war against him, and took him prisoner, and kept him in prison
certain years. But as 2 Samuel 14. When the woman of Tekoa was demanded by
David, 2 Samuel 14.
whether Ioabs hand were not in the business, that is, whether he did not set
her on work, confessed, and denied not, but said plainly, He did: So if you
will consult impartial Story, it will tell you, that either the beginning of
that hurly-burly, or the progress, had much life from him of Rome, who
threatened to excommunicate the Prelates that remained faithful to the Father.
Now, if this were done in a green tree, when the leaves of piety and virtue
yet remained, I mean before Satan was let loose, and men had abandonned
themselves unto all kinds of outrages, and villainies, what then might be
expected in the later decaying ages, when Satan had his full swinge? what
marvel, I say, if two hundred years after, Gregory the seventh stirred up
against Henry the fourth, Rodolpho, a great Prince of Sweden, sending him the
Imperial crown with a verse that every Scholar has in his mouth, Petra
dedit Petro, Petrus Diadema Rodolpho? And not content herwith, he lastly
stirred up against the said Emperor his own son, alluring him with fair
promises of this life, and of that that is to come, to rebel against his
father. In those days was nothing but wars and rumors of wars, a Post
went to meet a Post, and a Messenger, a Messenger, as the Prophet speaks, and
the Powers of heaven and earth seemed to be moved, and men's hearts to fail
with fear and anxiety, and all to be brought to a combustion. But what was the
issue of all this? The Emperor had success in most battles, (and he fought
52. more than ever did any before, or since,) and saw the end and confusion of
all his foes, save of his son, whom God suffered to survive, to make him a
subject and spectacle of his wrath. Abb. Vrspergen.
After the days of Henry the fourth, the succeeding Emperors had much ado
with their disloyal subjects, being set on by them of Rome, who would be
counted Fathers, and yet incense their children one against the other, that
themselves might devour them, (being weakened,) with open mouth. How did they
deal with Frederick the second? (to remember him only,) They work a
conscience in him, to make war upon the Infidels, (as though Christ would
have his Kingdom advanced by the material sword, But that was even their
hour, and the power of darkness, Luke 22.53.
) and while he is beyond the Seas, they inueigle his subjects at home, to
rebel against him, yea, (to show that they hated the Christian Emperor more
than the Mohammedan,) they send unto the Souldan, the Emperors picture, that he
might the more easily destroy him: But the Souldan dealt generously with him,
and acquaints him with the plot, and advises him to look to himself. To make
the matter short, he makes peace in the East, to the advantage of the
Christians there, and hastes home with all speed, and by his valor and
prudence, soon recouereth what was lost in his absence. Thus in Italy. But was
he suffered to be quiet in the Empire, in Germany? No, there the Popes set up
against him Anti-Emperours, two or three, one after another, presuming that if
one did miss, the other would hit. Prou. 12.
But the deceitful man rosteth not that that he takes in hunting, Proverb.
12. And this gift is given to such persons, of the Lord, that they lie down in
sorrow; all of them that admitted of their election, and took upon them the
name of Emperor, (the true Emperor being alive,) did in a manner suddenly
perish, and come to a fearful end; one of them was slain with an arrow,
another in the marshes of Frizeland, the third otherwise, all by a violent and
untimely death. If I had not promised, the contrary, I might tell you of Hen^y
the seventh poisoned by a Monk in the Sacrament. Of Lodowicke of Bauaria,
vexed with all the storms that perfidious malice could bring upon a Prince:
both of these, Emperors. So of our King John deuested of his Regalitie, and
bereaved of his life by vnpriestly practices. So of Philip (surnamed the
Fair,) the French King, brought in danger to have suffered as much. And truly
by the hands or heads of such, A^n. Sylv.
as Aeneas Syluius (that was afterward Pope,) speaks of in his Story of
Austrich, Non fuit vllum insigniter grande malum in Ecclesia, quod non exeat,
and originem sumat a Presbyteris, that is, Whatsoever great mischief has
befallen the Church, the same was caused or occasioned by some Shauelings. But
as all misery has its determined period, and as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 125.
The rod of the wicked shall not lie upon the lot of the righteous for ever: So
when the fullness of time came, that the mystery of iniquity should be
revealed, it pleased our good God, that stirred up the spirit of Cyrus, to send
them that were in captivity under old Babylon, Ezr. 1.
unto their own Country, Land of promise, to stir up the spirits also of
many Kings in our later times, to slip out their necks, and the necks of
their subjects, I say, to quit themselves and their subjects, from the yoke of
new Babylon, that is, Rome. These having the Book of God laid open, (which had
been for a long time hid, like as the Book of the Law had been under
Josiah,) more plainly and explicatly, than for many hundred years before, 2
Kings 22. ver. 5. and 2 Chronicles. 34.
did easily by the light thereof discern usurpation from right, and
superstition from true worship* They dared also to examine the validity and
authority of the Bulls that came from Rome, and were ashamed that they were so
long gulled and affrighted by Scarre-crowes. Hereupon it came to pass, that
our King Henry the eighth, a magnanimous Prince, plucked his neck out of the
collar, and feared not to put in the Letany, from the Bishop of Rome, and his
detestable enormities, Good Lord deliver us. By his example, or not long
before, Gustauus King of Swethland, a Prince likewise of great valor and
wisdom, he banished the Pope and his authority, out of his Kingdoms. So did
also Christian King of Denmark, a Prince not much inferior to either of the
former in virtue, that I speak nothing of the Princes, and Free Estates of
Germany, which fell from the Pope by heaps; yea, and Henry the second, King of
France, yea, and Charles the fifth Emperor, though both of them most
superstitious, protested against the Council of Trent, summoned by the Pope,
thereby not a little questioning and shaking his absolute authority, neither
had this declining and sinking stayed here, but as it is written in the
Revelation, Babylon is fallen, it is fallen: Revel. 14.8.
So surely it had been utterly ruined, if it had not been strengthened or
vnderlayed by new props, or Buttraces. They fable of Innocent the third, that
he (forsooth) should have a vision or dream, that Saint Peter's Church in Rome
tottered, and had fallen, if those worthy Friars Dominicke and Francis, had not
offered their shoulders; And surely it had gone hard with the Romish cause ere
this, if the Jesuits, the last vomit of Satan, and the last hope of Antichrist,
had not stayed it from overthrow. These are they, that coming out of the smoke
of the bottomless pit, R^u. 9.
Revelation 9. have power given them, as the Scorpions of the earth have power;
and though their faces be like the faces of men, and their hair like the hair
of women, that is, though they use great Hypocrisy, and Flattery, and
insinuation, as great as Harlots do, to entertain, and retain their Lovers,
yet their teeth are as the teeth of Lions, and will devour their souls, that
do believe them, and their bodies that do oppose them, nay, that do trust
them too far. They write of Paris the Trojan, that what time his mother went
with him, she dreamed she was with child of a firebrand, and so he proved to
his Country, being the author of the utter desolation thereof. They write also
of Dominicke the Friar, (of whom I spoke even now, Antonin. par. 3. tit. 23.
cap. 4.
) that his mother being with child of him, she dreamed she had a whelpe in her
womb, that had a firebrand in his mouth; and so he proved, barking against
the truth revealed in Gods word, and being the cause of the burning and
butchering of those good, and faithful men the Albigenses, by hundreds and by
thousands. Briefly, it is written of Caligula, that Tiberius presaged of him,
Suet^n. in C^ligul. cap. 11.
that he would prove a very poisonous Serpent to the people of Rome, and a
Pha^ton to the whole earth; and so he proved, showing himself not only an
enemy to virtue, but also to all that, that sauoured of it. And truly, he that
had the skill to cast the Jesuits their nativity, or rather, that will by the
fruit judge of the tree, will confess, that of all the Spawne, that Satan or
his Vicar have cast out or allowed in these later hundred years, none have
wrought, either more dishonor to God, or hurt to his Church, or danger to
Commonweals, Plutarch. in Alcibiade.
than these. Plutarch maruelleth how a man could be compounded of so many
contraries, as Alcibiades was, iocund with the merry, sad with the grave,
babblatiue with praters, of few words with the silent, a rioter with
boone-companions, abstinent with the abstenious, etc. in a word, a very
Cameleon, changing himself into all colors, save white, (for these be
Plutarch words. Cicer. pro Cael^^.
) The like writes Tully of Catiline, in Oration pro Caelio. The like we may
say of the Jesuits, as also some of themselves, (at the least of their friends
give forth,) Iesuita est omnis homo, that is, A Jesuit is an euery-ody, Cicer.
pro Caelio.
fellow for all companies, he can blow hot and cold with one breath, play fast
and loose with one hand; hold with the Hare, and run with the Hound; go to
the Kings of the earth, and incense them against their subjects, specially, if
they smell of Heresy, (as they call Heresy,) repair to the subjects, and
blow the coals of mutiny against the Prince, specially if he give the least
cause of Jealousy to him of Rome; with the iouiall they will not stick to
quaffe, and carouse, yea, to dance and game, Ordine ad Deum, to win them,
forsooth, (the Apostles were wont to use that method in preaching no doubt;)
with the austere, they will bend the browe, and put such a face of gravity upon
it, as though the Quintessence of virtue might be extracted out of their
foreheads, intus Nero, Hieron. ad Rusticum.
foris Cato, totus ambiguus, that is, A Nero inwardly, a Cato outwardly, every
way an Hypocrite or doubler. Thus as the Apostle became all things to all men,
to win some, so they become all things to all men, to overthrow the faith of
many. Tertul. praespt. contr He^r ic.
Volo, and virtutes eorum proferre, etc. that is, I will acquaint you with
their virtues, says Tertullian of some Heretics: but this I acknowledge to
be the greatest virtue in them, that they do emulate the Apostles peruersely:
for the Apostles raised such as were dead to life, and these make such as were
alive dead. Aeneas Syluius, compares Monks and old witches together, Aene. Syl.
saying, Non audet Stygius Pluto tentare quod audet Infelix Monachus, plenaque
fraudis anus, that is, The Devil himself is not so venturous, as wretched
Monks, and charming old women be. And the like complaint might be taken up, and
might have been taken up this many, and many years past, concerning the
Jesuits, that their attempts are desperate, and their executions bloody for
the most part. They will not play small play, nor busy their refined wits
about trifles, (as Domitian is reported to have spent certain hours in the
day in catching flies.) O no, but as one said to Antonius the Triumvir; Thy
fishing is to take up Towns and Fortresses, and Kingdoms, and the lik: so
their fishing is to hale up at one draught a whole Seignory or Principality. Is
any man great with a Prince, or a State? him they seek by all means, (by
promises, by gifts, by threats,) to win him to their side; if they cannot
make him to be for them, then they will do their best or worst to make him
away. Nay, they are not content to strike at a servant, and to seek to unhorse
him, but no worse than David will serve their turn. David the Anointed of the
Lord, him they persecute, his life they seek to take away, as it is in my
Text, Fight not against small nor great, but against the King of Israel only,
(said the King of Syria.) So these strike only at the fairest. So did they in
Queen Elizabeth's time. What do you speak of killing of Leicester, (said one
of the fourteen Traitors that were En-Iesuited,) the Queen is the only
mark? Thus in England. So in France, Let King Henry the third, a counterfeit
Monk, be killed by a true Monk; James Clement, do thou, upon the remission
of thy sins, and to be made a Saint, strike him, and one blow for all, that
thou need not strike him again. Thus they dispatched Henry the third, for
fear lest he would wholly revolt from them. So did they deal against Henry the
fourth, though he had turned to them, yet because he had stood out long, and
the holy Father was not wholly reconciled to him, therefore they proclaim, that
it was a meritorious deed to kill him. Hereupon one John Castile, a Nouice of
theirs, attempts upon his person, and strikes out one of his teeth, (he meant
to have stricken him to the heart, but the King stooping down upon occasion,
received the blow into his mouth, (My mouth, said the King afterward,
conuinceth the Jesuits.) And Barrier, a disciple of theirs, came with a
resolution from Meloun to stabbe him. Barrier missed then, but Rauillacke
afterward did the deed, being poisoned by the Jesuits their doctrine; that
for as much as the Pope is Christ's Vicar, or Vicegerent, whosoever fights
against any of his creatures or favorites, he fights against Christ himself,
and therefore may lawfully be murdered. Before that, even about this time
twelve years, they attempted against our now Sovereign, (whom God in his
mercy preserve,) and as though it had been a small thing to kill a King, and
no body besides, they conspired to destroy the whole State with him, head and
tail, Esaias 9.14.
branch and rush, as the Prophet speaks. The King, Queen, and their
Children, they were (as it were) the head; the Counselors, and Honorable men,
they as it were the breast; the Commons assembled in Parliament, they (as it
were) the feet. Upon all these, and upon thousands more that dwelt or lay near
the Parliament House, they thought to bring a Panolethry, an universal
destruction. We read of twenty thousand slain in a Town of Italy, called
Fidenae, (in the days of Tiberius, Sueton. in Tiber. cap. 14.
) by the fall of a Theater; but this was by casualty, (the finger of God was in
it, but men call it casualty.) So we read of many hundreds, yea, thousands,
blown up into the air, and torn in pieces by gunpowder, bestowed in mines
under the earth for such mischief; but this was in time of hostility and by
enemies. So we read of Mithridates conspiracy against the Romans in Asia; of
Hamans conspiracy against the Jews in Persia, to have them massacred all in
one day as one man: but these were Pagans, and knew nothing of God or
godliness. So we read of Vesperae Siculae, matutinae Parisienses, that is,
Sicilian Euen-song, and Paris-Mattens; also of Danish and Normandish Washals,
in which there was an horrible slaughter made of such as came unto the place,
in the simplicity of their souls; but this was done by the Zelotae, and in hot
blood, and rather to prevent mischief^* that themselves might not be destroyed,
than to bring causes of destruction upon others. But now for the sons of the
Church, and her dear and lawful sons, (so they repute themselves, and all
others for bastards,) for the sons of the Commonweal, and the same most
faithful and loyal, what else; for them, 1 Kings 2.5.
I say, to seek to shead the blood of war in peace, for them like Vipers to
gnaw the bowels of their mother, and to stretch forth over their Country, the
line of Samaria, and the plummet of the house of Ahab, as it is in the holy
Story, the line of vanity, and the stones of emptiness, as it is in the
Prophet, this would make Isaiah, 2 Kin. 21.13. Esaias cap. 32.11. Esaias 29.9. Esaias
66. Virgil. Aenei* 3.
if he were alive, to cry out, as he does, Chapter 29. verse 9. Stay your
selves and wonder, cry out, and cry: Or as he does, Chapter 66. Who has
heard such a thing, who has seen such things? Poets feine of Enceladus the
Giant, that as often as he changes his side for weariness, he makes the
Country about him to quake, and as often as he belcheth, he casts up fire and
brimstone, in that abundance, that he makes all the Ilanders to be aghast. So
Philosophers teach, that when exhalations and vapors have gotten in great
store into some hollow places of the earth, if they hap to be stopped there, so
that they cannot have a vent, they first work a strange rumbling, and
hurly-burly in the earth, making it to reele to and fro like a drunken man, as
the Psalmist speaks, and then in the end, breaking forth with violence, they
carry away whatsoever is in the way, trees, houses, Towers, transplanting or
translating them from one side to another, from one end to another
maruellously. And even in like manner, these Enceladi, or Ennosigaei, by
working under the ground, and piling together a great deal of sulphurous and
combustible, or rather inflammatory matter under the vault of the Parliament
house, made reckoning with the turning of their side, nay, with the turning of
their hand, (by setting fire to the match,) to blow up all that were above or
near, and to bury in one common sepulcher the whole State. Suetonius writes
of Nero, that when heard one utter out of a Tragedy these words, When I am
dead, let fire and earth be iumbled together; Nay, rather, said he, let this
happen, (...), while I am alive. So these unnatural parricides, thought it too
long to stay till God should correct us himself, either by famine or
pestilence, or the sword; but they would take the sword into their own hands,
and call for fire from heaven, like the rash sons of Zebedee, Luke 9.
or rather because they had no hope to prevail that way, they would strike
fire in the lower parts of the earth, and set upon a light fire their whole
native Country. Thus they persecute David, and seek to take away his life, and
the lives of all his well-wishing subjects and near ones. But did they
prevail? No, They took counsel together, but it came to naught, Esaias 8.
they pronounced a Decree, but it did not stand, for God was with us.
Omnipotens Deus, Valentiniano Regnum, quod dederat, reseruauit, that is,
Ambros. ep. ^i. 5. epist. 27.
Almighty God, that gave Valentinian the Empire, preserved it unto him; and he
that set the Crown upon the Kings head, did keep it sure unto him, maugre the
despite of Rome and Romanists; They thrust sore at him that he might fall, but
the Lord was his help and our help; our merciful God did break the snares
of them that sought to entrap us all, the snare was broken, and we delivered. O
that we would give thanks to the Lord for his goodness, and declare the
wonders that he does for the children of men! O that we would confess that he
himself did it, and he alone, and that it was not our policy or providence,
that avoided the blow! Remember, O let us remember how glad Jacob was to see
Joseph rediuiuum, Genes. 45.28.
whom he had given over, and thought he had been devoured of a wild beast.
Remember how glad they were in Marks house, Act. 12.
when Peter came in unto them, whom they had thought to have been fast bound
in fetters and iron, and that he should have been brought forth, and put to
death the next day. It is a day that the Lord has made, let us be glad and
rejoice therein; a day to be remembered, as the days of the Passe-ouer, Exodus
12.
wherein the children of Israel escaped the destroying Angel, and also the
fury of the Egyptians; or as the days of Purim, wherein the same people of God
escaped the bloody practices of Haman and his accomplices. Ester 9.
Let me tell you what joy there was in Rome upon a false alarm. News being
brought that Germanicus, noble Germanicus was alive, (of whose sickness they
had intelligence, and for whose health they were most careful,) they showted,
Saluae Roma, salua patria, saluus est Germanicus, Rome is safe, our Country is
safe, for lo, Gemanicus is safe. Much more justly may we showte for joy, and
say, Salua Anglia, salua patria, saluus est Rex, that is, England is in safety,
our Country is in safety, for why our King is in safety. This I say, should
make us to rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious, seeing it is not a false
word that is brought unto us of the Kings safety, but as we have heard, so may
we see: and his Majesty may say unto us as Joseph does to his brethren, Genesis
the 45. Behold, your eyes do see, Genes. 45.
and the eyes of my brother Benjamin, that my mouth does speak unto you. The
Romans celebrated the memorial of the driving out of their oppressors, and
called it Regifugium, Macrob.
we may call this feast Regi-sa^uium, because the Kings life, and the life of
his best subjects were saved and preserved. The Persians kept a feast in
remembrance of the destruction of the Magies, who destroyed the remainder of
the Blood-Royall, and usurped the Crown themselves, and called it (...), we
may call this feast (...), because of the destruction of the Traitors who were
taken in their own snare, Ctesias ex Ph^tij Bibliothec.
and fell into the pit that they had dug for others. This was the Lords
doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes, and ought to be remembered with all
thankfulness; and God is to be honored for the same, and with special
honor while we have a day, or hour to live. For if the Lord himself had not
been on our side, may Israel now say, if he had not given his Angels charge
over us, it had not failed us but our souls had been put to silence, they
were so wrathfully displeased at us. Well, the enemies of David were found
liars, and howsoever they thought to take away his life by pursuing him, yet
they could not. This is a good entrance to the Omination, the later part of my
division, the which I will rather touch than handle, the time being so far
spent. [ The soul of my Lord shall be bound in the bundle of life, with the
Lord thy God, and the soul of thine enemies shall he sling out, as out of the
middle of a sling.] In these words Abigail promises or foretells, (wishes
at the least,) safety and preservation to David's person and estate, and
describes the same safety by a Metaphor of safe bindingor safe pursing. We
know, that ears of corn, if they lie scattered upon the ground, they may
easily be trod out with the foot, or licked up by a beast, but if they be
bound up in a bundle, and the bundle laid up in a stacke, then they are out of
harms way commonly, (the original may signify a Bundle, as in that place of
the Canticles, Cantic. 1.12.
that is, My Beloved is as a bundle of myrrh, Tseror mor.) Again, we know that
if a piece of money be it of gold or silver be cast upon the table, or some
odd place, it may be taken up by some thief, or one that is light-fingered,
but if it be pursed, then it is safe, (The original may signify a purse, as
inthat place of Haggai, Chapter 1. He that earneth wages, puts it into a
bag or purse, that has a hole in it. Hagge 1.6.
) In like manner of Phrasing, David says, that his tears were put up in Gods
bottle, that none of them should be spilt upon the ground, Psalm. 56.
but should be remembered, and accounted for. And Saint Paul, That our life is
hid with Christ in God; Colos^. 3.
hid, that is, laid up, (...), as in a repository, sure and safe. And briefly
the Prophet Esaias phraseth it after the same manner, that God had made him a
chosen shaft, and hid him in his qu^uer, Esaias 49.2.
that it should not be broken, nor pilfered away by every one that came in the
way. Now, we understand the meaning of the Phrase; but peradventure for the
truth of the matter every one is not satisfied: for some will say, How could
Abigail speak so confidently, that David, and consequently such as were
faithful like David, should not miscarry, since so many worthy servants of
God, and his Anointed ones, have dyed a violent death; as namely ^osiah, (to
speak of no more, before Christ's time; and after Christ's time, Gratian, and
Valentinian, 2 King. 23.29.
) Christian and godly Emperors, and of late in our fresh memory, the two
Henry's of France, that I speak nothing of the Prince of Conde* and the Prince
of Orange. If it be true, as it is most true, that these had their lives taken
away by their enemies, then Abigails speech cannot be true in the general. I
answer, first, That Abigail speaks, this as a well-wishing woman, but not as
a Prophetess: for we do not read any where that the name of a Prophetess is
given unto her. Secondly, That prophesies themselves, importing a blessing,
have either expressed or employed a condition, namely, If they will walk in the
ways of the Lord with an upright heart, and with all their heart, etc. even as
Samuel the Prophet expresses the happiness of a King and a State
conditionally, and not absolutely in those terms, If ye will fear the Lord,
and serve him, and hear his voice, both you and your King shall follow the
Lord, (that is, 2 Samuel 12.
you shall prosper in following the Lord; a Metonymie of the cause for the
effect,) but if ye do wickedly, ye shall perish both you and your King. O that
we would consider this, we that forget God so often, and so foulely, what hurt we
do to our good King, Nostris pecc^tis barbari fortes sunt nostris vitijs
Rom^^os superatur exercitus etc. Hieron. in Epitaph. Nepotian.
not only our selves, by every work of impiety and iniquity we do* we strike
at his Estate, as often as we strike our brother with the fist of wickedness; we
wound our Kings person after a sort, as often as we tear God with our false or
vain oaths; we do what we can to shorten his days, as often as we draw along
the cords of unnecessary contentions, of sensuality, of drunkenness, of
oppression, of uncharitableness, of coozenage, of usury and the like. These
do more endanger a Kingdom, than either foreign enemies, or domestike
conspirators. For as while we please the Lord, he makes our very enemies to be
our friends, as it is in the Proverbs, yea, Prou. 16.7.
the stones of the field to be at peace with us, and the beasts of the field to
be at league with us, as it is in Job. So, on the other side, Job 5.
if wickedness be found in us, as Solomon said to Adoniah; 1 Kings 1.
if an execrable thing be found in the Host, as in the days of Iosuah, then
Israel cannot stand before the men of Aye, nor Iosuah prosper; John 7.
Then the Lord will raise up the vildest of the Nations to persecute us, they
shall fan us, and they shall empty us, See Ezech. 22* ver. 31. and Iere.
51.^, etc. Da^. 4.
till we be weeded out of the good Land that God has given us to possess. It
is true, the most High it is that translateth Kingdoms, (taking them from one
Nation, and giving them to another,) as it is in the Prophet Daniel; but it is
true withal, that this is done for the sins of the people, even as Solomon
expressly sets it down, Proverbs 28. For the transgression of a people,
there be many Princes, (that is, many changes,) when as on the contrary side,
Prou. 28.2.
when a people do set their hearts to fear the Lord, and to worship him with
holy worship, when they meddle with the thing that is equal, and right, and
shun the sins of unfaithfulness, of Idolatry, of presumption, of
profaneness, and the like* then behold, he gives them a good Prince in his
mercy, and keeps him unto them in his favor, preserving his lying down and
rising up, his going forth, and coming home, in such sort, that the enemy can
do him no violence, nor the son of wickedness hurt him. Would we then have
our King to flourish, and to prosper, to live out of danger, and gunshot: Oh
then let us not only pray for him, as Tertullian did for the Emperor, that God
would give him Domum tutam, Tertull. in Apologetic.
exercitus fortes, senatum fidelem, that is, A safe Court, valiant Armies, and
a faithful Senate, but also that he would give him Populum probum, Tertull.
ibid.
that is, A virtuous people, a good Commonalty, (which is a part of Tertullians
prayer in the same place,) and let us endeavor our selves every one for his
part, to make up this Populum probum, that is, to be pious and virtuous. Psalm.
94.20.
Let us have nothing to do with the stool of wickedness, which imagines
mischief like a Law; let us have nothing to do with the bag of deceit, Pro.
20.23. and 11.1.
with false weights, false measures, since these be an abomination to the Lord,
as Solomon speaks, 1 These. 4.6.
and since God is a revenger of all such things as the Apostle testifies.
Finally, let us have nothing to do with the unfruitful works of darkness,
Ephesians. 5.11.
but rather reprove them, as the same Apostle admonishes. So shall the Lord
make unto our King a sure house, and his son shall sit upon his Throne after
him and his son after him, Et nati natorum, and qui nascentur ab illis, that
is, Virgil. Aenei. 3. ex illo Homeri (...). I^rem. 48.11.
their sons after them, to many and many generations. Briefly, so shall not we
be powered out from vessel to vessel, but shall be settled upon our lees, as
it is in the Prophet; The Lord shall speak peace to us, and to our Land, that
we be not led into captivity, and that the enemy beneuer able to shoot an arrow
amongst us. Lastly, so shall our enemies be found liars, and they shall look
till their eyes fail them for our subversion, but they shall not see it; but
on our Kings head shall his Crown flourish, and be more, and more green in
his age; In a word, so shall his life, and the life of the Queen, and the life
of the Prince, and the lives of the whole Royal Issue, be long and long bound
up in the bundle of life with the Lord their God, and our God; and the souls
of their, and our enemies be slung out, as out of the midst of a sling, which
God the Father grant, for Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with the holy Spirit,
three persons and one immortal, invisible, and only wise God, be all Praise,
Power, Dominion and Majesty ascribed for ever, and ever, Amen, Amen.

A SERMON UPON THE FIFTH TO THE EPHESIANS. THE FIFTEENTH SERMON.
EPHESIANS, 5. verse 18. (...). Be not drunk with Wine, wherein is excess.


IN these words we have, First, a special charge, [ not to be drunk.]
Secondly, a special designation or Caveat, [ with wine.] Thirdly, a special
reason, [ wherein is excess.] To be drunk is a foul sin; to be drunk with
wine is a sin soon committed; to do that which contains and carries with
it so much mischief, and inconvenience as the word (...) imports, is very
fearful and dangerous. Touching the first; It may seem a strange course to
discourse against drunkenness before sober men, and at the Assize-time too,
when men use to hear of righteousness and Judgment, and the greater things
of the Law; For as Christ says, They that are whole, need not the Physician,
but they that are sick. And as St. Paul, Mat. 9. 1 Cor. 12.
Our uncomely parts have more honesty on, for our comely parts need it not; So
they that are here in the Church, they are well advised, and they that are
misaduised come not hither; therefore both ways you shall labor in vain, and
for nothing, as the Prophet speaks, and speak in the air, as the Apostle
has it, or cast your seed upon the Sea, as the Poet speaks. Thus some
hastily, and peradventure ouer-hastily. For what if most of them that hear me
this day, are soberly-minded? yet, as Saint John says to another purpose, 1
John 3.
It is not made manifest what we shall be. And as the same Saint John says, He
that is just, let him be more just. So it is no disgrace for any man to be
called upon with these words, He that thinks he stands now, at the second
or third hour of the day, 1 Cor. 1^.
let him take heed, lest he fall before the eleventh or twelfth. Revel. 3.
And again, Hold what thou have, lest another take away thy Crown. There was
a time when Saint Paul could deliver this observation for a truth, They that
are drunk, are drunk in the night. And Saint Peter might be bold to Apologize
for himself and his fellows, Act. 2.
These are not drunk, as ye suppose, since it is but the third hour of the
day, that is, about nine of the clock. But now the case is altered: if you
will find some sober, you must take them in their beds, (for they rise up
early to follow drunkenness) Nay, Hieronym.
as Saint Hierome tells of one that swear by her Jove, that she was very
betime, and before any would imagine, ^ewd or naught; So there be some that
with the Sun, and before the Sun, will be at the cup, and as though Satan
could expel Satan, so they think that one cup will drive away another. Ierem.
22. Ierem. 6.
O earth, earth, earth, hear the Word of the Lord, says the Prophet Jeremy in
one place. In another, To whom shall I speak and admonish, that they may
hear? If a man will prophecy to them of wine and strong drink, (for it is not
against it,) he shall even be the Prophet of this people, a Prophet for the
nonce. He that will go to the Tavern to them, and carowse with them, him they
will welcome and hear. Aelian. lib. 3. cap. 14.
Indeed, as I find in Aelian, that a certain politic Captain, Leonides by
name, finding the security, the beastly security of them of Byzantium, (whom he
took upon him to defend,) that they would not be reclaimed from their
tippling, no, not when the enemy was ready to scale the walls, devised to have
the Vintners and Ale-wiues remove their hogs-heads and barrels out of their
houses and Tauernes to the walls, that the people thither resorting to swill,
might at the least make a show of resistance. So if you will have some to hear
you, you must either remove the Pulpit to the Tavern, or the Tavern, the wine
and strong drink of the Tavern to the Church, for it they will follow, Deuteronomy.
3^.
that is their god. The Prophet Moses reproves the Jews from offering unto
new gods, which newly came up, whom their fathers feared not. Surely Bacchus is
a new Idol, whom few of our Ancestors served. Comus and Addeph^gia, that is,
Gluttony or full-^eeding, those they are were acquainted with, and for the same
reproached by their neighbors that had not so good stomakes; but as for
drunkenness, they took little pleasure therein, at the leastwise they did
not glory in it. The world is changed now, Iamdudum Syrus in Tiberim defluxit
Orontes, Esaias 2.
We are full of the manners of the East, and as the haire-siue suffers the
good liquor to run through it, and retains only the grains: so our
neighbors excelling in many kinds of virtues, we learn none of those, but
their quaffing and drinking; that we take up, nay, we labor to outstrip them
in. The saying of the Prophet is verified in too many; They pass the deeds of
the wicked: And therefore we can expect none other favor, but that which is
added in the same place, and prefixed above in the Chapter, Shall I not visit
for these things, says the Lord, shall I not be avenged upon such a Nation as
this? Well, Ierem. 5.
the matter falling out so foul, and being brought to the extremity, that it
is time both for all to pray, as it is in the Psalm, It is time, O Lord, that
thou put to thine hand, yea, the time is come; And for Preachers to lift up
their voices like Trumpets, and to cry aloud, and not to cease crying against
this sin of drunkenness. Alas, this sin of Drunkenness is a crying sin,
and as it is said, Genes. 6.
Genes. 6. That all flesh had corrupted his way upon earth, (through lust
especially;) So now the world may seem to be corrupt and abominable through
Drunkenness. Of Wisdom there is delivered a negative Proposition, The depth
says, It is not in me: Job 28.14.
the Sea also says, It is not in me. But of Drunkenness, it may be said
affirmatively, that both depth and dry land, both City and Town are full of
it. It was once said of God, Iouis omnia plena, All the world is full of God,
so by the Latin Poet. By the Greek also, (...): All streets are full of
Jove, all market places, all Seas and Ports: but now the like is verified of
Drunkenness, which God abhors and good men condemn, all the world is set
upon this naughtiness. Now if God had no where spoken against it, or if
secretly, or in the chamber, as it were, we had either been in no fault, or in
less fault. For as where there is no Law, there is no transgression, so where
men are ineuitably necessarily blind or ignorant, Romans 4.
they have somewhat to excuse their sin withal. But now when all the
Prophets and holy men of God from Moses downward, as many as have written or
spoken, have sharply inueighed against this sin; when (as Augustine speaks
against merit,) Vniuersa facies atque (vt ita dicam) vultus sanctarum
Scripturarum recte intuentes, id admonere inuenitur, vt qui gloriatur, in
Domino glorietur, The whole face and countenance of the holy Scriptures, does
admonish them that look upon it with a straight eye, that he that rejoices
should rejoice in the Lord. So the whole Book of God, if we will search it as
we are commanded, to do John 5. does every where decipher the odiousness of
Drunkenness, and what plagues God brings upon them that delight therein;
ought we not to hold that sin most vile and detestable, that is so generally
spoken against? Look upon my Text only, Be not drunk, s^ith the Apostle.
Mark, he does not say, I advise you not to be drunk, Tertul. de Corona
militis.
though as Tertullian says, Consilium and edictum eius, diuini iam praecepti
instar obtinuit, etc. His counsel were of no less authority than a
commandment: but he expressly lays his commandment upon us; [ Be not
drunk.] Where note in the second place, That Gods ways be not like man's
ways, as the Prophet says, Men think it is an indifferent thing to drink
much or little, nay, they count it a generous thing to drink hard, and that
man is no Gallant, that is not a great drinker, (...); Aristophan. Ran. circa
med. Comae.
He is the true Gentleman now adays, that can drink and drab it best. O
tempora, o mores! says the Orator! O mysteria, o mo^es, Ambro. 1. de vir.
says Ambrose! O Lord, to what times have thou reserved me, cried out
Polycarpus in Eusebius. Men call evil good. What remains next, but that they
call good evil? But Saint Paul here (in Gods name) charge us not to be
drunk; therefore he does not leave us to our liberty, but requires it as a
special duty, that we keep our selves within the bounds of sobriety. Indeed
in the words going next before, he forbids us to be unwise in Gods matters,
and commands us to understand what is the will of the Lord, and therefore
adding immediately thereupon the words of my Text, [ Be not drunk with wine,]
he would have us to make this collection, That Drunkenness is a special
hinderance to the knowledge of God. It is so, and to the service of God, and to
whatsoever is of piety or humanity either. It was said in old time, Prove a
man to be ungrateful, and you prove him to be altogether naught: Apoc. 3.1.
and so it may be said in all times, If you prove ^ man to be a drunkard, you
prove him to be filthy, Ier. 6.
and to every good work reprobate. He may have a name to live, but indeed he
is dead, as S. John speaks: he may have the appearance of a man, but indeed
he is a beast, as Jeremy speaks; He may be thought to be a sound man, but
indeed he is demoniacall, Basil. (...).
obsessed, or rather possessed with a Devil, or rather devils, and more
miserable than such a one. For as Basil says, (...), He that has a Devil is
pityed, but the drunkard is not worthy to bepitied (...), because he wrestleth
with a Devil of his own choosing. To be short, The drunkard is no better than
an Idol; he has eyes and sees not, ears and hears not, tongue and
speaks not, feet and walks not, Nec pes, nec manus, nec lingua of ficium
faciunt. If a blind man, and a lame man agree together, one may help the
other, according to the Emblem; the blind man having his limbs, may carry the
lame upon his back, and the lame man having his eyes, may direct the blind.
But now, if two drunkards go together, (if they can go,) they both fall into
the ditch, and the fall is grievous, and many times foul. It is said in the
Proverbs, Proverb. 26.
See thou a man wise in his own eyes? there is more hope of a fool than of
such a one. And so we may say in this case, See thou a man given to the cup?
there is as much hope of an Ass as of him. The reason is plain; Every other
sin that a man commits, leaves some sting or remorse behind it, but the
drunkard seems to be (...), past sorrow, past feeling. Again every other
sin has its satiety: but the drunkard is never weary of drinking, Prouer. 30.
as the daughters of the Horse-leech cry; Give, give, so he cries, Give, give,
Fill, fill. Therefore when God would show his hatred against pride, because it
could hardly be compared to a worse thing, he compares it to drunkenness,
saying, Behold the proud man (or arrogant (...), Habac. 2.5.
) is as he that transgresses by wine, he keeps not at home, (lo-ijnueh) he
enlarges his desire as hell, and is as death, and cannot be satisfied. Indeed
thus it is with drunkards, they cry out, Nos nisi damnosi bibimus, moriemur
inulti, Et calices poscunt maiores: If we drink not till our eyes stare
again, and while we have ever a penny in our purse, we shall dye an ignoble
death, no man will revenge our death. So do the drunkards exhort one another
in the Prophet: Come, I will bring wine, and we will fill our selves with
strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant. Esaias
56.
This is the (...), the practice, but what is (...), the duty? Roman. 13.13.
The Apostle shows it in my Text, Be not drunk. So to the Romans, Walk
honestly as in the day time, not in gluttony and drunkenness: what follows?
neither in chambering and wantonness: So it is, Venture mero aestuans, cito
despumat in libidines, says Hierome: Hieron. Oceano.
When the Persian Ambassadors were well whitled, then they fell to dishonest
embracings with the Macedonian Gentlewomen, and that they paid full dearly
for, Herodotus.
itcost them their lives though they were Ambassadors. This is to be seen at
large in Herodotus; and what Writer does not afford many such examples?
Therefore if you will have incontinency banished out of your City, do your
best to banish drunkenness first of all, for that is the mother of
fornication: Chrysostom. Athenae. li. 20.
so Chrysostom calls it upon the 13. to the Romans, yea, it is, (...), the
mother City of all mischief: so says Athenaeus, there was an Oracle given to
them of Lacedemon, (...), Covetousness will be the overthrow of Sparta, and
nothing else. This was a Prophecy for the time to come. Pliny. l. 10.
There is a complaint in Pliny for the time present and past, Latifundia
perdiderunt Italiam, Italy is undone by large seuerals. We may take up the like
complaint against drinking, that Multifundia, I mean, multum infundendo, the
pouring in of much liquor is the shame of this Kingdom already, and will be
(it is to be feared,) the utter undoing of it. How can it choose, when it does
so much hurt publicly and privately? Publicly, for whence are quarrels,
blading, wounds without cause, and many times untimely death? be they not
hence, even of Choler that boyleth in their gall inflamed by wine? whence
breaking of houses and Robberies, but to supply wants occasioned, for the most
part, by lavish spending? If it were not for drunkenness or too much drinking,
neither needed Justices of the Peace so much to be troubled for granting of
Warrants of Peace, nor their Clerks with Recognizances, nor the Honorable
Judges themselves, against their clement nature be forcedto sentence so many to
death, as many times they do? For drunkenness causes foul behavior, and
foul behavior brings on a foul end. To be short, it makes many
unprofitable, which otherwise might be serviceable both in Church and
Commonweal. Privately, it starueth many a family, if the goodman of an house
be so given, yea, causes much brabbling between man and wife, if either of
them be so given, yea, causes many a parent to break his heart or her heart,
if their child be so given. What a grief was it to Nouellus Torquatus his
father, (if he lived,) that his son was such a quaffer as he was, and that he
got thereby the name of Tricongius? What a shame to Bonosus, Vopiscus.
that he should be called after his death, Amphora. To Diotimus of Athens, that
he was called being yet alive, Infundibulum. Some man will say; To what purpose
is this inuectiue against drunkenness, except you know, and would tell us what
is good against it? as if a Physician should tell his patient in what danger he
stood, and in the mean time should administer nothing unto him? I answer that
there is Balm in Gilead; there is help for it, if yet every man will do his
best for the removing of it. The best thing that I know, is first to lay to our
hearts the commandment that is in my Text, [ Be not drunk.] The Apostle
commands this in his Name, that has power to give life, and to destroy.
Secondly, that we take heed unto the exhortation that speaks to us as unto
children, Luke 21.
Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be oppressed with
^urfetting and drunkenness. Thirdly, that you sit not too long at the table, but
that you follow the counsel of the wise Grecian, and to rise up (...). Isocra^.
Fourthly, that you think that the Law that Minos made for Creete (whereof
Plato makes mention in his Dialogue called Minos,) is very necessary for them
of this Land, (...), Plato.
not to drink one to another. His Majesty has been graciously pleased to set
forth his Proclamation against Combatants: it may please God also to move his
Royal heart to proclaim against Compotants, against such as drink healths,
thereby to overthrow their own health, and while they drink healths to the
great Ones, they may show some small affection, but they do them no good; for
the very prayer of a drinker is abominable; Tephillash shotheh tognabah, Baal
Turim. in Leuit. cap. 10.
(so says Baal Turim, and it is not contradicted by Christians,) how much more
then is their drinking? Lastly, in my judgment it were very profitable, yea,
necessary, that in every City and Town, there should be certain persons
appointed, (in Cities some of the chiefest Aldermen,) that are of special
reputation for piety and gravity, in Towns also and Villages, some of the most
substantial Parishioners, and these Censors should have power, not only to
enter into tippling houses, and to take forth such as they find drunk, or to
have lain soking any long time, and to commit them to Ward, till they be sober,
and do edormiscere villum, but also such as are scandalous in the streets,
reeling to and fro, not like a drunken man, (as it is in the Psalm) but stark
drunk, and swinishly ^umbling in the gutter: these also would be especially
punished by Censors, because they sin openly, that the evil being taken
away, God may be entreated toward the Land. Why should the name or office of a
Censor be odious unto us? (albeit I stand not upon the name, let such be
appointed, that will proceed as farre-forth as the common Law, or local
ordinance will warrant, and I have my desire.) It was not refused by the
Romans, when they were at the proudest, but being free, they subjected
themselves to the yoke of discipline, even the most noble of them did. So I
could tell you that a great politician, and a very wise man finds this fault
with the Venetians, that having such a world of Officers as they had, yet they
had never a one that looked to men's behavior, to see the public peace were
not violated; on the other side the same author commends a City that shall
be namelesse at this time, (though he were not of the same sound Religion, that
is practiced in that City,) that by their discipline they kept men in such awe,
and order, that seldom whiles any gross offenc^ is committed, and sin
seems there, rather to be prevented than punished. But what is the
Commonwealth the better, if one City be reformed for one sin of
drunkenness, when the whole head is sick, and the whole heart is heavy? when
from Dan to Beersheba, from one end of the Land to the other, all the
foundations of the earth be out of course? Shall the righteousness of a few,
divert a common destruction? or shall it deliver the righteous themselves in
the evil day? what good then will it do? Much verily; First, a book of
remembrance shall be written before the Lord, for them that fear the Lord,
Malac. 3.
and think on his Name, and in the day of death they shall have enough, and in
the day of public calamity they shall either be delivered, as Rahab in
Jericho, Jeremy in Jerusalem in Nebuchadnezzars time: the Jews that were
turned Christians in Pella, (who by Gods providence were maruellously saved,
Eusebius. l. 3. c. 5.
when a Panolothry or universal destruction was brought upon the Jews by
Titus;) or else their punishment shall be so mitigated, that they may be well
able to bear it. Secondly, as Saint Paul says, How know thou, O man,
whether thou shall save thy wife, etc? So, how know thou, O man, what good a
few pious neighbors may do for the converting of a whole street, and what
good one street reformed may do for the reforming of a whole City, and so of a
whole shire, and so of a whole Realm. Who are you, that despise the day of the
small things, Zacar. 4.
Ze^ha^y, 4? An handful of corn shall be ^owne on the top of the mountains,
and the fruit thereof shall be like Lebanon, Psalm. 72. Ezech. 47.
Psalm 72. The waters in Ezechiel Chapter 47. that at the first, were but
ancle deep, and then knee deep, and then up to the Loins, did afterward so
rise and flow, that they were as a river that could not be passed over.
Briefly, Elias servant at the first and a great while saw nothing, 1 King 18.
at the length a little cloud as big as a man's hand, and by and by the
heavens were black with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain, 1 Kings
18. They write strange things of Naphtha, that it will catch fire a far off,
and being once on fire, it will hardly be quenched; so of the Lodestone, that
being put near a chain of iron, it does not only draw the link that is next
unto it, but also causes that link to draw its fellow, and the next to it
its fellow again, and so the rest, till all be drawn; So let every man mend
one, and do his best to reform his own house, (do his best, I say, for the
best man cannot do what he will,) and we are in hope, that our example shall
not be in vain in the Lord, for the converting of others. Let so much be
spoken of the charge. [ Be not drunk.] I proceed now to the Designation, [
with wine.] Mark, Well beloved, he does not command us to abhor wine as an
unclean thing, Plutarch.
as Plutarch in his book of Isis, and Osiris, does report of the Egyptians,
that they used it not, no, not in their Sacrifices, or drink offerings, until
the time of Psammeticus, but abhorred the same upon a conceit, that it was the
blood of those Giants that they had heard did once make war against God: Thus
Plutarch. Aug. de haeres. cap. 46.
The like does Augustine in his book De haeresibus, write of the Manichees,
that they also could not abide wine; Why? For that it was the gall of the
Prince of darkness: blasphemous conceits, bending to the dishonor of
Almighty God, who brings forth bread out of the earth, and wine that makes
glad the heart of man, Psalm. 4.7. 1 Timothy 4. 1 Timothy 5.
etc. Not only every good giving comes down from the Father of lights,
James 1. but also whatsoever is given of God is good, and nothing ought to be
refused if it be received with thanksgiving* etc. 1 Timothy 4. Therefore,
though God will not allow us to be drunk with wine, 1 Timothy 4.
yet he does not forbid us to drink wine, 1 Timothy 5.
Use a little wine for thy stomachs sake, and thine often infirmities; Give
strong drink to him that is ready to perish, and wine to them that have grief
of heart. But a little proof will serve the turn to persuade us concerning
the lawfulness of wine, all the matter is to use it lawfully. They do not use
it well if they be Ministers, that spend more upon wine than upon oil, (upon
candles at their book,) as a wise man said. If they be rich men, if they spend
upon themselves more than their alms to the poor comes to: If they be
Tradesmen, specially poor Tradesmen, if they spend any thing at all. There was
an Emperor that said to his Soldiers when they murmured for want of wine, What
need you wine, that have the river Nilus to drink of? It is true, that the
water of Nilus is better than our water, (for that will feed apace, and
therefore they would not suffer their Caluish-god Apis to drink of it,
Plutarch vt supra.
) but yet we have mixed water, brued water, that is far better and wholesomer
also, than any water in Nilus, and that should content ^ll, at the least, the
meaner sort: But may not one lawfully be drunk^ with it, (with malt-drinke I
mean,) that is out of the tenor of our Text, which mentions only drunkenness
by wine? Beloved, you may not be drunk with wine, nor with any thing that has
operation of wine; for here is a Synecdoche: As bread in the Scripture
signifies all kind of strong nourishment, so wine also is taken for every kind
of strong drink, whether it be made of grapes, or of grain, or of fruit, or
the like, and therefore you shall have many times Sicera joined with it to
explicate the meaning of the word more fully, to wit, a drink that has the
power to inebriate, for so the word signifies. So then, though you be not
drunk with wine, because peradventure you have no wine to be drunk with, yet
if you be overcome with strong drink, of what kind soever it be, you are
found trespassers against Saint Paul in this place, and consequently against
God himself. To satisfy you farther, you shall understand that Aristotle
certain hundred years before Saint Paul, Aristotle.
makes mention of (...), Wine made of barley; and sets down the
difference, that whereas wine will make a man fall upon his nose, barley-broth
will make him fall backward upon his nole. I could make a demonstration of
artificial wines, as of Dates and Cherries, and twenty other things. What say
you? the West-Indians, (as Benzo writes, Benzo. lib. 1. page 123.
) make a strange kind of mash in the mouths of their women, (that is their
Vate,) which they boil, and drink the same, and will be as drunk with it, as
some beasts will be, when they have swilled in sweet whay or strong wort, and
do not you think, they offend highly against Saint Paul's precept, [ Be not
drunk with wine?] I make no doubt, for in this matter it is not respected what
you call the thing that does the hurt, but what hurt it does; if it makes the
head heavy, the heart outrageous, the eyes to stare, the tongue to stammer, the
feet to stagger, the stomach to work like a barrel of new ale, etc^ then it
may be called Sicera, and go for wine, and so come within the compass of my
Text. For this cause also you are forbidden to be drunk with Tobacco, which
howsoever some dote upon, and think they cannot take enough of, as though it
were some Panace that was good against all diseases, or some Moly that was good
against all sorcery, yet I believe the Proverb is fulfilled in most takers,
Thesaurus carbones, we looked for treasure, and beheld coals. I list not to
sift or examine curiously the worth of it, I leave that to another profession:
only I put you in mind, of a saying of Saint Augustine in his confessions, Hoc
me docuisti, vt quemadmodum medicament^, August. confess. lib. 10. cap. 31.
sic alimenta sumpturum accedam, etc. Thou have taught me (O God,) that I
should come with such a mind to receive my meat, as I come to take Physic;
whereby he signified, that as he took no Physic, but in case of necessity,
so he did not eat but when hunger did prick him. If it be meat, why is it not
eaten? If Physic, why is it taken so often? If Physic be taken too often,
then will it not work like Physic; as he that uses strong wine for his
ordinary drink, when he would have his crude meats digested, it will not
serve the turn, but he must have some compound water to help: So were Tobacco
as wholesome a weed, or herb, as is pretended, yet if it be used too
commonly, nature will entertain it as a friend, not as a Physician. But my
duty is to tender you health of the soul, not of the body; If it do no hurt
to the soul, let it be used for me, and let it be used as it is used by some
all the day long. Hoc primus repetas opus, hoc postremus omittas; but how can
it choose but hurt the soul, when it causes a man to spend so many precious
hours in idleness, in unthriftiness, in sensuality? If we must give an
account for every idle word, must we not give an account for every idle day,
nay month, nay year? if for every idle penny, must we not then for every idle
shilling? nay, I have heard of diverse that have sold their Patrimony for it.
This is not the way to bring men to that state, that the Prophet Esaias speaks
of, Esaias 24.
Like buyer, like seller, but this is to cause men to write under the sign of
them that have purchased by selling Tobacco, as Diogenes did under the golden
statue that Phryne the strumpet dedicated at Delphi, (...), that is, This was
gotten by the intemperance of the Grecians. And so I come to the third and last
part of my division, to wit, the reason drawn from the danger attending
drunkenn^sse, in these words, [ Wherein is (...),] The word signifies two
things, Excess in expenses, opposite to frugality, and excess in delights,
(whether it be in meats or drinks, or the like,) opposite unto temperance,
neither does it signify these vices in any mean degree, but in an extremity;
As for example Esau, in selling away his birthright was Asotus, and in selling
it away for a mess of potage, was twice Asotus. The like might be said of
Vgaccio, of Luca, that ventured his Dukedom, rather than he would lose a good
supper; of Lysimachus, that did away a whole Kingdom for drink, the like of
Wenceslaus, Paul. Ionius.
that did consume his Empire after the same manner; so the Prodigal son,
Luke 15. for dilapidating of his portion, may be called Asotus, and for
dilapidating of it no man knows for what, was twice Asotus. To be sho^t; they
that walk as Saint Peter describes them, 1 Pet. 4.
in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, reuellings, bankettings, etc. they
are Asoti: but in that they do marvel, and consequently be offended, in that
others do not run with them into the same excess of riot, they are twice,
yea, thrice Asoti. If Saint Paul were alive, and would phrase it according to
the Idiome of these times, he would call them roaring boys, and fellows of
the damned crew. Should any of the children of light wilfully abandon himself
to the fellowship of darkness, add sin unto sin, drunkenness unto
thirst, proceed from evil to worse; truly it had been good for such, that
they had never been borne, 2 Pet. 2.
it had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness,
than after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment given unto
them. It is a fearful thing to receive the grace of God in vain: and it is a
desperate thing, being warned of a rock wilfully to cast our selves upon it. You
have heard that drunkenness occasioned by drinking of wine or strong drinks,
or strong, heady fumes, is a thing displeasing to God, unprofitable, nay
hurtful to man, to his soul, to his body, to his estate, to his reputation;
for if it be followed, it brings a man to a desperate estate, that he shall
be Asotus, that is, Perditus, profligatus, that he shall simul cum re animam
etiam perdere, make havoc of his substance, and soul together. Thrax erit,
aut olitoris aget mercede caballum. That when all is gone, he shall be glad to
be a Swine-heard, Iuuenal.
like the Prodigal son, and be weary of his life ((...),) or make himself
away like Peter the Cardinal, the base son of Sixtus the the fourth, that
monstrous Epicure, the shame of the later times, or like Apitius the shame of
the ancient age, wherein he lived. If you will have the mischief that is done
by drunkenness or drinking of much wine, or strong w ine, ((...), and (...),)
gathered into a short sum: m^ thinks the old Schoole-man expresses it
significantly. Drun^ennesse, (says he,) takes away natural gifts, vsque ad
insensibilitatem, till a man do become void of sense; spiritual gifts, vsque
ad fundamentum, till he lose the very foundation of faith, or until he be
fleshly, and have no spirit left, as Saint Jude speaks. Lastly, temporal
blessings, vsque ad mendicitatem, till he be left a very beggar. Thus he.
Touching beggerlinesse that drunkenness brings men unto, I gave you even now
two or three examples, and he is a very young man and vnobseruant, that cannot
add twenty or forty out of his own experience. And for the hurt that it does
to the spiritual graces or inward man; let me tell you what Saint Basil, and
Saint Ambrose say, As smoke chaseth away Bees, Basil.
so does surfeiting and drunkenness spiritual graces. So Basil; more
particularly Ambrose; As continency is the mother of faithfulness, Ambrose de
Helia and i^iunio.
so drunkenness is the mother of perfidiousnesse. Thus he. Lastly, for
insensiblenesse, I mean insufficiency, either to judge or conceive: A Story
may be remembered out of Athenaeus, which in short was this, Certain youths in
a Town of Sicily called Agrigentum, Athenaeus l. 2. Agrigentum.
had been a tippling, and had applied so hard, that they knew not where they
were, but thought they were upon the Sea, and their Inn was a ship, and tossed
and in great danger, by the surges and billows, which carried it to and fro,
(when those surges were in their brains, or in their bellies, and no where
else;) What do they therefore? imagining that the ship would sink except it
were lighted, they bestirre themselves and open the doors and windows, and
cast forth whatsoever they could come by, stools, and pewter and bra^se, and
beds and bedding, and old scuffling there was in the streets for the things
that were cast forth; but this did not bring the drunkards to themselves, for
all that day and that night; on the morrow when the Captains of the Town,
(hearing of the stir and hurly-burly,) repaired to the house, and demanded
what was the matter, They answered, that the ship had bin in great danger, and
that they were enforced to cast forth all the fraught or lading into the Sea,
else had they bin all castaway; yea said one of them, (that thought himself
to be the best in the company,) I was in special danger* and therefore for
fear I gate me under the hatches as far as I could. The Captains pardoned
them, but would not suffer them to have any more wine, and anon the tempest
ceased. To this effect Athenaeus; Which Story I do not recite to move any to
laugh or to smile, but rather to mourn within our selves, to consider the
corruption of man's nature, whereby that which God has given for our good, is
unto man an occasion of falling. Man abides not in honor, ^specially if he
drink too much, but may be compared to the beast that perishes. You know how
Noah lay, What Lot did, What brags Benhadad and Belshazzar made, What Herod
promised when they were drunk, and h^w the things turned to their shame and
decay. It is wickedness to turn the Grace of God into wantonness, and it is
madness to lose ones-selfe utterly, to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season. The pleasure of the thr^^^ is but (...), of one line, as one said, it
has no breadth, much less substance in it. The breadth of the throat, (if
Bernards measure be true,) is not passing two fingers; Bernard. de conuersione
ad Clericos.
and shall a man for two fingers pleasure, cast away health of body, health of
soul, and whatsoever is to be reckoned of? Know ye not, that your bodies are
the Temples of the holy Ghost, and will you now take the Temple of God, and
make it the Temple of an Idol, and of the worst Idol (...)? Know ye not that
drunkards are reckoned amongst them that shall not inherit the Kingdom of God?
and will you be at cost, and do away that you have, to lose that Kingdom,
which a wise Merchant would give all that he has to buy and to compass? O ye
Corinthians, (says Saint Paul,) my mouth is open unto you, my heart is
enlarged. I use great boldness of speech, and am earnest in showing the
detestation of this sin, and to prove, if by any means I may prevail with
any for their good. Basil wrought upon Valens his conscience, and moved him,
(as also Saint Paul did upon Foelix his, and Saint John the Baptist upon
Herod's,) but yet it fared with them as it does with iron, which though it do
glowe, and be made never so red-hot with the fire, yet remains iron still;
Thus Nazianzen. But I hope of better things of some that hear me, namely, that
they will be truly changed by the renewing of their mind, and so become new
creatures. Why? upon a Sermon that Saint Paul made to a Jailer, he believed,
and was baptized, and all his household straight-wayes; Act. 16.
So in the same Chapter, after he had preached a time in Ephesus, many of them
which used curious Arts, brought their books and burned them before all men,
and counted the price of them, I cannot tell how many thousand marks. But
Saint Paul was an Apostle, and endued with the first fruits of Gods Spirit, and
besides, the Lord made way to the conversion by a miracle. Let me recount
therefore to you another example of one Johannes Capistranus, of whom Aeneas
Syluius writes at large, Aeneas Syluius. Vrspergensis Paralipomen.
and for my purpose Vrspergensis in his Chronicles. This fellow coming into
Germany to reform abuses, prevailed so far with them, that the women did
cast away their vain apparel and gugawes, and the men gathered together their
Tables, Dice, and Cards, and burnt them. But this Friar was not alone, he had
an associate; True, but the associate did only interpret what the Friar did
deliver in Latin, so the speech, or exhortation was but one, if one. But the
Turk did then invade Christendom, and then very fear will make men devout,
and to yield easily. What say you then to Pythagoras? Trogus li. 20.
It is written of him by Trogus, That being alone, and no body to help him, he
prevailed so far with the men of Crotona, that of dissolute men he made them
sober, of wretchlesse, frugall and modest; the women also laid aside their
shining garments and attire, and were nothing behind the men for all kinds of
temperancy; but he took pains with them twenty years together. What say you
then to the Story of Polemo in Laertius? This Polemo being overtaken with
drink, Laert. li. 4.
(as he was wont to be,) broke into Xenocrates his School with his companions,
of a purpose to daunt him, and to drive him out of countenance; but Xenocrates
treating at that time, (as God would have it,) of Temperance, so handled the
matter, and wrought upon the young man's conscience, that he began to be ashamed
of his dissolute course, and became such a Convert, and well reformed, that
there was not the like to him among all Xenocrates his Scholars, and after his
death became his successor. Now could a Lecture of a Philosopher prevail with
a deplorate youth then, and shall not the Sermon of a Preacher, nay, of many
Preachers prevail with them, that either are, or should be more stayed now?
Where is the Lord God of Eliah? 2 Kings 2.14. Lactant. lib. 3. cap. 26.
Where is the force of the Word that Lanctantius speaks of Da mihi virum qui
sit iracundus, etc. Give me a man that is never so loose and unbridled, with a
few of the Words of God I will bring him into good order and compass. Is the
power of God shortened, or is not the naughtinsse of man increased? This is
that which the Rabbis do say, Ba lithar mesaijegim otho, When a man does his
good will, (and that good will is also of God, Phil. 2.12.
God works in us both the will and the deed, as it is in the Philippians,)
when, I say, he does not ponere obicem, (as the Schoolmen speak,) resist the
holy Ghost, as the Scripture phraseth it; then lo, the Lord is near unto them
that call upon him, Briefly, this is that which Clemens Alexandrinus puts
us in mind of. As in the play of tossing the Ball, it is not enough for one of
the players to be cunning in throwing of it, but the other player also must
take it (...), handsomely, finely, or else the Ball will go down. So when the
Lord shall say to us, Behold me, Behold me, seek ye my face, If we do not
answer, Thy face, Lord, will we seek, we are here ready to do thy will, O
God; if we stop our ears against his calling, harden our hearts against his
knocking, we can blame no body but our selves, if the Word become unprofitable
to us. The sum of all is this; Beware of Drunkenness, do ye beware of it
every one, specially young men, and that you may escape Drunkenness, take heed
of drinking much wine and strong drink, otherwise you will fall into the
extremity which is called (...), which without serious repentance, without the
greater repentance will bring a man to destruction both of body and soul. The
Lord save that which he has bought. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.
A SERMON AT THE FUNERAL OF THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, MILES, LATE LORD
BISHOP OF GLOVCESTER:

PREACHED IN THE CATHEDRAL CHVRCH of GLOVCESTER, upon the ninth of November,
1624. by THOMAS PRIOR, Master of Arts, and one of the Prebendaries there.

PSALM 16. My flesh shall rest in hope.

LONDON, Printed by Elizabeth Allde for Robert Allot, dwelling at the Black
Bear in Paul's Churchyard. 1632.

A FUNERAL SERMON UPON THE DEATH OF MILES SMITH, LATE LORD BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER.
2 TIMOTHY 1.12. For I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he
is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against that Day.


BLackenesse and sadness have clouded this day; for a principal Pastor, a
great Prelat is now fallen in our Israel. Himself occasioned the choice of
this Text: and the scope of it is this; Paul, appointed a Preacher of the
Gospel, labors therein much; but men worldly-wise, accounting his preaching
foolishness and babbling, do scoff, reproach and persecute to dash, and to
discourage him: yet cannot he, through cowardice, be diuerted from his way; nor
through selfe-guiltinesse be ashamed of his work. For when (elsewhere) he
looks on the Gospel it self, he is bold and says, I am not ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ, Romans 1.16.
for it is the power of God unto salvation. And here, looking on the future
reward of his now pains and patience, with like confidence he says again; I
suffer these things, nevertheless I am not ashamed; for I know whom I have
believed, etc.

They observe a difference usual between credere Deum, Deo, and in Deum; to
believe a God, to believe God, and to believe in God. But here the holy Ghost
observes not this difference; for though (...), be rightly englished, whom I
have believed, yet it imports no less than if it had been (...), in whom I
have believed. For by it, he gives firm assent to the premises, with
application to himself, and relyance on God; that they shall be performed to
him accordingly; which is to believe in God. And for proof of this, our
Apostle tells us, that he has committed to Gods custody (as he calls it,)
(...), a Pawn, a Pledge, or that, which he entrusted him withal. And what
that is, take from Interpreters ancient, and modern. One says, ( his soul,)
another which is all one, Ambros. Aquin. Bruno. Calvin. Beza. Bull^nger. in
locum.
( himself,) ( his works,) says a third; a fourth adds his ( sufferings,)
a fifth his (Salvation;) And from all you have the whole truth, and nothing
else. For thus it stands; God has deposited with Paul the gifts of his
Grace; these he uses to his masters best advantage, and suffers much for it;
but that blankes him not, that puts not him out of heart: for his ( depositum,)
is with God; to whom he has committed his soul, himself, his doings, his
sufferings to be rewarded with life, and salvation. Of this to be sure he
supporteth his confidence with two props.

Alsufficient power of God, who is able, ((...):) or of power to keep all for
him. Now this ((...), Zanch. de Attri. Dei, l. 3. c. 1. q. 2.
) this Power of God is, either Immanent, working in himself: or Transient,
toward the creatures: And this, Absolute, by which he can do more than he
will: or Actual, by which he does what he will. And that this actual power,
which the Almighty pleased to determine by his Will, is here meant, is plain
by the

(I know whom I have believed,) q. d. A God of Wisdom, Truth, Righteousness,
Goodness, Love, and whatsoever may assure me.

But when is the time of his expectation? At the Day, that shall set an end to
all days, to all times: called by an eminency in the Text, (that Day,) id est,
that great, and fearful day of Christ, in which the Lord Jesus shall come to
judge the world. In sum, thus our Apostle; He who knows, that he whom he
has entrusted can, and will keep for him against the appointed day, that
which he has committed to his trust: needs not to be ashamed of his
sufferings for it.

But such an one I know my God to be, etc.



Thus he reasons. And by this time you know his meaning, and whereat he aims,
scil. To speak his knowledge of God; In a twofold Proposition: 1 General,
that he knows who he is, saying, I know whom I have believed. 2 Particular,
that he knows what a one, specially in one of his Attributes, viz. of Power.
Which Power is Invincible, ( able to keep that which is committed unto him.)
Which Power is Unchangeable, until, or ( against that day.)



According to this, the first Meditation we shall fall on will, run thus,

That God, and none but God is the comfort of the faithful in his troubles.

The believer (in afliction) draws not comfort out of the standing Pooles of
outward sufficiencies, but out of the living Fountains of the Alsufficiency of
the Lord Almighty: He romes not up and down this Sublunary world to relieve
himself being hard bestaed. No, that were with that unclean spirit in the
Gospel, Matthew. 12.43.
to walk through dry places seeking rest, and finding none: but when he (with
David) is greatly distressed, his house rifled, his goods spoiled, his wives
captiuated, his Ziglag fired, his associates mutinous, meditating death, and
stoning him, then fetches he his comfort from Heaven: so, David comforted
himself in the Lord his God, 1 Samuel 30.6. 1 Samuel 30.6.


And truly, (to enlarge our selves a little here, whither should a man in such
a case fly but hither? For nothing can afford solid comfort, that (it self)
cannot (at least) take away the cause of discomfort. That Romans grief prompt
so much to him; C. Figulu^ in Val. Max. il. 9. cap. 3.
who to his friends that would comfort him about the loss of the Consulship,
says, Omnes consulere scitis, Consulem facere nescitis; All can give me
counsel, ye cannot make me Consul. Could outward things rid us from the
troubles of this life, from death the end of this life, from damnation after
death, then said they something worth the harkening to; but this they cannot
do: for breuities sakes insist on one.

Not from Death: for as the Candle fails before it is well lighted, or is
choked with much moisture, or is puffed out with the wind, or is extinguished
by the hand of man, or goes out of its own accord: So man, if not intombed in
his mothers bell^ dies not in the cradle, withers not growing up, be not
conquered when ablest to conquer, but does hold out till old age; then die he
must. Shut the doors of the womb, and then no entrance into this world; but
being here, so many are the passages hence, that they cannot b^ stopped. So
that a living man, is but an Emblem of that liuelesse Anatomy, where the Ram
pusheth at the head, the Bull at the Neck, the Lion at the Heart, the Scorpion
at the Privy parts, etc. One dies of an Apoplexy in the head, another of a
Struma in the neck, a third of a Squinancie in the throat, a fourth of the
Cough and Consumption of the Lungs, others of Obstructions, Inflammations,
Pleurisies, Gowts, Dropsies, etc. And him that escapes the sword of Hazael,
him does Iebu slay; and him that escapes the sword of Iebu, him does Elisha
slay. Let God arm any of the least of all his creatures against the strongest
man, it is present death. Our glass is so britle, that every thing that can
knock it, can crack it; nay what is more brittle than glass? yet it may be
laid up and preserved for many ages: for though subject to knocks (which it may
escape) yet not to agues, to diseases. But with mankind mortality dwells,
Intus est hoc malum, in visceribus ipsis haeret, where ever life is, there is
death, it sticks in our very bowels. The Comparison is Saint Augus^ines. We
walk among casualties, (says he) Si vitrei essemus, If we were glass, etc.
August. ^e verb. Dom. s^cund. Matthew. Ser. 1.
Falls for these brittle vessels we fear, but age, or sickness we fear not
in respect of them. But man, besides the many casualties that have continual
intercourse with his life, lies open to the enfeerbling of age, and sickness.
2 Cor 3.1.
The holy Scriptures call our Tabernacles earthly houses, and very rightly; for
either they fall by outward violence, or moulder away of their own accord. Man
dwells in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, Job 4.19.
which are crushed before the moth. Thus frail are we, and all the world
cannot help it.

But God can help all: If that were a good argument, Could not he, that opened
the eyes of the blind, John 11.37.
have caused that even this man should not have dyed? Then this is good, He
that restored him to life, being dead, could much more have kept him in life,
being yet alive. He can translate Enoch to depart without the sense of death;
or (if He please,) that he shall not die at all. Heb. 11.5.
He can (if it seemed Him best,) grant unto all men their common desire not to
unclothe them at all; but cloth them upon, 2 Cor. 5.2. and 4.
with their house, which is from Heaven, that mortality may be swallowed up of
life. And he can, (for he will) take order, that all those that are alive at
the coming of the Lord, shall not sleep, but be changed in a moment. 1 Cor.
15.51.
But where he decrees the faithful to death, there also he can* he will, with
the Vipers flesh, cure the Vipers sting, and out of darkness fetch light, and
out of death life, filling the dying man with living comfort. First, through
his future Heavens dew is as the dew of herbs, Isa. 26.19.
and the earth shall give up her dead, and he, after he has slept a while in
his bed (the grave) shall arise refreshed; even when this corruptible shall put
on incorruption, and this mortal shall put on immortality. Secondly, Through
his Basil to the Tyrant, Quomodo mortem formidabo, Naz. in Mon^d^n Bas. ^ag.
quae me meo Creatori sit redditura? How shall I fear death, which will give me
back unto my Maker? Nay, with our Apostle Saint Paul, like a prisoner that
would be enlarged; Phil. 1.23.
I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is best of all.

And as thus the believer comforts himself in the Power of God: so likewise in
the Wisdom of God, who afflicts him only when he needs affliction, as Saint
Peter has it, 1. Pe. ^1.6.
though now for a season (if need be) ye are in heaviness, etc. These
corroding medicines need be applied to eat out proud flesh; these bitter
potions to purge out peccant humors; these dusts to smoke us out of the
highway of the world; these unpleasant things to acquaint us with the bitter
fruit of sin; and what that wrath-full cup was, which Christ our Savior
drank of for our sins; these to try our faith, our patience, and the
naturalnesse of our love, whether it will bear the rod laid on, not so much
for the Fathers pleasure, Hebr. 12.10.
as for the childrens profit.

And in the Love of God he can take comfort, who, when he gives a bitter
potion, stands by to see the working of his Physic; And when the Physicians
of our bodies are not touched with the sick fits of their patients, God
Almighty, the Physician of Israel can condole with us. To this purpose Isaiah,
Isa. 63 9.
In all their affliction, he was afflicted; and Joel, Io^l 2.^3.
he is such a one as is sorry for our afflictions.

Finally, he can comfort himself in the faithfulness of the Lord. 1 Cor.
10.13.
For God is faithful, who will not suffer us to be tempted above our strength,
but will give the issue with the temptation, says our Apostle. God will not
suffer the smarting plaster longer on, than needs must, but will be a refuge
in due time, Psalm. 9.9.
as David tells us, and speak comfortable things to our hearts, Hos. 2.14.
even in the wilderness, as he promises by another Prophet. Thus he, that
has faith in his heart, cheareth up himself in the midst of discomforts, by
the Power, Wisdom, Love, and Faithfulness of his God; which sets him down,
with the Churches soliloquies in her Lamentations, ^am. 3.24, 25, 26.
The Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore will I hope in him. Lam.
3.24.25, 26.
The Lord is good to them that wait for him, to the soul that seeks him. It
is good that a man should hope, and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord.

Foolish therefore, and impious is the practice of those (to make some use of
this matter,) who in times of fear, of care, of sorrow, or of distress of
conscience, seek to allay or forget their heart-pangs, by joining to merry,
riotous and profane company. As if a man ran from a Lion, and a Bear met
him: or leaned his hand on a wall, Amos ^.19.
and a Serpent bit him; this is to put more on the ^core, where is too much
already, and to make two real evils, of one seeming one: Forsaking the
fountain of living waters, to dig to themselves pits, broken pits, Ierem. 2.13.
that can hold no water. Jonas the Prophet would be an example to such for
ever, who flying from the pre^ence of the Lord toward Tarshish, there to hide
from God, and to solace and forget himself (if possible) among the Learned of
that University, was pursued by vengeance, D. Ray. on Ob. p. 13.
thrown into the bottom of the sea, filled with fear lest the Whale should
devour his body, and hell his soul; for as a man already in the state of the
dead, he said, Ion. 2.2.
Out of the belly of Hell cried I, Chap. 2.2. Then verse. 4. I said, Verse. 4.
I am cast out of thy sight. Oh that God (rather than lose them) would so
pursue ours, and fetch them home before past recovery! O, that themselue; would
fore-apprehend the bitterness of outward crosses, specially of sickness;
when these refuges will prove but a lie unto them! Oh, that they would consider
how conscience will then board them, and present to them the sin-reuenging
wrath of God, enough to make the heavens to melt, and the earth to tremble* Ah
poor dying man, whose life does hang before him; stays it? Its with that
intolerable companion a wounded spirit; departs it? it is into the insuf^erable
and unquenchable flames of hell. But whereto tends this? to drive to
desperation? Nay, but to God; Whither should the a^^righted child go, but to
his Father? Whither the tired, but to him that can refresh him, the wounded,
but to the Surgeon? A people, but to their God? To whom shall we go? Ioh.
6.68.
(say the Disciples by Peter's mouth) thou have the words of eternal life. To
Christ then, to Christ, and by him unto the Father; who says, I am the way,
John 15.6. Matthew. 11.27.
the truth and the life; no man comes to the Father, but by me: And again,
Neither knows any man the Father but the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son
will reveal him. Where to find comfort in distress, ye know* and the way ye
know. When Noah's Dove found no rest for the sole of her foot, Genes. 8.9.
she returned into the Arc unto him again; so let us return unto God again,
out of whom no rest can be found, no, not for the sole of our foot. The Law
was, that if a man found his enemies Ox, or Ass going a^tray, Exodus 23.4.
he should return it home to the owner; sure I am, we owe no less to our own
souls, when they go astray from God. Let us therefore, send them homewards
with David's direction; Return to thy rest, O my soul.

Psalm. ^16.7.
Thus have we opened the fountain of Paul's consolation: next, you shall see how
he does assure it; I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is
able to keep that which I have committed unto him, id est, entrusted him
withal.

When a foundation is laid, in a proportion Geometrical, they build; and the
more weight is laid on the foundation, the firmer; so where God is the
foundation, settle thy building upon him, entrust thy self and whatsoever thou
art, with him, and be sure; For They that trust in the Lord, Psalm. 125.1.
shall be as Mount Sion, which cannot be removed, but abides for ever. The
means to secure our felicity, is to entrust our selves, and our causes with
him.

For he is both Able, to keep all: and it may stand him upon* First, He is
Able; for nothing is hard to the Almighty; He is able by his absolute power, of
these stones to raise up children unto Abraham: To mix all things, and to bring
them back to their former Chaos; And what else not? And by his Actual power
he can cast Satan from heaven like lightning; can deliver him into the chains
of darkness, can rescue out of his Kingdom whom he will; can keep them,
being so delivered unto Salvation. That then, which is committed unto him, does
not perish, because the everlasting Arm is underneath. Isay 26.3.4.
Him will thou keep in perfect peace (says Isaiah) whose mind is stayed on
thee, because he trusts in thee. Trust ye in the Lord for ever: for in the
Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength. And secondly (in a sort) it stands his
Majesty upon, to do for them that depend upon him; else what shall be done to
his great Name? how will the enemy insult? the godly hang down the head; or
how will any be bold to cast themselves on him in aftertimes? In their
pressures therefore, they may resolve with David, Our heart shall rejoice in
him, because we have trusted in his holy Name, Psalm. 33.21.
Psalm. 33.21.

Would thou then (O Christian man) find sanctuary in a storm, and a City
of refuge against the pursuer? when other men's hearts do faint, would thine be
stable? when the spirit of other men can scarce bear their own infirmity,
would thine find help against the wound of spirit? when not civil honesty,
not good intentions, not formal prosession, nor the bare name of Christian can
steed thee? would thou then want wherewith to foil and fell thine enemy
when thou art to dye? would thou bid defiance to death and hell? In a word,
when the heavens shall be on fire about thine ears, would thou be able to
look upon the Son of man? Let the Lord be thy relyance, and the most High
thy confidence: gather thy self under his wings, and trust under the shadow of
feathers; bewail thine unaptness to believe on him; confess thine aptness
to lean on lying vanities; and stir up thy soul to rely on heaven. Do we
call Acts and Deeds of men, security; and shall we not trust that which God
has sealed and delivered unto us? children rely wholly on their parents, and
shall not we rely wholly on our heavenly Father. Never man yet trusted in God,
and was disappointed; and shall we now be forsaken? 2 Chro. 20.20
If Iehosaphats people will believe in the Lord, they shall be established; if
believe his Prophets, they shall prosper; If we be not wanting to our selves,
we shall not want any thing necessary; Mark 9.23.
If thou can believe, (says our Savior to that man in the Gospel) all
things are possible to him that believes: dependence on God is better, than
all worldly confidences; And better is it than Saul's Armor, to be able to
affront an enemy as David did Goliath, saying, I come to thee in the Name of the
Lord of Hosts, 1 Samuel 17.
the God of the Armies of Israel: For that armeth with Power invincible, able
to preserve, and with Power unchangeable, able to preserve for ever; for this
cause our Apostle is bold, and says, He is able to keep that which I have
committed unto him against that Day. Where, of the last Day, in the last place.

Now, in that he does so slight his sufferings, and the shame of them for his
expectation at the day of Judgment, he learneth us, That it does much concern
a man to provide, that it may go well with him at that Day. Let the fire,
(says Ignatius, that holy Martyr under Traian, in his Epistle to Rome, Eusebius.
^ist. li. 3. cap. 32.
) the gallows, devouring of wild beasts, breaking of bones, pulling asunder of
my members, the pressing of my whole body, the torment of the Devil, or hell
it self come upon me, so that I may win Christ Jesus: Win Christ Jesus,
What Is that? This is that, and no other, for which our Saint Paul suffered the
loss of all things, and did count them but dung, that he might win Christ,
Philip. 3.8. ver. 11.12.
Philip. 3.8. But what may that be? Read the 11. and 12. verses, and you shall
hear himself, That I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the
fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his death; if by any
means I might attain unto the resurrection of the dead. Thus he and all tend
to this, that he may be sure of a blessed Resurrection at the last day. The
discretion of a man makes him to provide in Summer for Winter, in youth for
age; But if the soul be better than the body, heaven than earth, God than the
world, things eternal than things transitory, it shall be our Wisdom in the
sight of God, and men; to lay up a good foundation against that Day, when the
Lord shall appear to Judgment.

For first, It is a dreadful time, for then the Lord Jesus shall be revealed
from Heaven with his mighty Angels, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.
in flaming fire, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. By the dread of that Day, is described some
time of fearful punishment on sinners in this life as some learned judge; or
if that Day it self be there meant, as others conceit; mark the astonishment
thereof, Revel. 6.12. Reu. 6.12* etc.
And lo there was (for it is as sure as if already acted,) a great Earthquake,
and the Sun became black as a sacke^loth of hair, and the Moon became as
blood, and the Stars of heaven fell unto the earth, even as a fig tree
casts her untimely figs, when she is shaken of a mighty wind, and the heaven
departed as a scrole, when it is rolled together: and every Mountain and Island
were moved out of their places. Should we see such things now, What would our
fear and amazement be? How would not our hearts within us melt with
perplexity? Surely that Day that shall end all times, and the course of all
things in this world, must be to man a hideous time. For the Kings of the
earth, and the great men, Reu. 6.15.
and the rich men, etc. hid themselves, (says the Spirit of prophecy, making
things present that are to come,) in dens and in rocks of the mountains, and
said to the mountains, and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us, etc. from the
suffering, perhaps, of momentany things. And what will they do at this Day? As
it was said of the last end of Jerusalem; so of this time, and most truly,
Then shall be great tribulation, Matthew. 24.2.
such as was not from the beginning of the world till then.

2. It Is the time of trial, and of the great Assize: If a man be to be tried
for life, how does he provide against the time, to clear his innocence, or to
plead his pardon? Then it comports every man to be ready with his plea, that he
be not condemned, Magistrates Ministers, people; 2 Cor. 5.10.
For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every man
may receive according to that he has done in the body, whether it be good or
evil.

Thirdly, As it fares with us then, so must it stand with us for ever: No
reuersing that Sentence by a writ of error, no appeal from thence to a Court
of Chancery; Mercy accepted in this our Day, shall be showed then, refused here
shall be denied there. And the execution shall follow; Matthew. 25.
To them on the left hand it shall be said, Go ye cursed. To the on the right
hand, Come ye blessed. And so long as eternity lasts, and the immortal soul
lives, yea so long as God is God, the reprobate shall be in the torments of
hell, and the righteous in the joys of heaven.

Now it would make a man's heart to shiuer, and his flesh to tremble, to see how
in other matters men careful of every trifle, and of every complement
obseruant, neglect this matter of greatest consequence. Would you think that a
man that trots from Lawyer to Lawyer, to secure and assure lands, would not be
a better husbandin greater matters? When Parents be so careful to get an
estate to leave to posterity, would they be imagined to be unprovided of a
place for themselves at need? If evil be toward another, we can pity him; if
an Ox be in a pit, we can help him out? we can even pity a Dog in his hurt;
yet not be touched toward our selves, in the extremest danger of extremest
misery, as if nothing were cheap with us but our selves, nothing vile but our
own souls. If a man had the keeping of the blood of Christ in a violl, how
chary would he be of it? We have the custody of our souls committed to our
selves, Ber^. de aduen. Dom. Ser. 3.
dearer to Christ (as Saint Bernard observes,) than his own blood, and shall
we not be most tender of them? Trifles in themselves are trifles; and some
things that bear some show, in comparison with others of more weight, are
trifles; Now, to the soul of man and his welfare at the Day of Christ, all the
Kingdoms of the world are but trifles; for what shall it profit a man to win
the whole world, Matthew 16.26.
and to lose his own soul? or what recompense shall a man give for his soul?

Be entreated therefore, Brethren, in conclusion, be entreated by the sweet
mercies of God, by all the sufferings and intercessions of Christ, by all the
joys of heaven, by the great charge which God and Nature have committed unto
you of your own souls; oh by the glory and dread of that Day, be entreated to
prepare, that it may go well with you then, and that ye may be numbered among
the blessed: Here to live, and lie with swine, is abhorred, and it is much more
to be abhorred to live with Devils and damned spirits in hell. Might those who
now suffer the scorching of those hellish flames have offer, how readily would
they apprehend it to be delivered thence? And how should we beware, and use all
possible means that we come not there? They had their time, and they lost it;
our time is now, Behold, now is the accepted time, behold, 2 Cor. 6.2.
now is the Day of salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2. Heaven may be had; oh dear
Christians, lose it not; cast up your account, mourn for your sins, make
your peace with God, through the blood of Christ; bring forth fruits of
Regeneration; Offer your selves sacrifices to God, holy and acceptable; and if
ye find these things hard, if (to you) impossible, call in Christ to your
help. Christ will inform your minds, mollify your hearts, regenerate your
wits, subdue your affections, purge your consciences, rebuke Satan, and give
the victory, and the Crown. Assure your selves, as the Church does her self,
saying, Cant. 2.5, 6.
His left hand shall be under mine head, and his right hand shall embrace me;
he will stay me with apples, and comfort me with flagons. And as our Saint Paul
himself, Philip. 4.13.
I am able to do all things through the help of Christ that strengthens me.
Idle not out your time (with the foolish Virgins) lest the gate be shut against
you: Matthew. 25.
but (with the wise Virgins) get oil into your Lamps, the oil of knowledge,
the oil of faith, the oil of holiness, the oil of praises, let your Lamps
be trimmed, and your lights flaming, that ye may enter with the Bridegroom
into the bridechamber, a place of celestial pleasure, and celestial plenty,
plenty that never fails, and pleasures for euer-more.

And thus have you our Meditations on the Text.

A word more of this present occasion, and we have done.

When I was appointed by this right Reverend and Honorable Prelate to this
service, I found him declining any Encomium of his pr aises; for well knew he
what Austin has, (and what has Augustine or any of the Fathers, that he knew
not?) That the soul received among the blessed, regards not the
commendations of men, Imitationem tantum quaerit, it likes their imitation
better. But as the Elders of the Jews to Christ, in another case, on the
Centurions behalf, Luke 7.4.5.
He is worthy thou should do this for him, for he has loved our Nation,
and built us a Synagogue; he is worthy to be remembered of us, for he loved our
Nation, id est, us Ministers, and he furnished your Synagogues, your Churches
with the plentiful preaching of the Gospel. The same which moved Israel so
honorably to interre that good high Priest Iehoiada, is our cause this day; 2
Chr. 24.16.
For he did good in Israel, both toward God, and toward his house: Ye
daughters of Israel, weep over him, who clothed you in scarlet, with other
delights, and put on ornaments of gold upon your apparel.

Two singular ornaments crowned him, which seldom meet in one man, Learning,
and Humility; Learning, the ornament of his mind; and humility, the ornament of
his learning.

F. Quin^. orat. instit. lib. 10. cap. 3.
Julius secundus studying long for an Exordium to his matter, was asked by
Julius Florus, Nunquid tu melius dicere vis quam potes? I have matter, if I
must fit it with speech, I must speak better, than in this cantle of time, I
can speak. A. Gel. Noct. Attic. l. 19. c. 3.
Therefore lest I should Frigide laudare, which Fauorinus likes not; I Will give
it you in gross, considering his much reading, with the happiness of his
memory; how well acquainted with Histories Ecclesiastical, and profane; with
the Jewish Rabbis, and the Christian Doctors, with Divines ancient and
modern; with Fathers Greek and Latin; how perfect in the Greek, the Hebrew,
the Chaldee, the Syriacke, and the Arabicke tongues, I am bold to affirm, that
there are few so learned men under heaven.

One monument of his learning have we, for which the age now does, and the
children unborn shall bless his memory; That he began with others, but
finished alone, and (with one of the greatest and most learned Bishops of the
Church of England,) set forth the new and most exact translation of the Bible;
wherein (as it was said of Jerome, Hieronym. Sophroni.
for translating the Septuagint into the Dalmatian tongue,) he delivered the
Scriptures suae linguae hominibus, to Englishmen in English. The sole merit of
which work preferred him to this place of government in the Church; For with
Basilius Magnus, Non ex maioribus, Naza. in M^n. Bas. Mag.
sed ex propria virtute Nobilitatem duxit, He eennobled himself with his own
worth and virtue.

And touching his Humility, as it was said of Piso, so more truly of him, Nemo
fuit, qui magis, Vellcius lib. 2.
quae agenda erant, curaret sine vlla ostentatione agendi; No man did more good
than he, with lesser show of ostentation. How he decked himself inwardly with
lowliness of mind, and did put himself underneath himself, every one that
knew him, knew; On a time (and many such I could tell you,) a poor Minister
sending in to speak with him, abruptly he brake off a most serious discourse,
saying, But the Minister must not stay, lest we should seem to take state upon
us. Therein imitating that great and invincible Supporter of the Faith of one
Substance, Athanasius; of whom Nazianzene writes, that being (...), grown to
a super excellent height of virtue, Nazian. in landem Ath^n.
yet was he (...), easy of access, and facile to entertain the poor man's
suit.

When (in his sickness) one hoped for his recovery, he gave the answer that
Saint Ambrose gave to the Nobles of Millaine, that desired him to pray for
life, Paul. de vita Ambros.
Non ita inter vos vixi, vt pudeat me viuere; nec timeo mori, quoniam Dominum
bonum habemus; I have not so lived among you, that I am ashamed to live,
neither am I afraid to dye, because our Lord is good.

How he perseuered in the truth, you shall hear; Some few days before his
death, in the presence of a worthy, Sr. R. C. of H.
and truly Noble Knight, I heard him discourse sweetly of the Certainty of
Salvation, and of Perseverance in Grace: comfortable truths so much opposed by
Papists, Arminians, and carnal Gospellers. And in conclusion, he did affirm,
That he, which holds the Protestants doctrine and faith herein, has built his
house upon the Rock, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against him.

Not many hours before his departure; for (as Ambrose of Acholius (non obijt,
Ambros. Ep. 59.
sed abijt,) I found him (as me seemed victorious upon some conflict, and Quis
Sanctorum sine certamine coronatur? What Saint was ever crowned, Hi^ro^. ^d
Eu^^achium.
but upon a combat, says Saint Jerome? I drew near his bed, he reached for my
hand and greezed it; (and now you see the cause of my choice,) saying, I know
whom I have believed, and I am persuaded, that he is able to keep that which I
have committed unto him against that Day. This occasioned some thing concerning
relyance upon God by Faith; yea, (said he,) I had fainted, unless I had
believed, Psalm. 27.13.
to see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the living. Mention being
further made of Faith, and Hope, and of their object. But, says he again, in
David's words, The mercies of the Lord are from generation to generation, on
them that fear him. Mercy brought in thoughts of Christ oh, says he, (in the
words of that holy Martyr) None but Christ, Lambert. Act. Mon. page 1026 Psalm.
116.
None but Christ. Being told how preciously the Lord esteems the death of
such; he replied, Right dear, Right dear in the sight of the Lord, is the
death of his Saints. Some prayers made for him, upon his desire; at conclusion
he said, Amen, I thank God. Amen, enough, enough, Amen, I thank God.

They write of Lanfrancus, sometime Archbishop of Canturbury, that he often
prayed and obtained to dye such a death, that neither hindered speech, nor
memory; this blessing God afforded our Reverend Bishop; for as I am certified
(by one most dear to him, Mistress K. S.
and worthy to be believed,) when he was leaving this life, he looked on her,
and on the rest of his children in the chamber present, and said, Christ bless
you all. And like that old Patriarch Jacob, he moved himself upon the bed, and
cried, Christ Jesus help, and so Christ took him, and conclamatum est.

His soul is now at rest; his name is among the Worthies of the Church; his
estate is with his children; and now are we to return his body to the dust
from whence it was taken. The best fruits show their goodness when they have
lain; let him lie a while and mellow; let us remember that we had him, and
remember that we have him not; And it will be said, It was a true report, that
we have heard of his worth and of our loss: but the one half was not told us.
In him read thine own mortality, and prepare for death, that thou may enter
into the joy of thy Lord at that Day. Amen.

FINIS.

