THE GENERAL HISTORY OF Virginia, New England, and the Summer Isles: with the
names of the Adventurers, Planters, and Governors from their first beginning
An: 1584. to this present 1624. WITH THE PROCEDINGS OF THOSE SEVERAL COLONIES
and the Accidents that befell them in all their Journyes and Discoveries. Also
the Maps and Descriptions of all those Countries, their Commodities, people,
Government, Customs, and Religion yet known. DIVIDED INTO SIX BOOKS.

By Captain JOHN SMITH sometimes Governor in those Countries and Admiral of
New England.

LONDON Printed by I.D. and I.H. for Michael Sparks. 1624.



TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS AND MOST NOBLE PRINCESS, the Lady FRANCIS, Duchess of
RICHMOND and LENOX.
MAy it please your Grace,
This History, as for the raritie and variety of the subject, so much more for
the judicious Eyes it is like to undergo, and most of all for that great Name,
whereof it dares implore Protection, might and ought to have been clad in
better robes then my rude military hand can cut out in Paper Ornaments. But
because, of the most things therein, I am no Compiler by hearsay, but have
been a real Actor; I take my self to have a property in them: and therefore
have been bold to challenge them to come under the reach of my own rough Pen.
That, which has been endured and passed through with hardship and danger, is
thereby sweetened to the Actor, when he becomes the Relator. I have deeply
hazarded my self in doing and suffering, and why should I stick to hazard my
reputation in Recording? He that acts two parts is the more borne withal if
he come short, or fail in one of them. Where shall we look to find a Julius
Caesar, whose atchieuments shine as clear in his own Commentaries, as they
did in the field? I confess, my hand, though able to weild a weapon among the
Barbarous, yet well may tremble in handling a Pen among so many Indicious:
especially when I am so bold as to call so piercing, and so glorious an Eye, as
your Grace, to view these poor ragged lines

Yet my comfort is, that heretofore honorable and virtuous Ladies, and
comparable but amongst themselves, have offered me rescue and protection in my
greatest dangers: even in foreign parts, I have felt relief from that sex.
The beauteous Lady Tragabigzanda, when I was a slave to the Turks, did all she
could to secure me. When I overcame the Bashaw of Nalbrits in Tartaria, the
charitable Lady Call^mata supplied my necessities. In the utmost of many
extremities, that blessed Pokahontas, the great Kings daughter of Virginia, often
saved my life. When I escaped the cruelty of Pirates and most furious storms,
a long time alone in a small Boat at Sea, and driven ashore in France, the good
Lady Madam Chanoyes, bountifully assisted me.

And so verily these my adventures have tasted the same influence from your
Gracious hand, which has given birth to the publication of this Narration. If
therefore your Grace shall daigne to cast your eye on this poor Book, view I
pray you rather your own Bounty (without which it had dyed in the womb) then
my imperfections, which have no help but the shrine of your glorious Name to
be sheltered from censorious condemnation. Vouchsafe some glimpse of your
honorable aspect, to accept these my labors; to protect them under the shadow
of your excellent Name: which will enable them to be presented to the Kings
royal Majesty, the most admired Prince Charles, and the Queen of Bohemia:
your sweet Recommendations will make it the worthier of their good
countenances. And as all my endeavors are their due tribute: so this Page shall
record to posterity, that my service shall be to pray to God, that you may
still continue the renowned of your sex, the most honored of men, and the
highly blessed of God.

Your Graces faithful and devoted servant, JOHN SMITH.

A Preface of four Points.
James has place and opportunity to enlarge his ancient Dominions without
wronging any; (which is a condition most agreeable to his most just and pious
resolutions:) and the Prince his Highness may see where to plant new Colonies.
The gaining Provinces adds to the Kings Crown: but the reducing Heathen
people to civility and true Religion, brings honor to the King of Heaven.
If his Princely wisdom and powerful hand, renowned through the world for
admirable government, please but to set these now Estates into order; their
composure will be singular: the counsel of diverse is confused; the general
Stock is consumed; nothing but the touch of the Kings sacred hand can erect a
Monarchy.

Honors that have employed great pains and large expense in laying the
foundation of this State, wherein much has been buried under ground, yet some
thing has sprung up, and given you a taste of your adventures. Let no
difficulties alter your noble intentions. The action is an honor to your
Country: and the issue may well reimburse you your sums expended. Our
practices have hitherto been but assayes, and are still to be amended. Let
your bounty supply the necessities of weak beginnings, and your excellent
judgments rectify the proceedings; the return cannot choose in the end but
bring you good Commodities, and good contentments, by your advancing shipping
and fishing so useful unto our Nation.



New England to light, though long since brought in obscurity, he is again to
be found a true servant to all good designs.

So I ever rest yours to command, JOHN SMITH.

A Gentleman desirous to be unknown, yet a great Benefactor to Virginia, his
love to the Author, the Company, and History.
STay, read, behold, skill, courage, knowledge, Arts;
Wonder of Nature: Mirror of our Clime.
Mars, Vulcan, Neptune strive to have their parts,
Rare Ornaments, rich honors of our time.
From far fetched Indies, and Virginia's soil,
Here Smith is come to show his Art and skill:
He was the Smith that hammered famins foil,
And on Powhatan's Emperor had his will.
Though first Colu^bus, Indies true Christofer;
Cabots, brave Florida, much admirer;
Meta Incognita, rare Martin Frobisher;
Gilberts brave Humphery, Neptunes deuourer;
Captain Amadis, Raleighs discouerer;
Sir Richard Grenvill, Zealands brave coaster:
Drake, doomes, drown, death, Spaines scorner;
Gosnolds Relates, Pring prime observer.
Though these be gone, and left behind a name,
Yet Smith is here to Anvile out a piece
To after Ages, and eternal Fame,
That we may have the golden Iasons fleece.
He Vulcan like di^ forge a true Plantation,
And chained their Kings, to his immortal glory;
Restoring peace and plenty to the Nation,
Regaining honor to this worthy Story.
By him the Infidels had due correction,
He blew the bellows still of peace and plenty:
He made the Indians bow unto subjection,
And Planters never returned to Albion empty.
The Colonies pined, starved, staring, bones so feeble,
By his brave proiects, proved strong again:
The Souldiers' lowance he did seek to treble,
And made the Salvage in uncouth place remain.
He left the Country in prosperous happy state,
And plenty stood with peace at each man's door:
Regarding not the Salvage love nor hate:
Themselves grew well, the India^s wondrous poor.
This there he did and now is home returned,
To show us all that never thither go:
That in his heart, he deeply often has mourned,
Because the Action goes on so slow.
Brave, grave, Wise, Rich, prize Benefactors,
Replant, want, continue still good Actors.
Be kind, and find, bring eyes to blind;
By Gods great might, give Indians light.
Spend money, Blood, to do that good,
That may give Indians heavenly food.
And God no less, you still shall bless;
Both you and yours the Lands possess.
S. M.

See here behold as in a Glass,
All that is, or is and was.
T. T.
1624.
Samuel Purchase of his friend Captain John Smith, and his Virginia.
Lo here SMITHS Forge, where Forgery's Ro^gue-branded,
True Pegasus is shooed, fetters are forged
For Silke-sotts, Milk-sops, base Sloth, far hence landed,
(Soile-chang'd, Coelum non attimum mutant
Soule-soil'd still) Englands dregs, discharged,
To plant (supplant!) Virginia, home-disgorged:
Where virtues praise frames good men Stories armor
Against Time, Achilles-like, with best Arts charged;
Pallas, all-arm'd, all-learn'd, can teach Sword-Grammer,
Can Pens of Pikes; Arms to Arts; to Scholar, Soldier, hammer:
Can Pilgrim make a Maker; all so-well
Has taught Smith scour my rustie out-worne Muse,
And so coniur'd her in Virginian Cell,
That things unlearned long by want of use,
She fresh areeds me read, without abuse
By fabling. Arthurs great Acts little made
By greater lies she says; seals Faith excuse
These are said a thousand years ago to have been in the North parts of
America.
TO Island, Groonland, Estotiland to wade
After lie-legends; Malgo, Brandon, are Wares braide.
The Friar of Linne He is said to discover the Pole 1360.
frights her with his black Art;
Nor British Bards can tell where Madoc Madoc ap Ow^n Planted some remote
Western parts. 1170.
planted.
Cabots, Thorns, Elyots truth have wenne her heart;
Eldest di^cov'rers of New Worlds Cont'nent (granted
So had just Fates.) Colon and Vespuce panted;
This got the name America named of Americus Vesputius, which discovered les
then Colon or Sir S^bastian Cabot, and the Continent later. Colo^ first found
the Isles 1492. the Continen^ 1498. Above a year after Cabot had don it. He
was set forth by Henry 7 and after by Hen. 8. Kni^hted, and made grand Pilot of
England by Ed. 6 Under who^ he procured the sending of Sir Hugh Willoughby, and
discovery of Greenland and Russia: having by himself discovered on America from
67 North lat. to near ^o South*
, last, least of Three; the Other
New Worlds Isles found first: Cabot is most chanted
In Three-Mens-song; did more New World discover
Then both, then any; an hundred degrees coasted over.
Hail Sir Sebastian, Englands Northern Pole,
Virginia's finder; Virgin Eliza named it,
Ga^e't Raleigh. ( Rut, Prat, Hoar, I not enrole)
Amadas rites to English right first framed it.
Lane planted, returned, nor had English tamed it:
Greenviles and Whites men all slain; New Plantation
JAMES founds, Sloth confounds, fear, pride, faction shamed it:
Smiths Forge mends all, makes chains for Savage Nation,
Frees, feeds the rest; the rest read in his Books Relation.
Thomas Macarnesse to his worthy friend and Countryman, Captain John Smith.
WHo loves to live at home, yet look abroad,
And know both passen and vnpassen road,
The prime Plantation of an unknown shore,
The men, the manners, fruitfulness, and store:
Read but this little Book, and then confess,
The less thou like and love, thou live the less.
He writ it with great labor, for thy good,
Twice over, now in paper, before in blood;
It cost him dear, both pains, without an aim
Of private profit, for thy public gain.
That thou might read and know and safely see,
What he by practice, thou by Theoree.
Commend him for his loyal loving heart,
Or else come mend him, and take thou his part.
To his friend Captain John Smith, and his Work.
I Know not how Desert more great can rise,
Then out of Danger to ane for good men's Good;
Nor who does better win the Olympian prize,
Than he whose Countries Honor stirs his blood;
Private respects have private expectation,
Public designs, should publish reputation.
This Gentleman whose Volumne here is stoard
With strange discovery of GODS strangest Creatures,
Gives us full view, how he has Sailed, and Oar'd,
And Marched, full many miles, whose rough defeatures,
Has been as bold, as puissant, up to bind
Their barbarous strength's, to follow him dog-linde.
But wit, nor valor, now adays pays scores
For estimation; all goes now by wealth,
Or friends; tush ^ thrust the beggar out of doors
That is not Purse-lyn'd; those which live by stealth
Shall have their haunts; no matter what is the guest
In many places; moneys well come best.
But those who well discern, esteem not so:
Nor I of thee brave Smith, that have beat out
Thy Iron thus; though I but little know
To what t'hast seen; yet I in this am stout:
My thoughts, maps to my mind some accidents,
That makes me see thy greater presidents.
Io: Done.

To my worthy friend Captain John Smith.
How great a part of knowledge had we lost,
Both of Virginia and the Summer Isles,
Had not thy careful diligence and cost
Informed us thus, with thy industrious style!
Like Caesar now thou writ'st what thou have done,
These acts, this Book will live while there is a Sun.
Edw: Worseley.

To his much respected Friend Captain John Smith.
Envy avaunt. For Smith, whose Anvill was Experience,
Could take his heat, knew how and when to Strike,
Wrought well this Piece; till After-negligence
Mistaking temper, Cold, or Scorched; or like
Unskillful workmen, that can never Fyle
Nor Pollish it, that takes in Forge such toil:
Here Noble Smith, thou show the Temper true,
Which other Tampring- Tempres never knew.
To: Norton.

To his loving friend Captain John Smith.
WHere actions speak the praises of a man,
There, Pens that use to flatter silent be,
Or if they speak, it is to scorn or scanne;
For such with virtue seldom do agree.
When I look back on all thy labors past,
Thy travels, perils, losses often ^ustaind
By Sea and Land; and (which is worst and last)
Neglect or small reward, so dearly gaind.
I do admire thy still undaunted spirit;
unwearied yet to work thy Countries good.
This be thy praise then, due unto thy merit;
For it the have venter'd life; and lost thy blood.
1. 2. 3. 1. 2. 3.
Truth, travayle, and Neglect, pure, painful, most unkind,
1. 2. 3. 1. 2. 3.
Does prove, consume, dismay, the soul, the corpse, the mind.
Edw: Ingham.

To my dear friend by true Virtue ennobled Captain John Smith.
MOre then enough I cannot thee commend:
Whose both abilities and Love do tend
So to advance the good of that Estate,
By English charge, and Planters propagate
Through heaps of painful hazards; in the first
Of which, that Colony thy Care has nursed.
And often that effected but with ten
That after thee, and now, three hundred men
Have faild in, among the Salvages; who shake
At bruit of Thee, as Spain at Name of Drake.
Which well appears; considering the while
Thou governedst, nor force of theirs, ne guile
Lessend a man of thine; but since (I rue)
In British blood they deeply did imbrue
Their Heathen hands. And (truth to say) we see,
Our selves we lost, untimely leaving Thee.
Nor yet perceive I any got between
Thee and thy merit; which has better been
In praise; or profit much; if counted just;
Free from the Weals abuse, or wronged trust.
Some few particulars perhaps have sped;
But wherein has the public prospered?
Or is there more of those Vast Countries known,
Then by thy Labors and Relations shown
First, best? And shall we love Thee now the less?
Far be ^t! fit condignely to express
Thanks, by new Charge, or recompense; by whom,
Such past good has, such future good may come.
David Wiffin.

Noble Captain Smith, my worthy Friend
NOt like the Age wherein thou live, to lie
Buried in baseness, sloth, or Ribaldrie
(For most do thus) have thou thy self applide;
But, in fair Actions, Merits height descride:
Which (like four Theaters to set thee forth)
The worlds four Quarters testify thy worth.
The last whereof ( America) best shows
Thy pains, and praise; and what to thee she owes,
(Although thy Summer shone on The Elder Three,
In as great Deeds as great variety)
For opening to Her Self Her Self, in Two Virginia now inhabited, and
New England.

Of Her large Members; Now Ours, to our view.
Thereby endearing us to thy desert,
That doubly do them to our hands impart;
There by thy Work, Here by thy Works; By each
May thou Fames lasting Wreath (for guerdon) reach.
And so become, in after Times t'ensue,
A President for others, So to do.
William Grent.

To his worthily affected Friend, Captain John Smith.
AMongst so many that by learned skill,
Have given just praise to thee, and to thy Book,
Dear friend receive this pledge of my good will,
Whereon, if thou with acceptance look,
And think it worthy, rank amongst the rest:
Use thy discretion, I have done my best.
(...)

The Contents of the general History, divided into six Books.
The first Book.
Madock Prince of Wales. The next by Ha^no Prince of Carthage, and how it was
offered K. Hen. 7. by Chr. Cullumbus, that undertook it for Spaniards. 1492.
How John Cabot was employed by King Hen. the 7. and found the Continent before
Cullumbus. Also Sir Martin Frobisher, and Humphrey Gilbert ranged toward the
North. Amidas was sent to discover the coast of Florida by Sir Water Raleigh
and his associates. And the Country Wingandacoa was called Virginia by Q^cene
Elizabeth. Page 1 -- 4. Richard Greenvill sent thither with 108. he left for a
plantation. The discovery of the Rivers Chawonok and Moratoc. The treachery of
their King, who with eight more were slain, and they all returned to England
again the same year with Sir Francis Drake. page 5 -- 9. The Observations of
Master Heriot. Of their commodities, victual, fru^ts, beasts, fishes, and
fowls. Their Religion, and belief of God, of the Creation of the world, and
man; the immortality of the soul; the subtlety of their Priests; the peoples
simplicity, and desire of salvation; and other Accidents. page 9 -- 12. Rich:
Greenvill sent to supply them. Not finding them, left fifty. Their success.
page 13. White sent to relieve them, found they were all slain, yet left 115.
more, and departed. 14 -- 16. Gosnoll of Elizabeth's Isles; his Observations,
Relations, and return. page 17.18. Pring to the same Coast. Waymouth; his
Observations, Relations, and return. page 18 -- 20. A Map of the old Virginia,
with the figures of the Salvages.
The second Book. Of Virginia now planted, discovered by Captain SMITH.
Chisapeack Bay, and s^aven navigable Rivers that fall into it, with their
several Inhabitants, and diversity of Language, page 21 -- 25. Of things
growing Naturally, as woods, fruits, gummes, berries, herbs, roots; also of
beasts, birds, and fishes; how they divide the year, prepare their ground,
plant their corn, and use it, and other victual page. 25. -- 29. What
commodities may be had by industry. The description of the people, their
numbers, constitutions, dispositions, attire, buildings, lodgings and gardens,
their usage of children, striking of fire making their Bows and Arrows,
knives swords, targets, and boats: how they spinne, make fish-hooks, and
ginnes, and their order of hunting. Consultations and order in Wars. page 29
-- 33. Their music, entertainment, trade, Physic, Surgery and Charms.
Their Religion, God, burials ordinary and extraordinary, Temples, Priests,
Ornaments, solemnities, Coniurations, Altars, sacrifices, black boys, and
resurrection. page 34 -- 36. The manner of their government, their Emperor; his
attendants, watch, treasury, wives, successors and authority: tenure of their
lands, and manner of punishment, with some words of their Language Englished.
page 37 -- 40. And a Map of the Country of Virginia now planted.
The third Book. Of the Accidents and Proceedings of the English.
41.42. Salvages assault the Fort, the ships return, their names were left,
occasion of sickness, plenty unexpected, the building of James Town, the
beginning of Trade, two proiects to abandon the Country. page 43 -- 46. Their
first attempts upon the Salvages. Captain Smith taken prisoner; their order of
Triumph, and how he should have been executed, was preserved, saved James
town from being surprised, how they Contured him. Powhata^ entertained him,
would have slain him; how Pocahontas his daughter saved him, and sent him to
James Town. The third plot to abandon the Country suppressed. page 47 -- 49.
Their first Supply and Accidents. The Salvages opinion of our God. Captain
Smith revisits Powhatan; James Town burnt; A co^ceited gold mine; A needless
charge; Captain Newports return for England. page 50 -- 53. James Town
rebuilt, with a Church and Storehouse; The Salvages plot to murder all the
English; their insolences suppressed. Different opinions among the Council.
p. 53. Their names landed in this Supply. p. 54. The discovery of the Bay of
Chriapeack. Their fight and conference with the Kuskarawaoks; Ambuscadoes
prevented in the river Patawomek; A mine like Antimony. page 55 -- 58. How to
deal with the Salvages. Smith near killed with a Stingray. With many other
Accidents in the discovery. A needless misery at James town redressed. page
58 -- 59. The second Voyage to discover the Bay. Their Encounter with the
Massawomekes and Tockwhoghs; the Sasquesahanoughs offer subiectio to the
English. The exceeding love of the Salvage Mos^o Their fight with the
Rapahanocks; their fight with the Manahokes. The King of Hasla^ing^'s brother
taken prisoner; his relation of those mountainers* p^ac^ (...) with all those
Nations. page 5^-64. The ^iscovery of the r^ver Payankatank; then sight with
the N^ndsamunds, and Chisapeacks; their return to James town. p. 65. The
Presidency surrendered to Cap. Smith. The second Supply by Captain Newport,
many Presents sent from England to Powhatan, his scorn* Consultations;
factions suppressed; Cap. Smith visits Powhatan; Pocahontas entertaines him
with a Mask; the Coronation of Powhatan, and Conditions. page 68. The
discovery of the Monacans; a punishment for swearing; the Chickahamanians
forced to Contribution; the abuses of the Mariners; Master Scriveners voyage to
Werowocomoco. page 68 -- 70. Captain Smiths Relation to England of the estate
of the Colony: the names of them arrived in this Supply. page 71.72. Nandsamund
forced to Contribution. The first Marriage in Virginia. Apamatuck discovered.
page 73. Captain Smiths journey to Pamavnkee. The discovery of the
Chawwonocks. Smiths discourse to Powhatan; His reply and slattery; and his
discourse of Peace and War. Powhatans plot to murder Smith, discovered by
his daughter Pocahontas, page 77. Their escape at Pamavnkee. The Dutchmen
deceive Captain Win, and arm the Salvages; sixteen English beset by seven
hundred Salvages, Smith takes their King Opechankanough prisoner; the Salvages
excuse and reconcilement. p. 77. -- 80. Master Scrivener and others drowned;
Master Wiffins desperate journey to Pamavnkee; Powhatan constraines his men
again to be treacherous; he is forced to fraught their Ship; Smith poisoned; the
Dutch men's treachery. page 80 -- 82. The Dutch-mens plot to murder Smith. He
takes the King of Paspahegh prisoner, and others; they become all subject to
the English. page 84. A Salv^ge smoothered, yet recovered; three or four
Salvages slain in drying stolen powder. Great extremity occasioned by ratts;
Bread made of dried Sturgeon; the punishment for loyterers; the discovery of
the Mangoags. Captain Argals first arrival; the inconveniences in a
Plantation. p. 84 -- 89. Nandsamund planted; breach of peace with the Salvages;
Powhatans chief seat bought for Copper; Mutinies. page 90.91. Captain Smith
blown up with Gunpowder; a bloody intent; the causes why he left the Country
and his Commission; his return for England; the ends of the Dutchmen.
Certain Verses of seven Gentlemen. p 95.
The fourth Book. With their Proceedings after the alteration of the
Government.
HOw the mutiners proceeded; the Salvage, revolt; the planting point Comfort,
Them at Nandsamund, and the False, defeated by the Salvages. Captain Ratliff,
with thirty slain by Powhatan. The fruits of improvidence. The arrival of
Sir Thomas Gates. Town abandoned. The arrival of the Lord La War; their
actions, and both their returns. page 105 -- 108. The government left to
Captain Percie; and his proceedings. The arrival of Sir Thomas Dale, and his
actions. page 109 -- 110. Thomas Gates; Henerico, and the Bermudas; how
Captain Argall took Pocahontas prisoner. Dales voyage to Pamavnkee.
Pocahontas to Master Rolfe. Articles of Peace with the Salvages. p. 110. --
114. Thomas Dale. Captain Argals voyage to port Royal. Master Hamers to
Powhatan; and their Accidents. page 115.116. Virginia. Dale with Pocahontas
comes for England. Capt. Yerley left Deputy Governor; Chickahamanians, and
proceedings. page 117 -- 121. A relation to Queen Anne of the quality and
condition of Pocahontas; how the Queen entertained her; Argall sent governor;
the death of Powhatan; English slain; Argals accidents and proceedings. The
Lord de la War sent again governor; his death. A relation of their present
estates. Haile-stones 8. inches about. page 121 -- 125. George Yerley sent
g^vernor; Waraskoyack planted. A parliament in Virginia; four Corporations
appointed; the adventures of Cap. Ward; the number of ships and men sent this
year; gifts given; Patents granted. page 125 -- 127. Chester with two Spanish
men of war; the names of the Adventurers. page 128 -- 138. Stockam. The
arrival of Sir Francis Wyat with nine ships. Master Gockings plantation; and
their accidents; the number of ships and men sent this year; gifts given,
Patents granted p. 139 -- 141. Master Poties iourneyes to Pawtuxunt, and other
places, with his accidents page 141. -- 143. Each sent to build Forts and
Barks. The cause and manner of the Massacre; the numbers slain; the providence
of Cap. Nuse; Cap. Chroshaw his voyage to Patowomek. page 143 -- 151. Capt.
Smiths offer to the Company to suppress the Salvages. Their answer; the manner
of the Satlery; Chroshaw stays at Patawomek; the escape of Waters and his
wife. Cap. Hamar goes to Patawomek; Chroshaws plot for all their preservations.
Capt. Madison sent to Patawomek. Cap. Powell kills three Salvages. Sir George
Yerleys journey to Acomack. The misery of Captain Nuse. The kindness of the
King of Patawomek; a vile policy of a Salvage; Madisons mischief unto the
Patawomeks. It was not well don to make Opechankanough drink healths. 300.
surpriseth Nandsamund and Pamavnkee. Smith how to subject the Salvages. The
arrival of Cap. Butler in Virginia, and other Accidents. page 152 -- 161. The
loss of Cap. Spilman and 26. men. A particular of such necessaries as are fit
for private persons or families. page 161.162. A brief relation by Cap. Smith
to his Mai^sties Commissioners, for the reformation of Virginia. The 7
questions the right Worthy Commissioners demanded, and his answers; 163 --
168. At this present two ships are going; more a preparing; new Commissions
sent. A Proclamation, no Tobacco be used in England, but what shall come from
Virginia, or the Somer Isles; quere the Proclamation.
The fifth Book.
A Map of the Somer Isles and Fortresses. The description of the Isles, the
fruits, fishes, soil, air, beasts, birds, with the relation of the shipwreck
of Henry May. 169 -- 173. Tho: Gates, and Sir George Summers; Virginia. Summers
return to the Isles; his death, and Epitaph, the accidents happened; 174 -- 177.
More sent to make a plantation. A piece of Amber Greece found of 80. pound
weight; much dissension; Mores industry in fortifying and waighing Ordnance
out of the wra^ks. 2 Spanish ships; a great mortality; a strange being of
Ravens; Moors return. page 177 -- 180. Hilliard, not much less then a
miracle. page 181.182. Tuckar; Assizes; the strange adventure of 5 men in a
boat; plants from the West Indies; the endeavors of Cap. Powell; Assizes.
Norwood; the names of the adventurers, and their shares. p. 182 -- 189. The
first Magazin; two exployts of desperate fugitives. The return of Cap. Tuckar.
Cap Kendall left deputy governor, and their Accidents. page 189-191. Butler; A
platform burnt, and much hurt by a Hericano. The refortifying the Kings
Castle. The arrival of two Dutch Frigots. The rebuilding the Mount, and a
Tomb for Sir George Summers. The reformation of their laws and officers. Their
Assizes. A Parliament. Their acts; their opinion of the Magazin. The building
three Bridges. 191-199. Barnard sent to be governor; his arrival, death, and
funeral, with the proceedings of Harrison his successor, and Woodhouse their
governor. page 200-201. Certain Verses of Master Withers, and other Gentlemen.
The sixth Book.
A Map of New England. How this Country has bin accounted but a miserable
Desert. Smiths first voyage; what peace and wars he had with the Salvages,
and within 6. months returned with 1500l. worths of commodities; got Prince
Charles to call it New England. A Table of the old names and the new. page
203*205. Cap. Hobsons voyage to Capan; the Londoners apprehend it. The
situation: notes for ignorant undertakers. The description of the Country.
Staple Commodities; present proof of the healthfulnesse of the clime.
Observations of the Hollanders chief trade. p. 209. Examples of the altitude
comparatively; the reasons why to plant it. An example of the gains every
year; a description of 15. several Countries in particular. Of their Kings,
rivers, harbors, Isles, mountains, landmarks, fruits, woods, birds, fishes,
beasts, etc. and how as well Gentlemen, as mecanicks, may be employed, and get
much wealth, with the reasons and causes of the defaylements. p. 206 -- 221.
Smiths second voyage; his ship near foundered in the Sea; He reimbarketh
himself; incountreth the English Pirates; 4. French men of war; how he was
released; his men ran from him with ship and all; how he lived with the French
men; what fights they had, what prizes they took; the French men's ingratitude.
13 sail cast away: how he escaped, proceeded in France, returned for England,
and punished them ran from him. page 222 -- 227. The yearly trialls of
New England; Dee, and diverse report, Hollanders Records; 150. have gone thither
to fish, with an estimate of their gains, with many observations and
Accidents. page 228-230. A Plantation in New England; New Plymouth; conference
with the Salvages; and kind usage of the King of the Massasoyts; a strange
policy of Tusquantum. page 230 -- 234. The Salvages make wars for their
friendships; English revenge their friends injuries. Notes and observations.
Tusquantum; they contriue to murder the English; how the English did cure a
King sick to death; two most desperate Salvages; the courage of Cap. Standish;
the Salvages sue for peace. page 235 -- 239. 40 sail fished th^re this year;
the religion of the Salvages; the government; an answer to objections;
considerations; the charge; the order of the Western men. p. 140 -- 142. The
effects of shipping; the Popes order for the East and West Indies How to build
a little navy royal; contention for New-Engla^d. The necessity of martial
power. p. 243-244. The charge to set forth a ship of a 100. tuns, both to make
a fishing voyage, and increase the plantation. The facility of the fishing
lately observed. New Plymouth, and order of government.
Its not his part that is the best Translator,
To render word for word to every Author.
HOW ANCIENT AVTHORS REPORT, THE NEVV-VVORLD, Now called America, was
discovered: and part thereof first Planted by the ENGLISH, called VIRGINIA,
with the Accidents and Proceedings of the same.

The first Book.
FOR the Stories of Arthur, Malgo, and Brandon, that say a thousand years ago
they were in the North of America; or the Friar of Linn that by his black Art
went to the North pole in the year 1360. in that I know them not. Let this
suffice.

Wales report, that Madock, son to Owen Quineth, Prince of Wales seeing his
two brethren at debate who should inherit, prepared certain Ships, with men
and munition, and left his Country to seek adventures by Sea: leaving Ireland
North he sailed west till he came to a Land unknown. Returning home and
relating what pleasant and fruitful Countries he had seen without
Inhabitants, and for what barren ground his brethren and kindred did murder
one another, he provided a number of Ships, and got with him such men and women
as were desirous to live in quietness, that arrived with him in this new Land
in the year 1170: Left many of his people there and returned for more. But
where this place was no History can show.

Spaniards say Hanno a Prince of Carthage was the first: and the next
Christopher Cullumbus, a Genoesian, whom they sent to discover those unknown
parts. 1492.

But we find by Records, Cullumbus offered his service in the year 1488. to
King Henry the seventh; and by accident undertook it for the Spaniards. In
the Interim King Henry gave a Commission to John Cabot, and his three sons,
Sebastian, Lewis, and Sautius. John and Sebastian well provided, setting sail,
ranged a great part of this unknown world, in the year 1497. Cullumbus had
found certain Isles, it was 1498. ere he saw the Continent, which was a year
after Cabot. Now Americus came a long time after, though the whole Continent to
this day is called America after his name, yet Sebastian Cabot discovered much
more then them all, for he sailed to about forty degrees Southward of the line,
and to sixty-seauen toward the North: for which King Henry the eight Knighted
him and made him grand Pilate of England. Being very aged King Edward the sixth
gave him a Pention of 166l.13^.4d. yearly. By his directions Sir Hugh Willowby
was sent to find out the Country of Russia, but the next year he was found
frozen to death in his Ship, and all his Company.

Martin Frobisher was sent in the year 1576. by our most gracious Queen
Elizabeth, to search for the Northwest passage, and Meta incognita: for which
he was Knighted, honored, and well rewarded.

Humphrey Gilbert a worthy Knight attempted a Plantation in some of those
parts: and obtained Letters Pattents to his desire: but with this Proviso, He
should maintain possession in some of those vast Countries within the term
of six years. Yet when he was provided with a Navy able to encounter a Kings
power, even here at home they fell in divisions, and so into confusion, that
they gave over the Design ere it was begun, notwithstanding all this loss,
his undaunted spirit began again, but his Fleet fell with Newfound land, and
he perished in his return, as at large you may read in the third Volume of the
English Voyages, written by Mr Hackluit.

Upon all those Relations and inducements, Sir Walter Raleigh, a noble
Gentleman, and then in great esteem, undertook to send to discover to the
Southward. And though his occasions and other employments were such he could
not go himself, yet he procured her Majesty's Letters Pattents, and persuaded
many worthy Knights and Gentlemen to adventure with him to find a place fit
for a Plantation. Their Proceedings follows.

Elizabeth, granted her Letters Patents to Sir Walter Raleigh for the
discovering and planting new Lands and Countries, not actually possessed by any
Christians. This Patenty got to be his assistants Sir Richard Grenvell the
valiant, Mr William Sanderson a great friend to all such noble and worthy
actions, and diverse other Gentlemen and Merchants, who with all speed provided
two small Barks well furnished with all necessaries, under the command of
Captain Philip Amidas and Captain Barlow. The 27. of April they set sail
from the Thames, the tenth of May passed the Canaries, and the tenth of June
the West Indies: which unneedful Southerly course, (but then no better was
known) occasioned them in that season much sickness.

Their arrival.
The second of July they fell with the coast of Florida in shoule water, where
they felt a most dilicate sweet smell, though they saw no land, which ere long
they espied, thinking it the Continent: an hundred and twenty miles they sailed
not finding any harbor. The first that appeared, with much difficulty they
entered, and anchored, and after thanks to God they went to view the next Land
adjoining to take possession of it for the Queens most excellent Majesty:
which done, they found their first landing place very sandy and low, ^^pundance
^f G^apes.
but so full of grapes that the very surge of the Sea sometimes over-flowed
them: of which they found such plenty in all places, both on the sand, the
green soil and hills, as in the plains as well on every little shrub, as also
climbing toward the tops of high Cedars, that they did think in the world
were not the like abundance.

The I Will of W^kokon.
We passed by the Seaside toward the tops of the next hills being not high:
from whence we might see the Sea on both sides, and found it an I Will of twenty
miles in length, and six in breadth, the vallyes replenished with goodly tall
Cedars. Discharging our Muskets, such a flock of Cranes, the most white, arose
by us, with such a cry as if an Army of men had shouted altogether. This I Will
has many goodly Woods, and Decre, Conies, and Foul in incredible abundance,
and using the Authors own phrase, the Woods are not such as you find in
Bohemia, Moscovia, or Hercinia, barren and fruitless, but the highest and
reddest Cedars of the world, In Lybanus are not many.
bettering them of the Assores, Indies, or Libanus: Pynes, Cypres, Saxefras,
the Lentisk that bears Mastick, and many other of excellent smell and
quality. Till the third day we saw not any of the people, then in a little
Boat three of them appeared, one of them went on shore, to whom we rowed, and
he attended us without any sign of fear; after he had spoke much though we
understood not a word, of his own accord he came boldly aboard us, we gave him
a shirt, Conference with a Salvage.
a hat, wine and meat, which he liked well, and after he had well viewed the
barks and us, he went away in his own Boat, and within a quarter of a mile of
us in half an hour, had laden his Boat with fish, with which he came again
to the point of land, and there divided it in two parts, poynting one part to
the Ship, the other to the Pinnace, and so departed.

The next d^y came diverse Boats, and in one of them the Kings Brother, The
Arrival of the Kings brother.
with forty or fifty men, proper people, and their behavior very civil; his
name was Granganame^, the King is called Wingina, the Country Wingandacoa.
Leaving his Boats a little from our Ships, he came with his train to the
point: where spreading a Matte he sat down. Though we came to him well armed,
he made signs to us to sit down without any show of fear, stroking his head
and breast, and also ours, to express his love. After he had made a long speech
unto us, we presented him with diverse toys, which he kindly accepted. He was
greatly regarded by his people, for none of them did sit, nor speak a word,
but four, on whom we bestowed presents also, but he took all from them,
making signs all things did belong to him.

The King himself in a conflict with a King his next neighbor and mortal
enemy, was shot in two places through the body, and the thigh, yet recovered:
whereby he lay at his chief town six days journey from thence.

A day or two after showing them what we had, Trade with the Salvages.
Granganamco taking most liking to a Pewter dish, made a hole in it, hung it
about his neck for a breast plate: for which he gave us twenty Dear skins,
worth twenty Crowns; and for a Copper Kettell, fifty skins, worth fifty
Crowns. Much other trucke we had, and after two days he came aboard, and did
eat and drink with us very merrily. Not long after he brought his wife and
children, they were but of mean stature, but well favored and very bashful;
she had a long coat of Leather, and about her privities a piece of the same,
about her forehead a band of white Corrall, and so had her husband, in her
ears were bracelets of pearl, hanging down to her middle, or the bigness of
great Pease; the rest of the women had Pendants of Copper, and the Noblemen
five or six in an ear; his apparel as his wives, only the women wear
their hair long on both sides, and the men but on one; they are of color
yellow, but their hair is black, yet we saw children that had very fair
Chestnut colored hair.

After that these women had been here with us, there came down from all parts
great store of people, with Leather, Corrall, and diverse kind of dies, but
when Granganameo was present, none durst trade but himself, and them that wore
red Copper on their heads, as he did. When ever he came, he would signify by
so many fires he came with so many boats, that we might know his strength.
Their Boats are but one great tree, which is but burnt in the form of a trough
with gins and fire, till it be as they would have it. For an armor he would
have engaged us a bag of pearl, but we refused, as not regarding it, that
we might the better learn where it grew. He was very just of his promise, for
often we trusted him, and he would come within his day to keep his word. He sent
us commonly every day a brace of Bucks, Conies, Hares, and fish, sometimes
Mellons, Walnuts, Note.
Cucumbers. Pease, and diverse roots. This Author says, their corn grows
three times in five months; in May they sow, in July reap; in June they sow,
in August reap; in July sow, in August reap. We put some of our Pease in the
ground, which in ten days were 14. inches high.

The soil is most plentiful, sweet, wholesome, and fruitful of all other,
there are about 14. several sorts of sweet smelling timber trees: the most
parts of the underwood, Bays and such like: such Oaks as we, but far greater
and better. After this acquaintance, my self with seven more went twenty mile
into the River Occam, that runs toward the City Skicoack, and the evening
following we came to an I Will called Roanoak, from the harbor where we entered 7.
leagues; The I Will Roanoak.
at the North end was 9. houses, builded with Cedar, fortified round with
sharp trees, and the entrance like a Turnpik. When we came toward it, the
wife of Granganameo came running out to meet us, (her husband was absent)
commanding her people to draw our Boat ashore for beating on the billows, The
great courtesy of a Woman.
other she appointed to carry us on their backs a land, others to bring our
Ores into the house for stealing. When we came into the other room, (for there
was five in the house) she caused us to sit down by a great fire; after took
off our clothes and washed them, of some our stockings, and some our feet in
warm water, and she her self took much pains to see all things well
ordered, and to provide us victual.

A banquet.
After we had thus dried our selves, she brought us into an Inner room, where
she set on the board standing a long the house somewhat like frumentie, sodden
venison, and roasted fish; in like manner mellons raw, boiled roots and fruits
of diverse kinds. There drink is commonly water boiled with Ginger, sometimes
with Saxefras, and wholesome herbs, but whilst the Crape lasts they drink
wine. More love she could not express to entertain us; they care but only to
defend themselves from the short winter, and feed on what they find natural
in summer. In this fea^ting house was their Idol of whom they ^ould us
incredible things. When we were at meat two or three of her men came amongst
us with their Bows and Arrows, which caused us to take our arms in hand. She
perceiving our distrust, caused their Bows and Arrows to be broken, and they
be^ten out of the gate: but the evening approaching we returned to our boat,
where at she much grieuing brought our supper half boiled, pots and all, but
when she saw us, but put our boat a little off from the shore and lie at
Anchor, perceiving our Jealousy, she sent diverse men and 30. women to sit al
night on the shore side against us, and sent us five Mats to cover us from the
rain, doing all she could to persuade us to her house. Though there was no
cause of doubt, we would not adventure: for on our safety depended the voyage:
but a more kind loving people cannot be. Beyond this I Will is the maine land and
the great river Occam, Skicoac a great town.
on which stands a Town called Pomeiock, and six days higher, their City
Skicoak: those people never saw it, but say there fathers affirm it to be
above two hours journey about. Into this river falls an other called Cipo,
where is found many Mustells wherein are Pearls: likewise another River called
Nomapona, on the one side whereof stands a great town called Chawanock, the
Lord of the Country is not subject to Wingandacoa. Beyond him an other king
they call Menatonon. These 3. are in league each with other. Toward the south.
4. days journey is Sequotan, the southermost part of Wingandacoa.

Adjoining to Secotan begins the country Pomouik, belonging to the King
called Piamacum, Pomovik.
in the Country Nusiok upon the great river Neus. These have mortal wars
with Wingina, King of Wingandacoa. Betwixt Piemacum and the Lord of Secotan, a
peace was concluded: notwithstanding there is a mortal malice in the Secotuns,
because this Piemacum invited diverse men, and 30. women to a feast, and when
they were altogether merry before their Idol, which is but a mere illusion of
the Devil, they sudainly slew all the men of Secotan, and kept the women for
their use. Beyond Roanoak are many Isles full of fruits and other Natural
increases, with many Towns a long the side of the Continent. Those Isles lie
200. miles in length, and between them and the main, a great long sea, in
some places. 20. 40. or 50. miles broad, in other more, somewhere less. And in
this sea are 100. Isles of diverse bignesses, but to get into it, you have but 3.
passages and they very dangerous. Though this you see for most part be but the
relations of Saluages, because it is the first, I thought it not a mis^e to
remember them as they are written by them that returned and arrived in England
about the midst of September the same year. This discovery was so welcome
into England that it pleased her M^iestie to call this Country of Wingandacoa,
Virginia, by which name now you are to understand how it was planted, How the
Country was called Virginia.
disolued, reuned, and enlarged,

The Performers of this voyage were these following. Philip Amadas. Captain
Arthur Barlow. Captain William Grenuill. John Wood. James Browewich. Henry
Green. Beniamen Wood. Simon Ferdinando. Of the Company. Nicholas Peryman. Of
the Company. John Hewes. Of the Company.


Sir Richard Grenuills voyage to Virginia, for Sir Walter Raleigh. ^^85.
THe 9. of April he departed from Plymouth with 7. sail: Sir Richard
Grenvils, voyage. 1585.
the chief men with him in command, were Master Ralph Layne, Master Thomas
Candish Master John Arundel, Master Stukley, Master Bremige, Master Vincent,
Master H^ryot and Master John Clarke. The 14. day we fell with the Canaries,
and the 7. of May with Dominico in the West Indies: we landed at Portorico,
after with much a do at Izabella on the north of Hispaniola, passing by many
Isles. Upon the 20. we fell with the main of Florida, and were put in great
danger upon Cape Fear. The 26. we Anchored at Wocokon, where the admiral had
like to been cast away, presently we sent to Wingina to Roanoak, and Master
Arundell went to the main, with Manteo a saluage, and that day to Croo^on. The
11. The General victualed for 8. days, with a selected company went to the
maine, and discovered the Towns of Pomeiok, Aquascogoc, Secctan, and the great
Lake called Paquipe. At Aquascogoc the Indians stole a silver Cup, wherefore we
burnt the Town and spoiled their corn, so returned to our fleet at Tocokon.
Whence we wayed for Hatorask, where we rested, and Granganimeo, King Wingina's
brother with M^nteo came abord our Admiral, the Admiral went for Weapomeiok,
and Master John Arundell for England. Our General in his way home took a rich
laden ship of 300. tunns, with which he arrived at Plymouth the 18. of
September. 1585.

These were left under the command of Master Ralph Layne to inhabit the
Country, but they returned within a year.
Philip Amidas Admiral. Master Thomas Heryot. Master Acton. Master Stafford.
Master Thomas Luddington. Master Maruyn. Cap. Vaghan. Master Gardener. Master
Kendall. Master Predeox. Master Rogers. Master Haruy. Master Snelling. Master
Antony Russe. Master Allen. Master Michaell Pollison. Master Thomas Bockner.
Master James mason. Master David Salter. Master James Skinner.
With diverse others to the number of 108.

Touching the most remarkable things of the Country and our proceeding from
the 17 of August 1585. till the 18. of June 1586. Their first Plantation.
we made Roanoack our habitation. The utmost of our discovery Southward was
Secotan as we esteemed 80. leagues from Roanoacke. The passage from thence was
thought a broad sound within the maine, being without kenning of land, yet full
of flats and shoulds that our Pinnasse could not pass, and we had but one boat
with 4. ores, that would carry but 15. men with their provisions for 7. days:
so that because the winter approached we left those discoueries till a stronger
supply. To the Northward; our farthest was to a Town of the Chesapeacks, from
Roanoack 130. miles. The passage is very shallow and dangerous by reason of the
breadth of the sound and the little succor for a storm, but this teritory
being 15. mile from the shore, for pleasantnest of seat, for temporature of
climate, fertility of soil and comoditie of the Sea, besides bears, good
woods, Saxefras, Walnuts etc. is not to be, excelled by any other whatsoever.

There be sundry other Kings they call Weroances as the Mangoacks, Trypaniks
and opposians, which came to visit us.

To the northwest our farthest was Chawonock from Roanoack 130. Chawonock.
miles our passage lies through a broad sound, but all fresh water, and the
channel Nauigable for a Ship, but out of it full of shoules.

The towns by the way by the water, are Passaquenock the women's town,
Chepanoe, Weapomciok; from Muscamunge we enter the river and jurisdiction of
Chawonock, there it begins to straiten, and at Chawonock it is as Thames at
Lambeth: betwixt them as we passed is goodly high land on the left hand, and
there is a town called Ohanock, Chawonock 700. men.
where is a great corn field, it is subject to Chawonock, which is the
greatest Province upon the river, and the Town it self can put seven hundred
men into the field, besides the forces of the re^t. The King is lame, but has
more understanding then all the rest.

The river of Moratoc is more famous then all the rest, and opens into the
sound of Weapometok, and where there is but a very small current in Chawonock,
it has so strong a current from the Southwest, as we doubted how to row
against it. Strange things they report of the head of this river, and of
Moratoc it self, a principal town on it, and is thirty or forty days
Journey to the head. This lame King is called Menatonon. Menatonon his
Relations of the I Will of Pearl, and a rich Mine, and the Sea by it.
When I had him prisoner two days, he told me that 3. d^yes Journey in a
Canow up the river Chawonock, then landing and going four days Journey
Northeast, there is a King whose Country lies on the Sea, but his best place
of strength is an Island in a Bay environed with deep water, where he takes
that abundance of Pearl, that not only his skins, and his nobles, but also
his beds and houses are garnished therewith. This king was at Chawonock two
years ago to trade with black pearl, his worst sort whereof I had a rope,
but they were naught; but that King he says has store of white, and had
traffic with white men, for whom he reserved them; he promised me guides to
him, but advised me to go strong, for he was unwilling strangers should come
in his Country, for his Country is populous and valiant men. If a supply had
come in April, I resolved to have sent a small Bark to the Northward to have
found it, whilst I with small Boats and 200. men would have gone to the head
of the river Chawonock, with sufficient guides by land, inskonsing my self
every two days, where I would leave Garrisons for my retreat till I came to
this Bay.

Very near unto it is the river of Moratoc, directly from the West, the head
of it springs out of a main Rock, which stands so near the Sea, that in
storms the Sea beats over it into this fresh spring, that of it self at the
surse is a violent stream. I intended with two Wherries and forty persons to
have Menatonons son for guide, to try this presently, till I could meet with
some of the Moratocks, or Mangoaks, but hoping of getting more victual from
the Saluages, we as narrowly escaped staruing in that Discovery as ever men did.

Pemissapan his treachery.
For Pemissapan who had changed his name of Wingina upon the death of his
brother Granganameo, had given both the Chawonests, and Mangoaks word of my
purpose: also he told me the Chawonocks had assembled two or three thousand to
assault me at Roanok, urging me daily to go against them, and them against us;
a great assembly I found at my coming thither, which sudden approach did so
dismay them, The discovery of the river Morat^c.
that we had the better of them: and this confederacy against us was procured
by Pemissapan himself our chief friend we trusted; he sent word also to the
Moratoks and the Mangoaks, I came to invade them, that they all fled up into
the high Country, so that where I assured my self both of succor and
provision, I found all abandoned. But being thus far on my journey 160. miles
from home, and but victuals for two days, besides the casualties of cross
winds, storms, and the Saluages treachery, though we intended no hurt to any: I
gave my Company to understand we were only drawn forth upon these vain hopes
by the Saluages to bring us to confusion: A noble resolution.
a Council we held, to go forward or return, but they all were absolutely
resolved but three, that whilst there was but one pynt of Corn for a man, they
would not leave the search of that river; for they had two Mastiue Dogs, which
boiled with Saxefras leaves (if the worst fell out) upon them and the pottage
they would live two days, which would bring them to the sound, where they
should find fish-for two days more to pass it to Roanock, which two days
they had rather fast then go back a foot, till they had seen the Mangoaks
either as friends or foes.

Though I did forsee the danger and misery, yet the desire I had to see the
Mangoaks was, for that there is a province called Chaunis Temoatan, frequented
by them and well known to all those Countries, where is a mine of Copper they
call Wassador; they say they take it out of a river that falls swiftly from
high rocks in shallow water, in great Bowls, covered with leather, leaving a
part open to receive the metal, The strange Mine of Chaunis Temoatan.
which by the change of the color of the water where the spout falls, they
suddenly chop down, and have the Bowlefull, which they cast into the fire, it
presently melts, and does yield in five parts at the first melting two parts
metal for three of Ore. The Mangoaks have such plenty of it, they beautify
their houses with great plates thereof: this the Salvages report; and young
Skiko the King of Chawonocks son my prisoner, that had been prisoner among
the Mangoak^, but never at Chaunis Temoatan, for he said that was twenty days
journey ove^ and from the Mangoaks.

Menatonon also confirmed all this, and promised me guids to this metal
Country; by Land to the Mangoaks is but one days journey, but seven by water,
which made me so willing to have met them for some assay of this metal: but
when we came there we found no creature, only we might see where had been
their fires. After our two days journey, and our victuals spent, in the
evening we heard some call as we thought Manteo, who was with me in the boat;
this made us glad, he made them a friendly answer, which they answered with a
song we thought for welcome, but he told us they came to fight. Presently they
did let fly their Arrows about the boat, but did no hurt, the other boat
scouring the shore we landed: but they all were fled, and how to find them we
knew not. The great current of the river Morat^^.
So the next morning we returned to the mouth of the river, that cost us four
days rowing up, and here our dogs pottage stood us in good stead, for we had
nothing else: the next day we fasted being windbound, and could not pass the
sound, but the day following we came to Chippanum, where the people were fled,
but their wires afforded us fish: thus being near spent, the next day God
brought us to Roanocke. I conclude a good Mine, or the South sea will make this
Country quickly inhabited, and so for pleasure and profit comparable with any
in the world: otherwise there will be nothing worth the fetching. Provided
there be found a better harbor then yet there is, which must be Northward if
there be any. Master Vaughan, no less hoped of the goodness of the Mine, then
Master Heriot that the river Moratocks head, either rises by the Bay of
Mexico, or very near the South Sea, or some part that opens near the same,
which cannot with that facility be done as from the Bay of Pearls, by
insconsing four days journey to the Chawonoks, Mangoaks, and Moratocks, etc.

The conspiracy of Pemissapan; the Discovery of it; and our return for England
with Sir Francis Drake.
ENsenore a Saluage, father to Pemissapan, the best friend we had after the
death of Granganimeo, when I was in those Discoueries, could not prevail any
thing with the King from destroying us, that all this time God had preserved,
by his good counsel to the King to be friendly unto us. The Conspiracy of
Pemissapan.
Pemissapan thinking as the brute was in this last journey we were slain and
starued, began to blaspheme our God that would suffer it, and not defend us, so
that old Ensenore had no more credit for us: for he began by all the devises he
could to invade us. But in the beginning of this brute, when they saw us all
return, the report false, and had Manteo, and three Saluages more with us, how
little we esteemed all the people we met, and feared neither hunger, killing,
or any thing, and had brought their greatest Kings son prisoner with us to
Roanock: it a little assuaged all his devises, and brought Ensenore in respect
again, that our God was good, and we their friends, and our foes should
perish, for we could do^ them more hurt being dead, then living, and that being
an hundred miles from them, shot, and struck them sick to death, and that
when we die it is but for a time, then we return again. But that which
wrought the most fear among them was the handy-worke of Almighty God. For
certain days after my return, Menatonon sent messengers to me with Pearl,
and Okisco King of Weopomcoke, to yield himself servant to the Queen of
England. Okisco with twenty-foure of his principal men came to Pemissapan to
acknowledge this duty and subjection, and would perform it. All which so
changed the heart of Pemissapan, that upon the advice of Ensenore, when we were
ready to famish they came and made us wires, and planted their fields they
intended to abandon (we not having one corn till the next harvest to sustain
us). The death of a most rare Salvage.
This being done our old friend Ensenore dyed the twenty of April, then all
our enemies wrought with Pemissapan to put in practice his devises, which he
easily embraced, though they had planted corn by us, and at Dasamonpeack two
leagues from us. Yet they got Okisco our tributary to get seven or eight
hundred (and the Mandoages with the Chisapeans should do the like) to meet
(as their custom is) to solemnize the Funeral of Ensenore. Half of whom
should lie hid, to cut off the straglers, seeking crabs and provision: the rest
come out of the main upon the Signal by fire. Twenty of the principal of
Pemissapans men had charge in the night to beset my house, put fire in the
Reeds that covered it, which might cause me run out so naked and amazed, they
might without danger knock out my brains. The same order for Mr Heriots, and
the rest: for all should have been fired at an instant. In the mean time they
should sell us nothing, and in the night spoil our wires, to make nenessitie
disperse us. For if we were but ten together, a hundred of them would not
meddle with us. So our famine increased, I was forced to send Captain Stafford
to Croatan, with twenty to feed himself, and see if he could epsy any sail
pass the coast; Mr Predeox with ten to Hatarask upon the same occasion: and
other small parties to the Main to live upon roots and Oysters.

Pemissapan sequestring himself, I should not importune him for victual, and
to draw his troops, found not the Chawonests so forward as he expected, being
a people more faithful and powerful, and desired our friendships, and was
offended with him for raising such tales, and all his proiects were revealed to
me by Skico my prisoner; who finding himself as well used by me, as Pemissapan
told me all. These troubles caused me send to Pemissapan, to put suspicion in
his head, I was to go presently to Croatan to meet a Fleet came to me,
though I knew no such matter: and that he would lend me m^n to fish and hunt.
He sent me word he would come himself to Roanock; but delaying time eight
days that all his men were there to be assembled, not liking so much company,
I resolved the next day to go visit him, but first to give them in the I Will a
Canvisado, and at an instant to seize on all their Canows about the I Will. But
the town took the Alarm before I meant it. For when I sent to take the
Canows, he met one going from the shore, A slaughter of two Salvages.
overthrew her and cut off two Salvages heads; whereupon the cry arose, being
by their spies perceived: for they kept as good watch over us, as we of them.
Upon this they to their Bows, and we to our Arms: three or four of them at
the first were slain, the rest fled into the woods. The next morning I went to
Dassamonpeack and sent Pemissapan word I was going to Croatan, and took him in
my way to complain Osocon would have stole my prisoner Skico. Hereupon he did
abide my coming, and being among eight of the principal est. I gave the
watchword to my men, and immediately they had that they purposed for us.
Himself being shot through with a Pistol fell down as dead, Pemissapan
slain and ^. others.
but presently start up and ran away from them all, till an Irish Boy shot him
over the buttocks, where they took him and cut off his head.

Seven days after Captain Stafforton sent to me he descryed twentie-three
Sail. The next day came to me himself (of whom I must say this, from the
first to the last, he neither spared labor, or peril by land or sea, fair
weather, or foul, to perform any serious service committed to him.) He
brought me a letter from Sir Francis Drake, whose generous mind offered to
supply all my defects, of shipping, boats, munition, victual, clothes, and men
to further this action: and upon good consultation and deliberation, he
appointed me a ship of 70. tuns, A most generous courtesy of Sir Francis Drake.
with an hundred men, and four months victuals, two Pinnaces, four small
Boats, with two sufficient Masters, with sufficient Gangs. All this being made
ready for me, suddenly arose such a storm for four days, that had like to
have driven the whole Fleet on shore: many of them were forced to the Sea,
whereof my ship so lately given me was one, with all my provision and Company
appointed.

Notwithstanding, the storm ceasing, the General appointed me a ship of 170.
tuns, with all provisions as before, to carry me into England the next August,
or when I had performed such Discoueries as I thought fit. Yet they durst not
undertake to bring her into the harbor, but she must ride in the road, leaving
the care of the rest to my self, advising me to consider with my Company what
was fittest, and with my best speed return him answer.

Hereupon calling my Company together, who were all as privy of the Generals
offer as my self; their whole request was, (in regard of all those former
miseries, and no hope of the return of Sir Richard Grenvill,) and with a
general consent, they desired me to urge him, Virginia abandoned.
we might all go with him for England in his Fleet; for whose relief in that
storm he had sustained more peril of wrack, then in all his honorable actions
against his enemies. So with praises to God we set sail in June 1586. and
arrived in Portsmouth the 27. of July the same year: Leaving this remembrance
to posterity.

To reason lend me thine attentive ears, Exempt thy self from
mind-distracting cares:
Least that is here thus proiected for thy good; By thee rejected be, ere
understood.
Written by Mr Ralph Layne, Governor.
The Observations of Mr. Thomas Heriot in this Voyage.
For Merchandise and Victuals.
WHat before is writ, is also confirmed by that learned Mathematician Mr Thomas
Heriot, with them in the Country, whose particular Relation of all the Beasts,
Birds, Fishes, Fowls, Fruits, and Roots, Commodities.
and how they may be useful; because I have writ it before for the most part
in the Discourse of Captain Amidas, and Captain Layne, except Silk grass,
Wormesilke, Flax like Hemp, Alum, Wapeith, or Terra sigillata, Tar, Rosen,
and Turpentine, Civet-cats, Iron ore, Copper that hold Silver, Coprose and
Pearl: Let those briefes suffice, because I would not trouble you with one
thing twice.

Dies.
For Dies, Showmack, the herb Wasebur, little roots called Chapacor, Dies.
and the bark of a tree called by the Inhabitants Tangomockonominge, which are
for diverse sorts of Reds.

What more then is related is an herb in Dutch called Melden, described like
an Orange, growing four foot high; the seed will make good broth, A strange
Salt.
and the stalk burnt to ashes makes a kind of Salt: other Salt they know not,
and we used of it for Pot Herbs. Of their Tobacco we found plenty, which they
esteem their chief Physic.

Roots.
Ground nuts, Tiswaw we call China roots; they grow in clusters, and bring forth
a bryer stalk, but the leaf is far unlike, which will climb up to the top of
the highest tree: the use known is to cut it in small pieces, then stamp and
strain it with water, and boiled makes a gelly good to eat. Cassavia grows
in Marshes, which the Indians often use for bread and broth. Habascon is like a
Parsnip, naught of it self, except compounded: and their Leekes like those in
England.

Fruits that's strange.
Sequenummener, a kind of Berry like Capers, and three kind of Berries like
Acornes, called Sagatamenor, Osamenor, and Pummuckoner.

Beasts extraordinary.
Saquenuckot and Maquowoc, two kind of beasts, greater then Conies, and very
good meat; in some places such plenty of gray Conies, like hayres, that all
the people make them mantels of their skins. I have the names of 28. several
sorts that are dispersed in the Country: of which 12. kinds we have discovered
and good to eat; but the Salvages sometimes kill a Lion and eat him.

Fish.
There is plenty of Sturgeon in February, March, April, and May; all Herings
in abundance; some such as ours, but the most part of 18.20. or 24. ynche^
long, and more. Trouts Porpisses, Rays, Mullers, Old-wiues, Pla^ce, Tortoises
both by Sea and Land: Crabs, Oysters, Mussels, Scalops, Periwinckles, Crevises,
Secanank: we have the Pictures of 12. sorts more, but their names we know not.

Fowls.
Turkeys, Stockdoues, Partridges, Cranes, Hernes, Swans, Geese, Parrots,
Faulcons, Merlins I have the names in their language of 86. several sorts.
Their woods are such as ours in England for the most part, except Rakeock a
great sweet tree, whereof they make their Canowes: and Ascopo, a kind of tree
like Lowrell, and Saxefras.

Their Natures and Manners.
Their Clothing, Towns, Houses, Wars, Arts, Tools, handy crafts, and
educations, are much like them in that part of Virginia we now inhabit: which
at large you may read in the Description thereof. But the relation of their
Religion is strange, as this Author reports.

Their Religion.
Some Religion they have, which although it be far from the truth, yet being
as it is there is hope it may be the easier reformed. They believe there are
many gods which they call Mantoac, but of different sorts and degrees. Also
that there is one chief God that has been from all eternity, who as they
say when he purposed first to make the world, How the world was made.
made first other gods of a principal order, to be as instruments to be used
in the Creation and government to follow: And after the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, as petty gods; and the instruments of the other order more
principal. First (they say) were made waters, out of which by the gods were
made all diversity of creatures that are visible or invisible.

How man was made.
For mankind they say a Woman was made first, which by the working of one of
the gods conceived and brought forth children; and so they had their beginning,
but how many years or ages since they know not; having no Records but only
Tradition from Father to son.

How they use their gods.
They think that all the gods are of humane shape, and therefore represent them
by Images in the forms of men; which they call Kewasowok: one alone is called
Kewasa; them they place in their Temples, where they worship, pray, sing, and
make many offerings. The common sort think them also gods.

Whether they go after death.
They believe the immortality of the Soul, when life departing from the body,
according to the good or bad works it has done, it is c^rried up to the
Tabernacles of the gods, to perpetual happpinesse, or to Popogusso, a great
pit: which they think to be at the furthest parts of the world, where the
Sun sets, and there burn continually.

To confirm this they told me of two men that had been lately dead, and
revived again; the one happened but few years before our coming into the
country; of a bad man, which being dead and buried, the next day the earth over
him being seen to move, was taken up, who told them his soul was very near
entering into Popogusso, had not one of the gods saved him and gave him leave
to return again, to teach his friends what they should do to avoid such
torment. The other happened the same year we were there, but sixty miles from
us, which they told me for news, that one being dead, buried, and taken up as
the first, showed, Two men risen from death.
that although his body had layne dead in the grave, yet his soul lived, and
had travailed far in a long broad way, on both sides whereof grew more sweet,
fair, and delicate trees and fruits, then ever he had seen before; at length
he came to most brave and fair houses, near which he met his Father, that was
dead long ago, who gave him charge to go back, to show his friends what good
there was to do, to enjoy the pleasures of that place; which when he had done
he should come again.

What subtlety so ever be in the Weroances, and Priests; this opinion works
so much in the common sort, that they have great respect to their Governors:
The subtlety of their Priests.
and as great care to avoyde torment after death, and to enjoy bliss. Yet they
have diverse sorts of punishments according to the offense, according to the
greatness of the fact. And this is the sum of their Religion, which I learned
by having special familiarity with their Priests, wherein they were not so
sure grounded, nor gave such credit, but through conversing with us, they were
brought into great doubts of their own, and no small admiration of ours: of
which many desired to learn more then we had means for want of utterance in
their Language to express.

Most things they saw with us as Mathematical Instruments, Sea Compasses;
Their simplicity.
the virtue of the Loadstone, Perspectiue Glasses, burning Glasses: Clocks to
go of themselves; Books, writing, Guns, and such like; so far exceeded their
capacities, that they thought they were rather the works of gods then men; or
at least the gods had taught us how to make them, which loved us so much better
then them; and caused many of them give credit to what wespake concerning our
God. In all places where I came, I did my best to make his immortal glory
known. And I told them, although the Bible I showed them, contained all; yet
of it self, it was not of any such virtue as I thought they did conceive.
Notwithstanding many would be glad to touch it, to kiss, and embrace it, to
hold it to their breasts, and heads, and stroke all their body over with it.

The King Wingina where we dwelt, would often be with us at Prayer. Twice he was
exceeding sick and like to dye. And doubting of any help from his Priests,
Their desire of salvation.
thinking he was in such danger for offending us and our God, sent for some of
us to pray, and be a means to our God, he might live with him after death. And
so did many other in the like case. One other strange Accident (leaving others)
will I mention before I end, which moved the whole Country that either knew or
heard of us, to have us in wonderful admiration.

There was no Town where they had practiced any villainy against us (we leaving
it unpunished, because we sought by all possible means to win them by
gentleness) but within a few days after our departure, they began to dye; A
wonderful Accident.
in some Towns twenty, in some forty, in some sixty, and in one an hundred and
twenty, which was very many in respect of their numbers. And this happened in no
place (we could learn) where we had bin, but where they had used some practice
to betray us. And this disease was so strange, they neither knew what it was,
nor how to cure it; nor had they known the like time out of mind; a thing
specially observed by us, as also by themselves, in so much that some of them
who were our friends, especially Wingina, had observed such effects in four or
five Towns, that they were persuaded it was the work of God through our
means: and that we by him might kill and slay whom we would, without weapons,
and not come near them. And thereupon, when they had any understanding, that
any of their enemies abused us in our Iourneyes, they would entreat us, we
would be a means to our God, that they, as the others that had dealt ill with
us, might dye in like sort: although we showed them their requests were
ungodly; and that our GOD would not subject himself to any such requests of
men, but all things as he pleased came to pass: and that we to show our selves
his true servants, ought rather to pray for the contrary: yet because the
effect sell out so suddenly after, according to their desires, they thought it
came to pass by our means, and would come give us thanks in their manner,
that though we satisfied them not in words, yet in deeds we had fulfilled their
desires.

Their strange opinions.
This marvelous Accident in all the Country wrought so strange opinions of us,
that they could not tell whether to think us gods or men. And the rather that
all the space of their sickness, there was no man of ours known to die, or
much sick. They noted also we had no women, nor cared for any of theirs: some
therefore thought we were not borne of women, and therefore not mortal, but
that we were men of an old generation many years past, and risen again from
immortality. Some would Prophecy there were more of our generation yet to
come, to kill theirs and take their places. Those that were to come after us
they imagined to be in the air, yet invisible and without bodies: and that
they by our entreaties, for love of us, did make the people die as they did, by
shooting invisible bullets into them.

To confirm this, their Physicians to excuse their Ignorance in curing the
disease, would make the simple people believe, that the strings of blood they
sucked out of the sick bodies, were the strings wherein the invisible bullets
were tied, and cast. Some thought we shot them our selves from the place where
we dwelt, and killed the people that had offended us, as we listed, how far
distant soever. And others said it was the special work of God for our sakes,
as we had cause in some sort to think no less, whatsoever some do, or may
imagine to the contrary; especially some Astrologers by the eclipse of the
Sun we saw that year before our Voyage, and by a Comet which began to
appear but a few days before the sickness began: but to exclude them from
being the special causes of so special an Accident, there are farther reasons
then I think fit to present or allege.

These their opinions I have set down, that you may see there is hope to
embrace the truth, and honor, obey, fear and love us, by good dealing and
government: though some of our company toward the latter end, before we came
away with Sir Francis Drake showed themselves too furious, in slaying some of
the people in some Towns, upon causes that on our part might have bin borne
with more mildness; notwithstanding they justly had deserved it. The best
nevertheless in this, as in all actions besides, is to be indevoured and
hoped; and of the worst that may happen, notice to be taken with consideration;
and as much as may be eschewed; the better to allure them hereafter to
Civilitie and Christianity.

Calling.
Thus you may see, How

Nature her self delights her self in sundry Instruments,
That sundry things be done to deck the earth with Ornaments;
Nor suffers she her servants all should run one race,
But wills the walk of every one frame in a diverse pace;
That diverse ways and diverse works, the world might better grace.
Written by Thomas Heriot, one of the Voyage.
How Sir Richard Grenvill went to relieve them.
Walter Raleigh and his Associates prepared a ship of a hundred tun, fraughted
plentifully of all things necessary: but before they set sail from England it
was Easter. And arriving at Hatora^k, they after some time spent in seeking the
Collony up in the Country, and not finding them, returned with all the
provision again to England.

About 14. or 15. days after, Sir Richard Grenvill accompanied with three
ships well appointed, arrived there. Who not finding the aforesaid ship
according to his expectation, nor hearing any news of the Collony there
seated, and left by him as is said 1585. travailing up and down to seek them,
but when he could hear no news of them, and found their habitation abandoned,
unwilling to lose the possession of the Country, Sir Richard Grenvill left
fifty ^en.
after good deliberation he landed fifty men in the I Will of Roanoak,
plentifully furnished with all manner of provision for two years: and so
returned for England.

Where many began strangely to discant of those cross beginnings, and him;
which caused me remember an old saying of Euripides.

Who broacheth ought that's new, to fools untaught,
Himself shall judged be unwise, and good for naught.
Three Ships more sent to relieve them by Mr. White.
WE went the old course by the west Indies, Master White his Voyages. 1687.
and Simon Ferdinando our continual Pilot mistaking Virginia for Cape Fear, we
sailed not much to have been cast away, upon the conceit of our all-knowing
Ferdinando, had it not been prevented by the vigilance of Captain Stafford.
We came to Hatorask the 22. of July, and with forty of our best men, intending
at Roanoack to find the 50 men left by Sir Richard Grenvill. But we found
nothing but the bones of a man, and where the Plantation had been, the houses
unhurt, but overgrowne with weeds, and the Fort defaced, which much perplexed
us.

By the History it seems Simon Ferdinando did what he could to bring this
voyage to confusion; but yet they all arrived at Hatorask. They repaired the
old houses at Roanock, and Master George How, one of the Council, straggling
abroad, One of the Council slain.
was slain by the Salvages. Not long after Master Stafford with 20. men went
to Croatan with Manteo, whose friends dwelled there: of whom we thought to have
some news of our 50 men. They at first made show to fight, but when they heard
Manteo, they threw away their Arms, and were friends, and desired there might
be a token given to be known by, least we might hurt them by misprision, as
the year before one had bin by Master Layne, that was ever their friend, and
there present yet lame.

The next day we had conference with them concerning the people of Secotan,
Aquascogoc, and Pomeiok, willing them of Croatan to see if they would accept
our friendship, and renew our old acquaintance: which they willingly embraced,
and promised to bring their King and Governors to Roanoak, to confirm it. We
also understood that Master How was slain by the men of Wingina, of
Dassamonpeack: and by them of Roanoack, that the fifty men left by Sir Richard
Grenvill, were suddenly set upon by three hundred of Secotan, Aquascogoc, How
the fifty men were slain^.
and Dassamonpeack. First they intruded themselves among 11 of them by
friendship, one they slew, the rest retyring to their houses, they set them on
fire, that our men with what came next to hand were forced to make their
passage among them; where one of them was shot in the mouth, and presently
dyed, and a Salvage slain by him. On both sides more were hurt; but our men
retyring to the water side, got their boat, and ere they had rowed a quarter of
a mile toward Hatorask, they took up four of their fellows, gathering Crabs
and Oysters: at last they landed on a little I Will by Hatorask, where they
remained a while, but after departed they knew not whether. So taking our
leaves of the Croatans, we came to our Fleet at Hatorask.

The Governor having long expected the King and Governors of Pomeiok,
Secotan, Aquascogoc, and Dassamonpeack, and the 7. days expired, and no news
of them, being also informed by those of Croatan, that they of Dassamonpeack
slew Master How, and were at the driving our men from Raonoack he thought no
longer to defer the revenge. Wherefore about midnight, with Captain
Stafford, and twentie-foure men, whereof Manteo was one, for our guide, (that
behaved himself toward us as a most faithful English man) he set forward.

An ill misprision.
The next day by break of day we landed, and got beyond their houses, where
seeing them sit by the fire we assaulted them. The miserable souls amazed fled
into the Reeds, where one was shot through, and we thought to have been fully
revenged, but we were deceived, for they were our friends come from Croatan to
gather their corn, because they understood our enemies were fled after the
death of Master How, and left all behind them for the birds. But they had like
to have paid too dear for it, had we not chanced upon a Weroances wife, with a
child at her back, and a Salvage that knew Captain Stafford, that ran to him
calling him by his name. Being thus disappointed of our purpose, we gathered
the fruit we found ripe, left the rest unspoiled, and took Menatonon his wife
with her child, and the rest with us to Roanoak. Though this mistake grieved
Manteo, yet he imputed it to their own folly, because they had not kept promise
to come to the governor at the day appointed. The 13. of August our Salvage
Manteo was Christened, and called Lord of Dassamonpeack, in reward of his
faithfulness. And the 18th, A child borne in Virginia.
Ellinor the Governors daughter, and wife to Ananias Dare, was delivered of a
daughter in Roanoak; which being the first Christian there borne, was called
Virginia.

Our ships being ready to depart, such a storm arose, as the Admiral was
forced to cut her Cables: and it was six days ere she could recover the shore,
that made us doubt she had been lost, because the most of her best men were on
shore. At this time Controversies did grow betwixt our Governor and the
Assistants, about choosing one of them 12. to go as Factor for them all to
England; for all refused save one, whom all men thought most insufficient: the
Conclusion was by a general consent, they would have the Governor go
himself, for that they thought none would so truly procure there supplies as
he. A controversy who to send for Factor to England.
Which though he did what he could to excuse it, yet their importunity would
not cease till he undertook it, and had it under all their hands how unwilling
he was, but that necessity and reason did doubly constrain him. At their
setting sail for England, waighing Anchor, twelve of the men in the flyboat
were thrown from the Capstern, by the breaking of a bar, and most of them so
hurt, that some never recovered it. The second time they had the like fortune,
being but 15. they cut the Cable and kept company with their Admiral to
Flowers and Coruos; the Admiral stayed there looking for purchase: but the
flyboats men grew so weak they were driven to Smerwick in the West of Ireland.
The Governor went for England; and Simon Ferdinando with much ado at last
arrived at Portsmouth. 1587.

The Names of those were landed in this Plantation were, John White Governor.
Roger Bayley. Ananias Dare. Simon Ferdinando. Christopher Couper. Thomas
Stevens. John Samson. Thomas Smith. Dionis Haruie. Roger Prat. George How.
Antony Cage.


With diverse others to the number of about 115.

The fifth Voyage to Virginia; undertaken by Mr. John White. 1589.
Plymouth, Master White his return to Virginia.
and passed betwixt Barbary and Mogadoro to Dominico in the West Indies. After
we had done some exployts in those parts, the third of August we fell with the
low sandy Isles westward of Wokokon. But by reason of ill weather it was the 11,
ere we could Anchor there; and on the 12. we came to Croatan, where is a great
breach in 35 degrees and a half, in the Northeast point of the I Will. The 15. we
came to Hatorask in 36. degrees and a terse, at 4. fadom, 3 leagues from shore:
where we might perceive a smoke at the place where I left the Colony, 1587.
The next morning Captain Cook, Captain Spicer, and their companies, with two
boats left ^ur ships, and discharged some Ordnance to give them notice of our
coming, but when we came there, we found no man, nor sign of any that had
been there lately: and so returned to our Boats. The next morning we prepared
again for Roanoack. Captain Spicer had then sent his Boat ashore for water,
so it was ten of the Clock ere we put from the ships, which rode two miles
from the shore. The Admirals boat, being a mile before the other, as she passed
the bar, a sea broke into the boat and filled her half full of water: but by
Gods good will, and the careful stearage of Captain Cook, though our
provisions were much wet we safe escaped, the wind blew hard at Northeast,
which caused so great a current and a breach upon the bar; Captain Spicer
passed half over, but by the indiscreet steering of Ralph Skinner, their boat
was overset, the men that could catch hold hung about her, the next sea cast
her on ground, where some let go their hold to wade to shore, but the sea beat
them down. Captain Spicer and seven others drowned.
The boat thus tossed up and down Captain Spicer and Skinner hung there till
they were drown; but 4. that could swim a little, kept themselves in deeper
water, were saved by the means of Captain Cook, that presently upon the
oversetting of their boat, shipped himself to save what he could. Thus of
eleven, seven of the chiefest were drowned. This so discomfited all the
Sailors, we had much to do to get them any more to seek further for the
Planters, but by their Captains forwardnes at last they fitted themselves
again for Hatorask in 2 boats, with 19 persons. It was late ere we arrived,
but seeing a fire through the woods, we sounded a Trumpet, but no answer could
we hear. The next morning we went to it, but could see nothing but the grass,
and some rotten trees burning. We went up and down the I Will, and at last found
three fair Roman Letters carved. C.R.O. which presently we knew to signify
the place where I should find them, according to a secret note between them
and me: which was to write the name of the place they would be in, upon some
tree, door, or post: and if they had been in any distress, to signify it by
making a cross over it. For at my departure they intended to go fifty miles
into the main. But we found no sign of distress; then we went to a place
where they were left in sundry houses, but we found them all taken down, and
the place strongly enclosed with a high Palizado, very Fortlike; and in one of
the chief Posts carved in fair capital Letters CROATAN, without any sign of
distress, They find where they had buried their provisions.
and many bars of Iron, two pigs of Lead, four Fowlers, Iron shot, and such
like heavy things thrown here and there, overgrowne with grass and weeds. We
went by the shore to seek for their boats but could find none, nor any of the
Ordnance I left them. At last some of the Sailers found diverse Chists had been
hidden and dug up again, and much of the goods spoiled, and scattered up
and down, which when I saw, I knew three of them to be my own; but books,
pictures, and all things else were spoiled. Though it much grieved me, yet it
did much comfort me that I did know they were at Croatan; so we returned to our
Ships, but had like to have bin cast away by a great storm that continued all
that night.

The next morning we weighed Anchor for Croatan: having the Anchor a-pike, the
Cable broke, by the means whereof we lost another: letting fall the third, the
ship yet went so fast a drift, we failed not much there to have split. But God
bringing us into deeper water; considering we had but one Anchor, and our
provision near spent, we resolved to go forthwith to S. John's I Will,
Hispaniola, or Trinidado, to refresh our selves and seek for purchase that
Winter, and the next Spring come again to seek our Countrymen. But our Vice
Admiral would not, but went directly for England, and we our course for
Trinidado. But within two days after, the wind changing, we were constrained
for the Western Isles to refresh our selves, where we met with many of the
Queens ships our own consort, and diverse others, The end of this Plantation.
the 23. of Seeptember 1590. And thus we left seeking our Colony, that was
never any of them found, nor seen to this day 1622. And this was the
conclusion of this Plantation, after so much time, labor, and charge consumed.
Whereby we see;

Not all at once, nor all alike, nor ever has it been,
That God does offer and confer his blessings upon men.
Written by Master John White.
A brief Relation of the Description of Elizabeth's I Will, and some others
toward the North part of Virginia; and what else they discovered in the year
1602. by Captain Bartholomew Gosnoll, and Captain Bartholomew Gilbert; and
diverse other Gentlemen their Associates.
12. years it lay dead.
ALL hopes of Virginia thus abandoned, it lay dead and obscured from 1590. till
this year 1602. that Captain Gosnoll, with 32. and himself in a small Bark,
set sail from Dartmouth upon the 26. of March. Though the wind favored us not
at the first, but forced us as far Southward as the Asores, which was not much
out of our way; we ran directly west from thence, whereby we made our journey
shorter then heretofore by 500. leagues: the weakness of our ship, the badnes
of our sailors, and our ignorance of the coast, caused us carry but a low
sail, that made our passage longer then we expected.

On friday the 11. of May we made land, it was somewhat low, where appeared
certain hummocks or hills in it: the shore white sand, but very rockie, yet
overgrowne with fair trees. Coming to an Anchor, 8 Indians in a Baske
shallop, with mast and sail came boldly aboard us. It seemed by their signs
and such things as they had, some Biskiners had fished there: being about the
latitude of 43. But the harbor being naught, and doubting the weather, we went
not ashore, but waighed, and stood to the Southward into the Sea. The next
morning we found our selves imbayed with a mighty headland: within a league of
the shore we anchored, Their first landing.
and Captain Gosnoll, my self, and three others went to it in our boat, being
a white sand and a bold coast. Though the weather was hot, we marched to the
highest hills we could see, where we perceived this headland part of the mayn,
near environed with Islands. As we were returning to our ship, a good proper,
lusty young man came to us, with whom we had but small conference, and so we
left him. Herein 5. or 6. hours we took more Cod then we knew what to do
with, which made us persuade our selves, there might be found a good fishing in
March, April, and May.

At length we came among these fair Isles, some a league, Martha's Vineyard.
2.3.5. or 6. from the Main, by one of them we anchored. We found it four
miles in compass, without house or inhabitant. In it is a lake near a mile in
circuit; the rest overgrowne with trees, which so well as the bushes, were so
overgrowne with Vines, we could scarce pass them. And by the blossoms we
might perceive there would be plenty of Strawberries, Respises, Gousberries,
and diverse other fruits: besides, Dear and other Beasts we saw, and Cranes,
Hernes, with diverse other sorts of foul; which made us call it Martha's
Vineyard.

The rest of the Isles are replenished with such like; very rocky, Elizabeth's
Island.
and much tinctured stone like Mineral. Though we met many Indians, yet we
could not see their habitations: they gave us fish, Tobacco, and such things as
they had. But the next Isle we arrived at was but two leagues from the Maine,
and 16. mile about, environed so with creekes and coves, it seemed like many
Isles linked together by small passages like bridges. In it is many places of
plain grass, and such other fruits, and berries as before were mentioned. In
mid-May we did sow Wheat, Barley, Oats, and Pease, which in 14. days sprung
up 9. inches. The soil is fat and lusty: the crust thereof gray, a foot or
less in depth. It is full of high timbred Oaks, their leaves thrice so broad
as ours: Cedar straight and tall, Beech, Holly, Walnut, Hazell, Cherry trees
like ours, but the stalk bears the blossom or fruit thereof like a cluster
of Grapes, forty or fifty in a bunch. There is a tree of Orange color, whose
bark in the filing is as smooth as Velvet. There is a lake of fresh water
three miles in compass, in the midst an Isle containing an acre or thereabout,
overgrowne with wood: here are many Tortoises, and abundance of all sorts of
fowls, whose young ones we took and cate at our pleasure. Grounds nuts as big
as eggs, as good as Potatoes, and 40. on a string, not two inches under
ground. All sorts of shell fish, as Schalops, Mussels, Cockles, Crabs,
Lobsters, Welks, Oysters, exceeding good and very great; but not to cloy you
with particulars, what God and nature has bestowed on those places, I refer
you to the Authors own writing at large. We called this Isle Elizabeth's Isle,
from whence we went right over to the main, where we stood a while as ravished
at the beauty and dilicacy of the sweetness, besides diverse clear lakes,
whereof we saw no end, and meadows very large and full of green grass, etc.

Here we espied 7. Salvages, at first they expressed some fear, but by our
courteous usage of them, they followed us to the neck of Land, which we
thought had been severed from the Main, but we found it otherwise. Here we
imagined was a river, but because the day was far spent, we left to discover
it till better leisure. But of good Harbors, there is no doubt, considering
the Land is all rocky and broken lands. The next day we determined to fortify
our selves in the Isle in the lake. Three weeks we spent in building us there
a house. But the second day after our coming from the Main, 11. Canows with
near 50. Salvag^s came toward us. Being unwilling they should see our
building, we went to, and exchanged with them Knives, Hatchets, Beads, Bells,
and such trifles, for some Bevers, Lyzards, Martins, Foxes, wild Catte
skins, and such like. We saw them have much red Copper, whereof they make
chains, collars, and drinking cups, A 'Copper Mine.
which they so little esteemed they would give us for small toys, and
signified unto us they had it out of the earth in the Main: three days they
stayed with us, but every night retired two or three mile from us: after with
many signs of love and friendship they departed, seven of them staying
behind, that did help us to dig and carry Saxafras, and do any thing they
could, being of a comely proportion and the best condition of any Salvages we
had yet incountred. They have no Beards but counterfeits, as they did think
ours also was: for which they would have changed with some of our men that had
great beards. Some of the baser sort would steal; but the better sort, we
found very civil and just. We saw but three of their women, and they were but
of mean stature, attyred in skins like the men, but fat and well favored. The
wholesomenesse and temperature of this climate, does not only argue the people
to be answerable to this Description, but also of a perfect constitution of
body, active, strong, healthful, and very witty, as the sundry toys by them
so cunningly wrought may well testify. For our selves, we found our selves
rather increase in health and strength then otherwise; for all our toil, bad
diet and lodging; yet not one of us was touched with any sickness. Twelve
intended here a while to have stayed, but upon better consideration, how
meanly we were provided, Their return.
we left this Island (with as many true sorrowful eyes as were before desirous
to see it) the 18. of June, and arrived at E^mouth, the 23 of July.

But yet man's mind does such it self explay,
As Gods great Will does frame it every way.
And, Such thoughts men have, on earth that do but live,
As men may crave, but God does only give.
Written by John Brierton one of the Voyage.
A Voyage of Captain Martin Pring, with two Barks from Bristow, for the North
part of Virginia. 1603.
Richard Hackluite, Mr John Whitson being Mayor, with his brethren the
Aldermen, and most of the Merchants of the City of Bristow, raised a stock of
1000l. to furnish out two Barks, the one of 50. tuns, with 30. men and boys,
the other 26. tuns, with 13. men and boys, having Martin Pring an
understanding Gentleman, and a sufficient Mariner for Captain, and Robert
Salterne his Assistant, who had bin with Captain Gosnoll there the year
before for Pilot. Though they were much crossed by contrary winds upon the
coast of England, and the death of that ever most memorable, miracle of the
world, our most dear sovereign Lady and Queen Elizabeth: yet at last they
passed by the western Isles, and about the 7. of June, fell upon the north
part of Virginia, about the degrees of forty three. Where they found plenty
of most sorts of fish, and saw a high country full of great woods of sundry
sorts. As they ranged the coast at a place they named Whitson Bay, they were
kindly used by the Natives, that came to them, in troops, of tens, twenties,
and thirties, and sometimes more. But because in this Voyage for most part they
followed the course of Captain Gosnoll, and have made no relation but to the
same effect he writ before, we will thus conclude;

Lay hands unto this work with all thy wit,
But pray that God would speed and perfect it.
Robert Salterne.

A relation of a Discovery toward the Northward of Virginia, by Captain
George Waymouth 1605. employed thither by the right Honorable Thomas Arundell,
Baron of Warder, in the Reign of our most royal King JAMES.
Ratcliffe, but by contrary winds we were forced into Dartmouth till the last
of this month, then with 29. as good sea men, and all necessary provisio^s as
could possibly be gotten, we put to sea; and the 24 of April fell with Flowers
and Coruos. We intended as we were directed toward the Southward of 39. But
the winds so crossed us we fell more Northwards about 41. and 20. minuits, we
sounded at 100. fathom, Dangerous shoules.
and by that we had run 6 leagues we had but 5. yet saw no land; from the main
top we descryed a whitish sandy clift, West North-west some 6. leagues from us,
but ere we had run two leagues further we found many shoules and breaches,
sometimes in 4. fadom and the next throw 15. or 18. Being thus imbayed among
those shoules, we were constrained to put back again, which we did with no
small danger, though both the wind and weather were as fair as we could
desire. Thus we parted from the Land, which we had not before so much desired,
and at the first sight rejoiced, as now we all joyfully praised God that he had
delivered us from so eminent danger. Here we found excellent Cod, Cod and
Whales.
and saw many Whales as we had done 2. or 3. days before. Being thus
constrained to put to sea, the want of wood and water caused us take the best
advantage of the wind, to fall with the shore wheresoever: but we found our
Sea cards most directly false. The 17. of May we made the Land again, but it
blew so hard, we durst not approach it. The next day it appeared to us a main
high land, but we found it an Island of 6. miles in compass: within a league
of it we came to an anchor, and went on shore for wood and water, Their first
landing.
of which we found sufficient. The water gushing forth down the rocky clifts
in many places, which are all overgrown with Fur, Birch, Beech, and Oak, as
the Verge is with Gousberries, Strawberries, wild Pease, and Rose bushes, and
much foul of diverse sorts that breed among the rocks: here as in all places
else where we came, we found Cod enough.

From hence we might discern the main land and very high mountains, the next
day because we rode too open to the Sea, we waighed, and came to the Isles
adjoining to the mayn: among which we found an excellent rode, defended from
all winds, for ships of any burden, in 6.7.8.9. or 10. fadom upon a clay oze.
This was upon a Whitsonday, wherefore we called it Pentecost Harbor. Pentecost
harbor.
Here I cannot omit for foolish fear of imputation of flattery, the painful
industry of our Captain, who as at Sea he was always most careful and
vigilant, so at land he refused no pains: but his labor was ever as much or
rather more then any man's; which not only encouraged others with better
content, but also effected much with great expedition. We dug a Garden the
22. of May, The Captains diligence.
where among our garden-seeds we sowed Pease and Barley, which in 16. days
grew up 8. inches, although this was but the crust of the ground, and much
inferior to the mould we after found in the main.

After we had taken order for all our necessary businesses, we marched through
two of these Isles. The biggest was 4. or 5. miles in compass; we found here
all sorts of ordinary trees, besides, Vines, Currants, Spruce, Yew, Angelica,
and diverse gummes: in so much many of our company wished themselves settled
here. Upon the 30. our Captain with 13. went to discover the main: we in the
ship espied 3. Canowes that came toward the ship. Which after they had well
viewed, one of them came aboard with 3. men, and by our good usage of them not
long after the rest, two days we had their companies, in all respects they are
but like them at Elizabeth's Isles, therefore this may suffice for their
description. In this time our Captain had discovered a fair river, trending
into the main 40 miles, and returned back to bring in the ship. The Salvages
also kept their words and brought us 40. Bever, Oter, and sable skins, for the
value of 5. shillings in knives, Trade with the Salvages.
glasses, combs, and such toys, and thus we used them so kindly as we could,
because we intended to inhabit in their Country, they lying aboard with us and
we ashore with them; but it was but as changing man for man as hostages, and in
this manner many times we had their companies.

At last they desired our Captain to go with them to the main to trade with
their Bashabes, which is their chief Lord, which we did, our boat well manned
with 14. yet would they row faster with 3. Ores in their Canowes then we with
8. but when we saw our old acquaintance, would not stay aboard us as before for
hostage, but did what they could to draw us into a narrow c^ke, we exchanged
one Owen Griffin with them for a young fellow of theirs, Their treachery.
that he might see if he could discover any treachery, as he did, for he found
there assembled 283. Salvages with bows and arrows, but not any thing at all
to trade as they pretended. These things considered, we conceited them to be
but as all Salvages ever had been, kind till they found opportunity to do
mischief. Wherefoer we determined to take some of them, before they should
suspect we had discovered their plot, lest they should absent themselves from
us, Five Salvages surprised.
so the first that ever after came into the ship were three which we kept, and
two we took on shore with much ado, with two Canowes, their bows and arrows.

Some time we spent in sounding all the Isles, channels, and inlets
thereabouts, and we found 4. several ways a ship might be brought into this
Bay. In the interim there came 2. Canowes more boldly aboard us, signifying we
should bring our ship to the place where he dwelt to trade. We excused our
selves why we could not, but used them kindly, yet got them away with all the
speed we could, that they should not be perceived by them in the houle, then we
went up the river 26. miles, A description of the river.
of which I had rather not write, then by my relation detract from it, it is in
breadth a mile, near 40. miles; and a channel of 6.7.8.9. or 10. fadom, and
on both sides every half mile gallant Coues, to contain in many of them 100
sail, where they may lie on Oze without Cable or Anchor, only mored with a
Hanser, and it flows 18. foot, that you may make, docke, or carine ships with
much facility: besides the land is most rich, trending all along on both sides
in an equal plain, neither rocky nor mountainous, but verged with a green
border of grass, does make tender to the beholder her pleasant fertility, if
by cleansing away the woods she were converted into meadow.

The woods are great, and tall, such as are spoken of in the Islelands, and
well watered with many fresh springs. Our men that had seen Oranoque so famous
in the worlds ears, Reogrande, Loyer, and Slion, report, though they be great
and goodly rivers, yet are not comparable to it. Leaving our ship we went
higher, till we were 7. miles higher then the salt water flowed; we marched
toward the mountains we had seen, but the weather was so hot, and our labor
so great, as our Captain was contented to return: after we had erected a
cross we left this fair land and river, in which the higher we went the
better we liked it, and returned to our ship. By the way we met a Canow that
much desired one of our men to go up to their Basshabes, but we knew their
intents, and so turned them off; and though we had both time and provision to
have discovered much more, and might have found peradventure good trade, yet
because our company was but small, we would not hazard so hopeful a business
as this was, either for our private, or particular ends, being more regardfull
of a public good, and promulgating Gods holy Church by planting Christianity,
which was the intent of our adventurers so well as ours; returning by the Isles
in the entry of the Sound we called them St Georges Isles, and because on
sunday we set out of England, on sunday also the 16. of June we departed hence.
When we had run 30. leagues we had 40. fadom, ^hen 70. then 100. After 2. or 3.
watches more we were in 24. fadoms, where we took so much Cod as we did know
what to do with, and the 18. of July came to Dartmouth, and all our men as
well God be thanked as when they went forth.

Thus may you see;

God has not all his gifts bestowed on all or any one,
Words sweetest, and wits sharpest, courage, strength of bone;
All rarities of mind and parts do all concur in none.
Written by James Rosier one of the Voyage.
VIRGINIA


The second Book.
THE SIXTH VOYAGE. 1606. To another part of Virginia, where now are Planted our
English Colonies, Whom God increase and preserve: Discovered and Described by
Captain JOHN SMITH, sometimes Governor of the Country.

Virginia is a Country in America between the degrees of 34. and 45. of the
North latitude. The latitude.
The bounds thereof on the East side are the great Ocean: on the South lies
Florida: on the North nova Francia: as for the West thereof, the limits are
unknown. Of all this Country we purpose nor to speak, but only of that part
which was planted by the English men in the year of our Lord, 1606. And this
is under the degrees 37.38. and 39. The temperature of this Country does agree
well with English constitutions, being once seasoned to the Country. Which
appeared by this, that though by many occasions our people fell sick; yet did
they recover by very small means, and continued in health, though there were
other great causes, not only to have made them sick, but even to end their
days, etc.

The Summer is hot as in Spain; the Winter cold as in France or England. The
temperature.
The heat of summer is in June, July, and August, but commonly the cool
Breeses assuage the vehemence of the heat. The chief of winter is half
December, January, February, and half March. The cold is extreme sharp, but
here the Proverb is true, that no extreme long continues.

In the year 1607. was an extraordinary frost in most of Europe, and this
frost was found as extreme in Virginia. But the next year for 8. or 10. days
of ill weather, other 14. days would be as Summer.

The winds here are variable, The winds.
but the like thunder and lightning to purify the air, I have seldom either
seen or heard in Europe. From the Southwest came the greatest gusts with
thunder and heat. The Northwest wind is commonly cool and brings fair
weather with it. From the North is the greatest cold, and from the East and
Southeast as from the Barmudas, fogs and raines.

Some times there are great droughts, other times much rain, yet great
necessity of neither, by reason we see not but that all the raritie of
needful fruits in Europe, may be there in great plenty, by the industry of
men, as appears by those we there Planted.

There is but one entrance by Sea into this Country, The entrances. Cape Henry.
and that is at the mouth of a very goodly Bay, 18. or 20. miles broad. The
cape on the South is called Cape Henry, in honor of our most noble Prince. The
land white hilly sands like unto the Downs, and all along the shores great
plenty of Pines and Firres.

The north Cape is called Cape Charles, in honor of the worthy Duke of York.
Cape Charles.
The Isles before it, Smith's Isles, by the name of the discover. Within is a
country that may have the prerogative over the most pleasant places known, for
large and pleasant navigable Rivers, The Country.
heaven and earth never agreed better to frame a place for man's habitation;
were it fully manured and inhabited by industrious people. Here are mountains,
hills, plains, valleys, rivers, and brooks, all running most pleasantly into
a fair Bay, compassed but for the mouth, with fruitful and delightsome land.
In the Bay and rivers are many Isles both great and small, some woody, some
plain, most of them low and not inhabited. This Bay lies North and South, in
which the water flows near 200. miles, and has a channel for 140 miles, of
depth betwixt 6 and 15 fadome, holding in breadth for the most part 10 or 14
miles. From the head of the Bay to the Northwest, the land is mountanous, and
so in a manner from thence by a Southwest line; So that the more Southward, the
farther off from the Bay are those mountains. From which fall certain brooks
which after come to five principal navigable rivers. These run from the
Northwest into the South east, and so into the West side of the Bay, where the
fall of every River is within 20 or 15 miles one of another.

The mountains.
The mountains are of diverse natures: for at the head of the Bay the rocks are
of a composition like Mill stones. Some of Marble, etc. And many pieces like
Crystal we found, as thrown down by water from those mountains. For in
Winter they are covered with much snow, and when it dissolveth the waters fall
with such violence, that it causes great inundations in some narrow valleys,
which is scarce perceived being once in the rivers. These waters wash from the
rocks such glistering tinctures, that the ground in some places seems as
gilded, where both the rocks and the earth are so splendent to behold, that
better judgments then ours might have been persuaded, they contained more
then probabilities. The vesture of the earth in most places does manifestly
prove the nature of the soil to be lusty and very rich. The color of the
earth we found in diverse places, The soil.
resembles bole Ammoniac, terra sigillata, and Lemnia, Fullers earth, Marle,
and diverse other such appearances. But generally for the most part it is a
black sandy mould, in some places a fat slimy clay, in other places a very
barren gravel. But the best ground is known by the vesture it bears, as by
the greatness of trees, or abundance of weeds, etc.

The valleys.
The Country is not mountanous, nor yet low, but such pleasant plain hills, and
fertile valleys, one prettily crossing another, and watered so conveniently
with fresh brooks and springs, Plains.
no less commodious, then delightsome. By the rivers are many plain marshes,
containing some 20 some 100. some 200 Acres, some more, some less. Other
plains there are few, but only where the Salvages inhabit: but all overgrowne
with trees and weeds, being a plain wilderness as God first made it.

On the west side of the Bay, we said were 5. fair and delightful navigable
rivers. The first of those, and the next to the mouth of the Bay has his
course from the West Northwest. The river Powhatan.
It is called Powhatan, according to the name of a principal country that
lies upon it. The mouth of this river is near three miles in breadth, yet do
the shoules force the Channel so near the land, that a Sacre will overshoot
it at point blanke. It is navigable 150 miles, the shouldes and soundings are
here needless to be expressed. It falls from Rocks far west in a Country
inhabited by a nation they call Monacans. But where it comes into our
discovery it is Powhatan. In the farthest place that was diligently observed,
are falls, rocks, shoules, etc. which makes it past navigation any higher.
Thence in the running downward, the river is enriched with many goodly
brooks, which are maintained by an infinite number of small rundles and
pleasant springs, that disperse themselves for best service, as do the veins
of a man's body. The branches
From the South there falls into it: First, the pleasant river of Apamatuck.
Next more to the East are two small rivers of Quiyoughcohanocke. A little
farther is a Bay wherein falls 3 or 4 pretty brooks and creekes that half
entrench the Inhabitants of Warraskoyac, then the river of Nandsamund, and
lastly the brook of Chisapeack. From the North side is the river of
Chickahamania, the back river of James Town; another by the Cedar Isle, where
we lived ten weeks upon Oysters, then a convenient harbor for Fisher boats at
Kecoughtan, that so turns it self into Bays and Creekes, it makes that
place very pleasant to inhabit; their cornefields being girded therein in a
manner as Peninsulaes. The most of these rivers are inhabited by several
nations, or rather families, of the name of the rivers. They have also over
those some Governor, as their King, which they call Werowances. In a Peninsula
on the North side of this river are the English Planted in a place by them
called James Town, in honor of the Kings most excellent Majesty. James Town.


The first and next the rivers mouth are the Kecoughtans, The several
Inhabitants.
who besides their women and children, have not past 20. fighting men. The
Paspaheghes (on whose land is seated James Town, some 40. miles from the Bay)
have not past 40. The river called Chickahamania near 250. The Weanocks 100.
The Arrowhatocks 30. The place called Powhatan, some 40. On the South side this
river the Appamatucks have sixty fighting men. The Quiyougcohanocks 25. The
Nandsamu^ds 200. The Chesapeacks 100. Of this last place the Bay bears the
name. In all these places is a several commander, which they call Werowance,
except the Chickahamanians, who are governed by the Priests and their
Assistants, or their Elders called Caw-cawwassoughes. In summer no place
affords more plenty of Sturgeon, nor in winter more abundance of foul,
especially in the time of frost. I took once 52 Sturgeons at a draught, at
another 68. From the later end of May till the end of June are taken few, but
young Sturgeons of two foot, or a yard long. From thence till the midst of
September, them of two or three yards long and few others. And in 4 or 5,
hours with one Net were ordinarily taken 7 or 8: often more, seldom less. In
the small rivers all the year there is good plenty of small fish, so that
with hooks those that would take pains had sufficient.

Fourteen miles Northward from the river Powhatan, is the river Pamavnkee, R.
Pamavnkee.
which is navigable 60 or 70 miles, but with Catches and small Barks 30 or 40
miles farther. At the ordinary flowing of the salt water, it divides it self
into two gallant branches. On the South side inhabit the people of Youghtanund,
The inhabitants.
who have about 60 men for wars. On the North branch Mattapament, who have 30
men. Where this river is divided the Country is called Pamavnkee, and
nourishes near 300 able men. About 25. miles lower on the North side of this
river is Werawocomoco, where their great King inhabited when I was delivered
him prisoner; yet there are not past 40 able men. Ten or twelve miles lower, on
the South side of this river, is Chiskiack, which has some 40 or 50 men.
These, as also Apamatuck, Irrohatock, and Powhatan, are their great Kings
chief alliance, and inhabitants. The rest his Conquests.

Before we come to the third river that falls from the mountains,
Payankatank. R.
there is another river ( some 30 miles navigable) that comes from the
Inland, called Payankatanke, the Inhabitants are about 50 or 60 serviceable men.

The third navigable river is called Toppahanock. Toppahanock R.
( This is navigable some 130 miles) At the top of it inhabit the people called
Mannahoacks amongst the mountains, but they are above the place we described.
The inhabitants.
Upon this river on the North side are the people Cuttatawomen, with 30
fighting men. Higher are the Moraughtacunds, with 80. Beyond them Rapahanock
with 100. Far above is another Cuttatawomen with 20. On the South is the
pleasant seat of Nantaughtacund having 150 men. This river also as the two
former, is replenished with fish and foul.

The fourth river is called Patawomeke, 6 or 7 miles in breadth. Patawomek, R.
It is navigable 140 miles, and fed as the rest with many sweet rivers and
springs, which fall from the bordering hills. These hills many of them are
planted, and yield no less plenty and variety of fruit, then the river
exceeds with abundance of fish. It is inhabited on both sides. The
inhabitants.
First on the South side at the very entrance is Wighcocomoco and has some 130
men, beyond them Sekacawone with 30. The Onawmanient with 100. And the
Patawomekes more then 200. Here does the river divide it self into 3 or 4
convenient branches. The greatest of the least is called Quiyough, trending
Northwest, but the river it self turns Northeast, and is still a navigable
stream. On the Western side of this bought is Tauxenent with 40 men. On the
North of this river is Secowocomoco with 40. Somewhat further Potapaco with 20.
In the East part is Pamacaeack with 60. After Moyowance with 100. And lastly,
Nacotchtanke with 80. The river above this place makes his passage down a low
pleasant valley overshaddowed in many places with high rocky mountains; from
whence distill innumerable sweet and pleasant springs.

Pawtuxunt, R.
The fifth river is called Pawtuxunt, of a less proportion then the rest; but
the channel is 16 fadome deep in some places. Here are infinite skuls of
diverse kinds of fish more then elsewhere. Upon this river dwell the people
called Acquintanacksuak, Pawtuxunt, and Mattapanient. Two hundred men was the
greatest strength that could be there perceived. But they inhabit together, and
not so dispersed as the rest. These of all other we found most civil to give
intertainement.

Bolus, R. The head of the Bay.
Thirty leagues Northward is a river not inhabited, yet navigable; for the red
clay resembling bole Armoniack we called it Bolus. At the end of the Bay where
it is 6 or 7 miles in breadth, it divides it self into 4. branches, the best
comes Northwest from among the mountains, but though Canows may go a days
journey or two up it, we could not get two miles up it with our boat for
rocks. Upon it is seated the Sasquesahanocks, Sasquesahanock.
near it North and by West runs a creek a mile and a half: at the head
whereof the Eble left us on shore, where we found many trees cut with hatchets.
The next tide keeping the shore to seek for some Salvages; (for within thirty
leagues sailing, we saw not any, being a barren Country,) we went up another
small river like a creek 6 or 7 mile. From thence returning we met 7 Canowes
of the Massowomeks, with whom we had conference by signs, for we understood
one another scarce a word: the next day we discovered the small river and
people of Tockwhogh trending Eastward.

Having lost our Grapnell among the rocks of Sasquesahanocks, we were then
near 200 miles from home, and our Barge about two runs, and had in it but 12
men to perform this Discovery, wherein we lay above 12 weeks upon those great
waters in those unknown Countries, having nothing but a little meal,
oatemeale and water to feed us, and scarce half sufficient of that for half
that time, but what provision we got among the Salvages, and such roots and
fish as we caught by accident, and Gods direction; nor had we a Mariner nor any
had skill to trim the sails but two sailors and my self, the rest being
Gentlemen, or them were as ignorant in such toil and labor. Yet necessity in
a short time by good words and examples made them do that that caused them
ever after to fear no colors. What I did with this small means I leave to
the Reader to judge, and the Map I made of the Country, which is but a small
matter in regard of the magnitude thereof. But to proceed, 60 of those
Sasquesahanocks came to us with skins, Bows, Arrows, Targets, Beads, Swords,
and Tobacco pipes for presents. Such great and well proportioned men are
seldom seen, for they seemed like Giants to the English, yea and to the
neighbors, yet seemed of an honest and simple disposition, with much ado
restrained from adoring us as Gods. Those are the strangest people of all those
Countries, both in language and attire; for their language it may well beseem
their proportions, sounding from them, The description of a Sasquesahanough.
as a voice in a vault. Their attire is the skins of Bears, and Woolues,
some have Cassacks made of Bears heads and skins, that a man's head goes
through the skins neck, and the ears of the Bear fastened to his shoulders,
the nose and teeth hanging down his breast, another Bears face split behind
him, and at the end of the nose hung a Pawe, the half sleeves coming to the
elbowes were the necks of Bears, and the arms through the mouth with paws
hanging at their noses. One had the head of a Woolfe hanging in a chain for a
Jewel, his Tobacco pipe three quarters of a yard long, prettily carved with a
Bird, a Dear, or some such devise at the great end, sufficient to beat out
ones brains: with Bows, Arrows, and clubs, suitable to their greatness.
These are scarce known to Powhatan. They can make near 600 able men, and are
pallifadoed in their Towns to defend them from the Massawomekes their mortal
enemies. Five of their chief Werowances came aboard us, and crossed the Bay in
their Barge. The picture of the greatest of them is signified in the Map. The
calfe of whose leg was three quarters of a yard about, and all the rest of his
limbs so answerable to that proportion, that he seemed the goodliest man we
ever beheld. His hair, the one side was long, the other shore close with a
ridge over his crown like a cocks comb. His arrows were five quarters long,
headed with the splinters of a white christall-like stone, in form of a heart,
an inch broad, and an inch and a half or more long. These he wore in a Woolues
skin at his back for his Quiver, his bow in the one hand and his clubbe in
the other, as is described.

On the East side the Bay, is the river Tockwhogh, Tockwhogh, R.
and upon it a people that can make 100 men, seated some seven miles within
the river: where they have a Fort very well pallisadoed and mantelled with
barks of trees. Next them is Ozinies with sixty men. More to the South of that
East side of the Bay, the river Rapahanock, Rapahanock, R. Kuskarawaock R.
Wighcocomoco, R.
near unto which is the river Kuskarawaock, Upon which is seated a people with
200 men. After that, is the river Tants Wighcocomoco, and on it a people with
100 men. The people of those rivers are of little stature, of another language
from the rest, and very rude. But they on the river Acohanock with 40 men,
Accomack, R.
and they of Accomack 80 men does equalize any of the Territories of Powhatan,
and speak his language, who over all those does rule as King.

Southward we went to some parts of Chawonock and the Mangoags to search for
them left by Mr White. Chawonock.
Amongst those people are thus many several Nations of sundry Languages, that
environ Powhatans Territories. The Chawonockes, the Mangoags, The several
languages.
the Monacans, the Mannahokes, the Masawomekes, the Powhatans, the
Sasquesahanocks, the Atquanachukes, the Tockwoghes, and the Kuscarawaokes. All
those not any one understands another but by Interpreters. Their several
habitations are more plainly described by this annexed Map, which will
present to the eye, the way of the mountains, and current of the rivers, with
their several turnings, bays, shoules, Isles, Inlets, and creekes, the
breadth of the waters, the distances of places, and such like. In which Map
observe this, that as far as you see the little Crosses on rivers, mountains,
or other places have been discovered; the rest was had by information of the
Savages, and are set down according to their instructions.

Thus have I walked a wayless way, with uncouth pace,
Which yet no Christian man did ever trace:
But yet I know this not affects the mind,
Which ears does hear, as that which eyes do find.
Of such things which are naturally in Virginia, and how they use them.
VIRGINIA does afford many excellent vegetables, and living Creatures, Why
there is little grass.
yet grass there is little or none, but what grows in low Marshes: for all
the Country is overgrowne with trees, whose droppings continually turns
their grass to weeds, by reason of the rancknes of the ground, which would
soon be amended by good husbandry. Woods with their fruits.
The wood that is most common is Oak and Walnut, many of their Oaks are so tall
and straight, that they will bear two foot and a half square of good timber
for 20 yards long; Of this wood there is two or three several kinds. The
Acornes of one kind, whose bark is more white then the other, and somewhat
sweetish, which being boiled, at last affords a sweet oil, that they keep in
gourds to anoint their heads and joints. The fruit they eat made in bread or
otherwise. There is also some Elm, some black Walnut tree, Elm.
and some Ash: of Ash and Elm they make soap Ashes. If the trees be very
great, the Ashes will be good, and melt to hard lumps, but if they be small, it
will be but powder, and not so good as the other. Of walnuts there is 2 or 3
kinds; Walnuts. Supposed Cypres.
there is a kind of wood we called Cypres, because both the wood, the fruit,
and leaf did most resemble it, and of those trees there are some near three
fadome about at the foot, very straight, and 50, 60, or 80 foot without a
branch. By the dwelling of the Salvages are some great Mulbery trees,
Mulberries.
and in some parts of the Country, they are found growing naturally in pretty
groves. There was an assay made to make silk, and surely the worms prospered
excellent well, till the master workman fell sick. During which time they
were eaten with Rats.

Chestnuts.
In some parts were found some Chestnuts, whose wild fruit equalize the best in
France, Spain, Germany, or Italy. Plums there are of three sorts. The red and
white are like our hedge plums, but the other which they call Putchamins, grow
as high as a Palmeta: the fruit is like a Medler; it is first green, then
yellow, and red when it is ripe; if it be not ripe, it will draw a man's mouth
awry, with much torment, but when it is ripe, it is as delicious as an Apricot.

Cherries.
They have Cherries, and those are much like a Damson, but for their tastes and
color we called them Cherries. We saw some few Crabs, but very small and
bitter. Of vines great abundance in many parts that climb the tops of the
highest trees in some places, Vines.
but these bear but few grapes. Except by the rivers and savage habitations,
where they are not overshadowed from the sun, they are covered with fruit,
though never pruined nor manured. Of those hedge grapes we made near twenty
gallons of wine, which was like our French British wine, but certainly they
would prove good were they well manured. There is another sort of grape near
as great as a Cherry, this they call Messamins, they be satte, and the juice
thick. Neither does the taste so well please when they are made in wine. They
have a small fruit growing on little trees, husked like a Chestnut, but the
fruit most like a very small Acorne. Chechinquamins.
This they call Chechinquamins, which they esteem a great dainty. They have a
berry much like our Gooseberry, in greatness, color, and taste; those they
call Rawcomens, Rawcomens.
and do eat them raw or boiled. Of these natural fruits they live a great
part of the year, which they use in this manner; The Walnuts, Chestnuts,
Acornes, How they use their fruits.
and Chechinquamins are dried to keep. When they need walnuts they break them
between two stones, yet some part of the shells will cleave to the fruit. Then
do they dry them again upon a Mat over a hurdle. After they put it into a
mortar of wood, and beat it very small: that done they mix it with water, that
the shells may sink to the bottom. This water will be colored as milk, which
they call Pawcohiccora, Walnut mill.
and keep it for their use. The fruit like Medlers they call Putchamins, they
cast upon hurdles on a Mat, and preserve them as Pruines. Of their Chestnuts and
Chechinquamins boiled, they make both broth and bread for their chief men, or
at their greatest feasts. Besides those fruit trees, there is a white Popular,
and another tree like unto it, that yields a very clear and an odoriferous
Gum like Turpentine, Gummes. Cedats. Saxafiastrees.
which some called Balsom. There are also Cedars and Saxafras trees. They also
yield gummes in a small proportion of themselves. We tried conclusions to
extract it out of the wood, but nature afforded more then our arts.

Berries.
In the watery valleys grows a Berry which they call Ocoughtanamnis very much
like unto Capers. These they dry in summer. When they eat them they boil them
near half a day; Matoum.
for otherwise they differ not much from poison. Mattoum grows as our Bents.
The feed is not much unlike to Rye, though much smaller. This they use for a
dainty bread buttered with dear suet.

Strawberries.
During Summer there are either Strawberries, which ripen in April, or
Mulberries which ripen in May and June. Raspises, hurts; or a fruit that the
inhabitants call Maracocks, which is a pleasant wholesome fruit much like a
Lemond. Many herbs in the spring are commonly dispersed throughout the woods,
Herbs.
good for brothes and sallets, as Violets, Purslain, Sorrel, etc. Besides many
we used whose names we know not.

Roots.
The chief root they have for food is called Tockawhoughe. It grows like a
flagge in Marshes. In one day a Salvage will gather sufficient for a week.
These roots are much of the greatness and taste of Potatoes. They use to cover
a great many of them with Oak leaves and Fern, and then cover all with earth
in the manner of a Colepit; over it, on each side, they continue a great fire
24 hours before they dare eat it. Raw it is no better then poison, and being
roasted, except it be tender and the heat abated, or sliced and dried in the
Sun, mixed with sorrel and meal or such like, it will prickle and torment
the throat extremely, and yet in summer they use this ordinarily for bread.

They have another root which they call Wighsacan: Wig^sacan a root. Pocones
a small root.
as the other feeds the body, so this cures their hurts and diseases. It is a
small root which they bruise and apply to the wound. Pocones is a small root
that grows in the mountains, which being dried and beat in powder turns
red. And this they use for swellings, aches, anointing their joints, painting
their heads and garments. They account it very precious, and of much worth.
Musquaspen is a root of the bigness of a finger, Musquaspen a root.
and as red as blood. In drying; it will wither almost to nothing. This they
use to paint their Mattes, Targets, and such like.

There is also Pellitory of Spain, Sasafrage, and diverse other simples,
Pellitory. Sasafrage.
which the Apothecaries gathered, and commended to be good, and medicinable.

In the low Marshes grow plots of Onyons, Onyons.
containing an Acre of ground or more in many places; but they are small, not
past the bigness of the top of ones Thumb.

Of beasts the chief are Dear, nothing differing from ours. Their chief
beasts are Dear. Aroughcun. Squirrels.
In the deserts toward the heads of the rivers, there are many, but amongst
the rivers few. There is a beast they call Aroughcun, much like a badger, but
uses to live on trees as Squirrels do. Their Squirrels some are near as
great as our smallest sort of wild Rabbets, some blackish or black and white,
but the most are gray.

A small beast they have they call Assapanick, but we call them flying
Squirrels, Assapanick, a Squirrel flying. Opassom.
because spreading their legs, and so stretching the largeness of their skins,
that they have been seen to fly 30 or 40 yards. An Opassom has a head like a
Swine, and a tail like a Rat, and is of the bigness of a Cat. Under her belly
she has a bag, wherein she lodges, carries, and suckleth her young.
Mussascus.
A Mussascus is a beast of the form and nature of our water Rats, but many of
them smell exceeding strongly of Musk. Their Hares no bigger then our Conies,
and few of them to be found.

Their Bears are very little in comparison of those of Muscovia and Tartaria.
Bears.
The Beaver is as big as an ordinary water dog, but his legs exceeding short.
The Beaver.
His forefeete like a dogs, his hinder feet like a Swans. His tail somewhat
like the form of a Racket, bare without hair, which to eat the Salvages
esteem a great delicate. They have many Otters, which as the Beaver's they
take with snares, Otters.
and esteem the skins great ornaments, and of all those beasts they use to
feed when they catch them. An Vtchunquoyes is like a wild Cat. Their Foxes are
like our silver haired Conies, Vtchu^quoyes. Foxes-Dogges.
of a small proportion, and not smelling like those in England. Their Dogs of
that Country are like their Woolues, and cannot bark but howl, and the
Woolues not much bigger then our English Foxes. Martins, Powlecats, Weesels,
Martins. Polcats. Weesels, and Minkes.
and Minkes we know they have, because we have seen many of their skins,
though very seldom any of them alive. But one thing is strange, that we could
never perceive their Vermin destroy our Hens, Eggs, nor Chickens, nor do
any hurt, nor their flies nor serpents any way pernicious, where in the South
parts of America they are always dangerous, and often deadly.

Of Birds the Eagle is the greatest devourer. Hawks there be of diverse sorts,
Birds.
as our Falconers called them: Sparrow-hawkes, Lanarets, Goshawkes, Falcons and
Osperayes, but they all prey most upon fish. Their Partridges are little bigger
then our Quails. Wild Turkies are as big as our tame. There are Woosels or
Blackbirds with red shoulders, Thrushes and diverse sorts of small Birds, some
red, some blew, scarce so big as a Wrenne, but few in Summer. In Winter there
are great plenty of Swans, Cranes, gray and white with black wings, Herons,
Geese, Brants, Ducke, Wigeon, Dotterell, Oxeies, Parrats, and Pigeons. Of all
those sorts great abundance, and some other strange kinds, to us unknown by
name. But in Summer not any, or a very few to be seen.

Of fish we were best acquainted with Sturgeon, Grampus, Porpus, Seals, Fish.
Stingraies, whose tails are very dangerous. Bretts, Mullets, white Salmonds,
Trowts, Soles, Plaice, Herrings, Conyfish, Rockfish, Eeles, Lampreys^punc;
Catfish, Shades^punc; P^arch of three sorts, Crabs, Shrimps, Crevises, Oysters,
Cocles, and M^scles. But the most strange fish is a small one, so like the
picture of St George his Dragon, as possible can be, except his legs and wings,
and the Toadefish, which will swell till it be like to burst, when it comes
into the air.

The rocks.
Concerning the entrails of the earth, little can be said for certainty. There
wanted good Refiners; for those that took upon them to have skill this way,
took up the washings from the mountains, and some moskered shining stones and
spangles which the waters brought down, flattering themselves in their own
vain conceits to have been supposed what they were not, by the means of that
ore, if it proved as their arts and judgments expected. Only this is
certain, that many regions lying in the same latitude, afford Mines very rich
of diverse natures. The crust also of these rocks would easily persuade a man
to believe there are other Mines then iron and steel, if there were but means
and men of experience that knew the Mine from Spar.

Of their Planted fruits in Virginia, and how they use them.
How they divide the year.
THey divide the year into five seasons. Their winter some call Popanow, the
spring Cattapeuk, the summer Cohattayough, the earing of their Corn Nepinough,
the harvest and fall of leaf Taquitock. From September until the midst of
November are the chief feasts and sacrifice. Then have they plenty of fruits
as well planted as natural, as corn, green and ripe, fish, foul, and wild
beasts exceeding fat.

How they prepare the ground.
The greatest labor they take, is in planting their corn, for the Country
naturally is overgrowne with wood. To prepare the ground they bruise the bark
of the trees near the root, then do they scortch the roots with fire that
they grow no more. The next year with a crooked piece of wood they beat up the
weeds by the roots, and in that mould they plant their Corn. Their manner is
this. They make a hole in the earth with a stick and into it they put four
grains of wheat and two of beans These hol^s they make four foot one from
another; Their women and children do continually keep it with weeding, and
when it is grown middle high, they hill it about like a hop-yard.

How they plant.
In April they begin to plant, but their chief plantation is in May, and so
they continue till the midst of June. What they plant in April they reap in
August, for May in September, for June in October; Every stalk of their corn
commonly bears two ears, some three, seldom any four, many but one, and
some none. Every care ordinarily has betwixt 200 and 500 grains. The stalk
being green has a sweet juice in it, somewhat like a sugar Cane, which is the
cause that when they gather their corn green, they suck the stalks: for as
we gather green pease, so do they their corn being green, which excels
their old. They plant also pease they call Assentamen^, which are the same they
call in Italy, Fag^h. Their Beans are the same the Turks call Garnanses, but
these they much esteem for dainties.

How they use their Corn.
Their corn they roast in the ear green, and bruising it in a mortar of wood
with a Polt, lap it in rowles in the leaves of their corn, and so boil it for
a dainty. They also reserve that corn late planted that will not ripe, by
roasting it in hot ashes, the heat thereof drying it. In winter they esteem it
being boiled with beans for a rare dish, they call Pausarowmena. Their old
wheat they first steep a night in hot water, in the morning pounding it in a
mortar. They use a small basket for their Temmes, then pound again the great,
and so separating by dashing their hand in the basket, receive the flower in a
platter made of wood, scraped to that form with burning and shells. Tempering
this flower with water, they make it either in cakes, covering them with ashes
till they be baked, and then washing them in fair water, they dry presently
with their own heat: or else boil them in water, eating the broth with the
bread which they call Ponap. The grouces and pieces of the corns remaining, by
fanning in a Platter or in the wind, away, the branne they boil 3 or 4 hours
with water, which is an ordinary food they call Vstatahamen. But some more
thriftie then cleanly, do burn the core of the ear to powder, which they
call Pungnough, mingling that in their meal, but it never tasted well in
bread, nor broth. How they use their fish and flesh.
Their fish and flesh they boil either very tenderly, or boil it so long on
hurdles over the fire, or else after the Spanish fashion, putting it on a spit,
they turn first the one side, then the other, till it be as dry as their
ierkin Beef in the west Indies, that they may keep it a month or more
without putrefying. The broth of fish or flesh they eat as commonly as the meat.

In May also amongst their corn they plant Pumpeons, Planted fruits
and a fruit like unto a musk mellon, but less and worse, which they call
Macocks. These increase exceedingly, and ripen in the beginning of July, and
continue until September. They plant also Maracocks a wild fruit like a
Lemmon, which also increase infinitely. They begin to ripe in September, and
continue till the end of October. When all their fruits be gathered, little else
they plant, and this is done by their women and children; neither does this
long suffice them, for near three parts of the year, they only observe times
and seasons, and live of what the Country naturally affords from hand to
mouth, etc.

The Commodities in Virginia, or that may be had by Industry.
THe mildness of the air, the fertility of the soil, and situation of the
rivers are so propitious to the nature and use of man, as no place is more
convenient for pleasure, profit, and man's sustenance, under that latitude or
climat. Here will live any beasts, as horses, goats, sheep, asses, hens, etc.
A proof cattle will live well.
as appeared by them that were carried thither. The waters, Isles, and shoales,
are full of safe harbors for ships of war or merchandise, for boats of all
sorts, for transportation or fishing, etc. The Bay and rivers have much
marchantable fish, and places fit for Salt coats, building of ships, making of
Iron, etc.

Muscovia and Polonia do yearly receive many thousands, for pitch, tar, The
Commodities.
sope-ashes, Rosen, Flax, Cordage, Sturgeon, Masts. Yards, Wainscot, Firres,
Glass, and such like; also Swethland for Iron and Copper. France in like
manner, for Wine, Canvas, and Salt. Spain as much for Iron, Steel, Figs,
Reasons, and Sackes. Italy with Silks and Velvets consumes our chief
Commodities. Holland maintains it self by fishing and trading at our own
doors. All these temporize with other for necessities, but all as uncertain
as peace or wars. Besides the charge, travel, and danger in transporting
them, by seas, lands, storms, and Pirates. Then how much has Virginia the
prerogative of all those flourishing Kingdoms, for the benefit of our Land,
when as within one hundred miles all those are to be had, either ready provided
by nature, or else to be prepared, were there but industrious men to labor.
Only of Copper we may doubt is wanting, but there is good probability that
both Copper and better Minerals are there to be had for their labor. Other
Countries have it. So then here is a place, a nurse for soldiers, a practice
for mariners, a trade for merchants, a reward for the good, and that which is
most of all, a business (most acceptable to God) to bring such poor Infidels
to the knowledge of God and his holy Gospel.

Of the natural Inhabitants of VIRGINIA.
THe land is not populous, for the men be few; their far greater number is of
women and children. Within 60 miles of James Town, there are about some 5000
people, but of able men fit for their wars scarce 1500. The numbe^^
To nourish so many together they have yet no means, because they make so
small a benefit of their land, Seven hundred men were the most were seen
together when they thought to have surprised Captain Smith. A description of
the people. The Barbers.
be it never so fertile. Six or seven hundred have been the most has been
seen together, when they gathered themselves to have surprised me at
Pamavnkee, having but fifteen to withstand the worst of their fury. As small
as the proportion of ground that has yet been discovered, is in comparison of
that yet unknown: the people differ very much in stature, especially in
language, as before is expressed. Some being very great as the Sasquesahanecks;
others very little, as the Wighcocomocoes: but generally tall and straight, of
a comely proportion, and of a color brown when they are of any age, but they
are borne white. Their hair is generally black, but few have any beards. The
men wear half their beards shaven, the other half long; for Barbers they use
their women, who with two shells will grate away the hair, of any fashion they
please. The women are cut in many fashions, agreeable to their years, The
constitution.
but ever some part remains long. They are very strong, of an able body and
full of agilitie, able to endure to lie in the woods under a tree by the fire,
in the worst of winter, or in the weeds and grass, in Ambuscado in the
Summer. The disposition.
They are inconstant in every thing, but what fear constrains them to keep.
Crafty, timorous, quick of apprehension, and very ingenuous. Some are of
disposition fearful, some bold, most cautelous, all Savage. Generally
covetous of Copper, Beads, and such like trash. They are soon moved to anger,
and so malicious, that they seldom forget an injury: they seldom steal one
from another, least their coniurers should reveal it, and so they be pursued
and punished. That they are thus feared is certain, but that any can reveal
their offenses by coniuration I am doubtful. Their women are careful not to
be suspected of dishonestie without the leave of their husbands. Each household
knows their own lands, and gardens, and most live of their own labors. The
possessions.
For their apparel, they are sometime covered with the skins of wild
beasts, which in Winter are dressed with the hair, but in Summer without.
Their attire.
The better sort use large mantels of Dear skins, not much differing in
fashion from the Irish mantels. Some imbrodered with white beads, some with
Copper, other painted after their manner. But the common sort have scarce to
cover their nakedness, but with grass, the leaves of trees, or such like. We
have seen some use mantels made of Turkey feathers, so prettily wrought and
woven with threads that nothing could be discerned but the feathers. That was
exceeding warm and very handsome. But the women are always covered about
their middles with a skin, Their ornaments.
and very shamefast to be seen bare. They adorn themselves most with copper
beads and paintings. Their women, some have their legs, hands, breasts and face
cunningly imbrodered with diverse works, as beasts, serpents, artificially
wrought into their flesh with black spots. In each ear commonly they have 3
great holes, whereat they hang chains, bracelets, or copper. Some of their men
wear in those holes, a small green and yellow colored snake, near half a
yard in length, which crawling and lapping her self about his neck oftentimes
familiarly would kiss his lips. Others wear a dead Rat tied by the tail.
Some on their heads wear the wing of a bird, or some large feather with a
Rattell. Those Rattels are somewhat like the chape of a Rapier, but less,
which they take from the tail of a snake. Many have the whole skin of a
Hawke or some strange foul, stuffed with the wings abroad. Others a broad
piece of Copper, and some the hand of their enemy dried. Their heads and
shoulders are painted red with the root Pocone brayed to powder, mixed with
oil, this they hold in summer to preserve them from the heat, and in winter
from the cold. Many other forms of paintings they use, but he is the most
gallant that is the most monstrous to behold.

Their buildings.
Their buildings and habitations are for the most part by the rivers, or not
far distant from some fresh spring. Their houses are built like our Arbors,
of small young springs bowed and tied, and so close covered with Mats, or the
barks of trees very handsomely, that notwithstanding either wind, rain, or
weather, they are as warm as stooues, but very smoaky, yet at the top of the
house there is a hole made for the smoke to go into right over the fire.

Against the fire they lie on little hurdles of Reeds covered with a Mat, Their
lodgings.
borne from the ground a foot and more by a hurdle of wood. On these round
about the house they lie heads and points one by the other against the fire,
some covered with Mats, some with skins, and some stark naked lie on the
ground, from 6 to 20 in a house. Their houses are in the midst of their fields
or gardens, Their gardens
which are small plots of ground. Some 20 acres, some 40. some 100. some 200.
some more, some less. In some places from 2 to 50 of those houses together, or
but a little separated by groves of trees. Near their habitations is little
small wood or old trees on the ground by reason of their burning of them for
fire. So that a man may gallop a horse amongst these woods any way, but where
the creekes or Rivers shall hinder.

Men, women, How they use their children.
and children have their several names according to the several humor of
their Parents. Their women (they say) are easily delivered of child, yet do
they love children very dearly. To make them hardy, in the coldest mornings
they them wash in the rivers, and by painting and ointments so tanne their
skins, that after a year or two, no weather will hurt them.

The men bestow their times in fishing, hunting, wars, The industry of their
women.
and such man-like exercises, scorning to be seen in any woman-like exercise,
which is the cause that the women be very painful, and the men often idle.
The women and children do the rest of the work. They make mats, baskets,
pots, morters, pound their corn, make their bread, prepare their victuals,
plant their corn, gather their corn, bear all kind of burdens, and such like.

How they strike fire.
Their fire they kindle presently by chafing a dry pointed stick in a hole of a
little square piece of wood, that firing it self, will so fire moss, leaves,
or any such like dry thing, that will quickly burn. In March and April they
live much upon their fishing wires; and feed on fish, Turkies, and Squirrels.
The order of diet.
In May and June they plant their fields, and live most of Acornes, Walnuts,
and fish. But to amend their diet, some disperse themselves in small companies,
and live upon fish, beasts, crabs, oysters, land Tortoises, strawberries,
mulberries, and such like. In June, July, and August, they feed upon the roots
of Tocknough berries, fish, and green wheat. It is strange to see how their
bodies alter with their diet, even as the dear and wild beasts they seem fat
and lean, strong and weak. Powhatan their great King, and some others that
are provident, roast their fish and flesh upon hurdles as before is expressed,
and keep it till scarce times.

For fishing, hunting, and wars they use much their bow and arrows. How they
make their bow^s and arrows.
They bring their bows to the form of ours by the scraping of a shell. Their
arrows are made some of straight young sprigs, which they head with bone, some
2 or 3 inches long. These they use to shoot at Squirrels on trees. Another sort
of arrows they use made of Reeds. These are peeced with wood, headed with
splinters of crystal, or some sharp stone, the spurs of a Turkey, or the
bill of some bird. Their knives.
For his knife he has the splinter of a Reed to cut his feathers in form.
With this knife also, he will joint a Dear, or any beast, shape his shoes,
buskins, mantels, etc. To make the noch of his arrow he has the tooth of a
Beaver, set in a stick, wherewith he grateth it by degrees. His arrow head he
quickly makes with a little bone, which he ever wears at his bracert, of any
splint of a stone, or glass in the form of a heart, and these they glue to
the end of their arrows. With the sinews of Dear, and the tops of Deeres
horns boiled to a ielly, they make a glue that will not dissolve in cold water.

Their Targets and Swords.
For their wars also they use Targets that are round and made of the barks of
trees, and a sword of wood at their backs, but oftentimes they use for swords
the horn of a Dear put through a piece of wood in form of a Pickaxe. Some a
long stone sharpened at both ends, used in the same manner. This they were wont
to use also for hatchets, but now by trucking they have plenty of the same
form of iron. And those are their chief instruments and arms.

Their fishing is much in Boats. Their Boats.
These they make of one tree by burning and scratching away the coals with
stones and shells, till they have made it in form of a Trough. Some of them are
an elne deep, and forty or fifty foot in length, and some will bear 40
men, but the most ordinary are smaller, and will bear 10, 20, or 30. according
to their bigness. In stead of Oars, they use Paddles and sticks, with which
they will row faster then our Barges. How they spin.
Betwixt their hands and thighs, their women use to spin, the barks of trees,
Dear sinews, or a kind of grass they call Pemmenaw, of these they make a
thread very even and readily. This thread serves for many uses. As about their
housing, apparel, as also they make nets for fishing, for the quantity as
formally braded as ours. They make also with it lines for angles. Their hooks
are either a bone grated as they noch their arrows in the form of a crooked
pin or fish-hooke, Their fish-hookes.
or of the splinter of a bone tied to the clift of a little stick, and with
the end of the line, they tie on the bait. They use also long arrows tied in a
line, wherewith they shoot at fish in the rivers. But they of Accawmack use
staves like unto Iauelins headed with bone. With these they dart fish swimming
in the water. They have also many artificial wires, in which they get
abundance of fish.

In their hunting and fishing they take extreme pains; yet it being their
ordinary exercise from their infancy, they esteem it a pleasure and are very
proud to be expert therein. And by their continual ranging, and travel, they
know all the advantages and places most frequented with Dear, Beasts, Fish,
Foul, Roots, and Berries. At their huntings they leave their habitations, and
reduce themselves into companies, How they hunt.
as the Tartars do, and go to the most desert places with their families,
where they spend their time in hunting and fowling up toward the mountains,
by the heads of their rivers, where there is plenty of game. For betwixt the
rivers the grounds are so narrow, that little comes here which they devour
not. It is a marvel they can so directly pass these deserts, some 3 or 4
days journey without habitation. Their hunting houses are like unto Arbours
covered with Mats. These their women bear after them, with Corn, Acornes,
Morters, and all bag and baggage they use. When they come to the place of
exercise, every man does his best to show his dexterity, for by their
excelling in those qualities, they get their wives. Forty yards will they
shoot level, or very near the mark, and 120 is their best at Random. At
their huntings in the deserts they are commonly two or three hundred together.
Having found the Dear, they environ them with many fires, and betwixt the
fires they place themselves. And some take their stands in the midsts. The
Dear being thus feared by the fires, and their voices, they chase them so long
within that circle, that many times they kill 6, 8, 10, or 15 at a hunting.
They use also to drive them into some narrow point of land, when they find that
advantage; and so force them into the river, where with their boats they have
Ambuscadoes to kill them. When they have shot a Dear by land, they follow him
like bloud-hounds by the blood, and strain, and oftentimes so take them.
Hares, Partridges, Turkies, or Eggs, fat or lean, young or old, they devour
all they can catch in their power. In one of these huntings they found me in
the discovery of the head of the river of Chickahamania, where they slew my
men, and took me prisoner in a Bogmire, where I saw those exercises, and
gathered these Observations.

One Salvage hunting alone.
One Salvage hunting alone, uses the skin of a Dear slit on the one side,
and so put on his arm, through the neck, so that his hand comes to the head
which is stuffed, and the horns, head, eyes, ears, and every part as
artificially counterfeited as they can devise. Thus shrowding his body in the
skin by stalking, he approaches the Dear, creeping on the ground from one
tree to another. If the Dear chance to find fault, or stand at gaze, he
turns the head with his hand to his best advantage to seem like a Dear,
also gazing and licking himself. So watching his best advantage to approach,
having shot him, he chaseth him by his blood and strain till he get him.

Their Consultations.
When they intend any wars, the Werowances usually have the advice of their
their Priests and Coniurers, and their allies, and ancient friends, but
chiefly the Priests determine their resolution. Every Werowance, or some
lusty fellow, they appoint Captain over every nation. They seldom make war
for lands or goods, but for women and children, and principally for revenge.
They have many enemies, Their enemies.
namely, all their westernly Countries beyond the mountains, and the heads of
the rivers. Upon the head of the Powhatans are the Monacans, whose chief
habitation is at Rasauweak, unto whom the Mowhemenchughes, the Massinnacacks,
the Monahassanughs, the Monasickapanoughs, and other nations pay tributes. Upon
the head of the river of Toppahanock is a people called Mannahoacks. To these
are contributers the Tauxanias, the Shackaconias, the Ontponeas, the
Tegninateos, the Whonkenteaes, the Stegarakes, the Hassinnungaes, and diverse
others, all confederates with the Monacans, though many different in language,
and be very barbarous, living for the most part of wild beasts and fruits.
Beyond the mountains from whence is the head of the river Patawomeke, the
Salvages report inhabit their most mortal enemies, Massawomekes.
the Massawomekes, upon a great salt water, which by all likelihood is either
some part of Cannada, some great lake, or some inlet of some sea that falls
into the South sea. These Massawomekes are a great nation and very populous.
For the heads of all those rivers, especially the Pattawomekes, the
Pautuxuntes, the Sasquesa^anocks, the Tockwoughes are continually tormented by
them: of whose cruelty, they generally complained, and very importunate they
were with me, and my company to free them from these tormentors. To this
purpose they offered food, conduct, assistance, Their offer of subjection.
and continual subjection. Which I concluded to effect. But the council then
present emulating my success, would not think it fit to spare me forty men
to be hazzarded in those unknown regions, having passed (as before was spoken
of) but with 12, an^ so was lost that opportunity. Seven boats full of these
Massawomekes we encountered at the head of the Bay; whose Targets, Baskets,
Swords, Tobaccopipes, Platters, Bows, and Arrows, and every thing showed,
they much exceeded them of our parts, and their dexterity in their small
boats, made of the barks of trees, sowed with bark and well luted with gum,
argues that they are seated upon some great water.

Against all these enemies the Powhatans are constrained sometimes to fight.
Their chief attempts are by Stratagems, trecheries, or surprisals. Yet the
Werowances women and children they put not to death, but keep them Captives.
They have a method in war, and for our pleasures they showed it us, and it
was in this manner performed at Mattapanient.

Having painted and disguised themselves in the fiercest manner they could
devise. Their manner of Battle.
They divided themselves into two Companies, near a hundred in a company. The
one company called Monacans, the other Powhatans. Either army had their
Captain. These as enemies took their stands a musket shot one from another;
ranked themselves 15 a breast, and each rank from another 4 or 5 yards, not in
fyle, but in the opening betwixt their fyles. So the Rear could shoot as
conveniently as the Front. Having thus pitched the fields: from either part
went a messenger with these conditions, that whosoever were vanquished, such as
escape upon their submission in two days after should live, but their wives
and children should be prize for the Conquerours. The messengers were no sooner
returned, but they approached in their orders; On each flank a Serieant, and
in the Rear an Officer for Lieutenant, all duly keeping their orders, yet
leaping and singing after their accustomed tune, which they only use in
Wars. Upon the first flight of arrows they gave such horrible shouts and
screeches, as so many infernal hell hounds could not have made them more
terrible. When they had spent their arrows, they joined together pre^tily,
charging and retyring, every rank seconding other. As they got advantage they
catched their enemies by the hair of the head, and down he came that was
taken. His enemy with his wooden sword seemed to beat out his brains, and
still they crept to the Rear, to maintain the skirmish. The Monacans
decreasing, the Powhatans charged them in the form of a half Moon; they
unwilling to be enclosed, fled all in a troop to their Ambuscadoes, on whom
they led them very cunningly. The Monacans disperse themselves among the fresh
men, whereupon the Powhatans retired, with all speed to their seconds; which
the Monacans seeing, took that advantage to retire again to their own
battle, and so each returned to their own quarter. All their actions, voices,
and gestures, both in charging and retiring were so strained to the height of
their quality and nature, that the strangeness thereof made it seem very
delightful.

Their Music.
For their Music they use a thick Cane, on which they pipe as on a Recorder.
For their wars they have a great deep platter of wood. They cover the mouth
thereof with a skin, at each corner they tie a walnut, which meeting on the
backside near the bottom, with a small rope they twitch them together till it
be so tought and stiff, that they may beat upon it as upon a drum. But their
chief instruments are Rattles made of small gourds, or Pumpeons shells. Of
these they have Base, Tenor, Countertenor, Mean, and Treble. These mingled
with their voices sometimes twenty or thirty together, make such a terrible
noise as would rather affright, then delight any man. Their entertainment.
If any great commander arrive at the habitation of a Werowance, they spread a
Mat as the Turks do a Carpet for him to sit upon. Upon another right opposite
they sit themselves. Then do all with a tunable voice of shouting bid him
welcome. After this do two or more of their chiefest men make an Oration,
testifying their love. Which they do with such vehemence, and so great
passions, that they sweat till they drop, and are so out of breath they can
scarce speak. So that a man would take them to be exceeding angry, or stark
mad. Such victual as they have, they spend freely, and at night where his
lodging is appointed, they set a woman fresh painted red with Pocones and oil,
to be his bedfellow.

Their trade.
Their manner of trading is for copper, beads, and such like, for which they
give such commodities as they have, as skins, foul, fish, flesh, and their
Country Corn. But their victuals are their chiefest riches.

Their Physic.
Every spring they make themselves sick with drinking the juice of a root they
call Wighsacan, and water; whereof they power so great a quantity, that it
purges them in a very violent manner; so that in three or four days after,
they scarce recover their former health. Their Surgery.
Sometimes they are troubled with dropsies, swellings, aches, and such like
diseases; for cure whereof they build a Stoue in the form of a Doue-house with
mats, so close that a few coals therein covered with a pot, will make the
patient sweat extremely. For swellings also they use small pieces of
touchwood, in the form of cloves, which pricking on the grief they burn
close to the flesh, and from thence draw the corruption with their mouth. With
this root Wighsacan they ordinarily heal green wounds. But to scarrifie a
swelling, or make incision, their best instruments are some splinted stone. Old
ulcers, or putrified hurts are seldom seen cured amongst them. Their charms
to cure.
They have many professed Phisicians, who with their charms and Rattles, with
an infernal rout of words and actions, will seem to suck their inward grief
from their navels, or their grieved places; but of our Chirurgians they were so
conceited, that they believed any Plaster would heal any hurt.

But it is not always in Phisicians skill,
To heal the Patient that is sick and ill:
For sometimes sickness on the Patients part,
Proves stronger far then all Phisicians art.
Of their Religion.
THere is yet in Virginia no place discovered to be so Savage, in which they
have not a Religion, Dear, and Bow, and Arrows. All things that are able to
do them hurt beyond their prevention, they adore with their kind of divine
worship; as the fire, water, lightning, thunder, our Ordnance, pieces, Their
God.
horses, etc. But their chief God they worship is the Devil. Him they call
Okee, and serve him more of fear then love. They say they have conference with
him, and fashion themselves as near to his shape as they can imagine. In their
Temples they have his image evil favouredly carved, and then painted and
adorned with chains of copper, and beads, and covered with a skin, in such
manner as the deformity may well suit with such a God. By him is commonly the
sepulcher of their Kings. Their bodies are first bowelled, How they bury their
Kings
then dried upon hurdles till they be very dry, and so about the most of their
joints and neck they hang bracelets, or chains of copper, pearl, and such
like, as they use to wear, their inwards they stuff with copper beads,
hatchets, and such trash. Then lap they them very carefully in white skins,
and so roll them in mats for their winding sheets. And in the Tomb which is
an arch made of mats, they lay them orderly. What remains of this kind of
wealth their Kings have, they set at their feet in baskets. These Temples and
bodies are kept by their Priests.

For their ordinary burials, they dig a deep hole in the earth with sharp
stakes, Their ordinary burials.
and the corpse being lapped in skins and mats with their jewels, they lay them
upon sticks in the ground, and so cover them with earth. The burial ended,
the women being painted all their faces with black cole and oil, do sit
twenty-foure hours in the houses mourning and lamenting by turns, with such
yelling and howling, as may express their great passions.

In every Territory of a Werowance is a Temple and a Priest, two or three or
more. Their Temples.
Their principal Temple or place of superstition is at Vitamussack at
Pamavnk^e, near unto which is a house, Temple, or place of Powhatans.

Upon the top of certain red sandy hills in the woods, there are three great
houses filled with images of their Kings, and Devils, and Tombs of their
Predecessors. Those houses are near sixty foot in length built arbour-wise,
after their building. This place they count so holy as that but the Priests and
Kings dare come into them; nor the Salvages dare not go up the river in boats
by it, but they solemnly cast some piece of copper, white beads, or Pocones
into the river, for fear their Okee should be offended and revenged of them.

Thus, Fear was the first their Gods begot:
Till fear began, their Gods were not.
In this place commonly are resident seven Priests. Their ornaments for their
Priests.
The chief differed from the rest in his ornaments, but inferior Priests could
hardly be known from the common people, but that they had not so many holes in
their ears to hang their jewels at. The ornaments of the chief Priest were
certain attires for his head made thus. They took a dosen, or 16, or more
snakes skins and stuffed them with moss, and of Weesels and other Vermines
skins a good many. All these they tie by their tails, so as all their tails
meet in the top of their head like a great Tassell. Round about this Tassell
is as it were a crown of feathers, the skins hang round about his head, neck,
and shoulders, and in a manner cover his face. The faces of all their Priests
are painted as ugly as they can devise, in their hands they had every one his
Rattle, some base, some smaller. Their devotion was most in songs, which the
chief Priest begins and the rest followed him, sometimes he makes
invocations with broken sentences by starts and strange passions, and at every
pause, the rest give a short groan.

Thus seek they in deep foolishness,
To climb the height of happiness.
It could not be perceived that they keep any day as more holy then other; The
times of solemnitie^.
But only in some great distress of want, fear of enemies, times of triumph
and gathering together their fruits, the whole Country of men, women, and
children come together to solemnities. The manner of their devotion is,
sometimes to make a great fire, in the house or fields, and all to sing and
dance about it with Rattles and shouts together, four or five hours.
Sometimes they set a man in the midst, and about him they dance and sing, he
all the while clapping his hands, as if he would keep time, and after their
songs and dauncings ended they go to their Feasts.

Through God begetting fear,
Man's blinded mind did rear
A hell-god to the ghosts;
A heaven-god to the hoasts;
Yea God unto the Seas:
Fear did create all these.
They have also diverse coniurations, Their coniurations.
one they made when I was their prisoner; of which hereafter you shall read at
large.

Their Altars.
They have also certain Altar stones they call Pawcorances, but these stand
from their Temples, some by their houses, others in the woods and wildernes^es,
where they have had any extraordinary accident, or encounter. And as you
travel, at those stones they will tell you the cause why they were there
erected, which from age to age they instruct their children, as their best
records of antiquities. Upon these they offer blood, Dear suet, and Tobacco.
This they do when they return from the Wars, Sacrifices to the water.
from hunting, and upon many other occasions. They have also another
superstition that they use in storms, when the waters are rough in the Rivers
and Sea coasts. Their Coniurers run to the water sides, or passing in their
boats, after many hellish outcryes and invocations, they cast Tobacco, Copper,
Pocones, or such trash into the water, to pacific that God whom they think to
be very angry in those storms. Before their dinners and suppers the better
sort will take the first bit, and cast it in the fire, which is all the grace
they are known to use.

In some part of the Country they have yearly a sacrifice of children. Such a
one was at Quiyoughcohanock some ten miles from James Town, and thus
performed. Fifteen of the properest young boys, between ten and fifteen
years of age they painted white. Their solemn Sacrifices of children, which
they call Black-boyes.
Having brought them forth, the people spent the forenoon^ in dancing and
singing about them with Rattles. In the afternoon they put those children to
the root of a tree. By them all the men stood in a guard, every one having a
Bastinado in his hand, made of reeds bound together. This made a lane between
them all along, through which there were appointed five young men to fetch
these children: so every one of the five went through the guard to fetch a
child each after other by turns, the guard fiercely beating them with their
Bastinadoes, and they patiently enduring and receiving all* defending the
children with their naked bodies from the unmerciful blows, that pay them
soundly, though the children escape. All this while the women weep and cry out
very passionately, providing mats, skins, moss, and dry wood, as things
fitting their childrens funerals. After the children were thus passed the
guard, the guard tore down the trees, branches and boughs, with such violence
that they rent the body, and made wreaths for their heads, or bedecked their
hair with the leaves. What else was done with the children, was not seen, but
they were all cast on a heap, in a valley as dead, where they made a great
feast for all the company. The Werowance being demanded the meaning of ^his
sacrifice, Those Black-boyes are made so mad with a kind of drink, that they
will do^ any mischief, at the command of their Keepers.
answered that the children were not all dead, but that the Okee or Devil did
suck the blood from their left breast, who chanced to be his by lot, till they
were dead, but the rest were kept in the wilderness by the young men till nine
months were expired, during which time they must not converse with any, and of
these were made their Priests and Coniurers. This sacrifice they held to be so
necessary, that if they should omit it, their Okee or Devil, and all their
other Quiyoughcosughes, which are their other Gods, would let them have no
Dear, Turkies, Corn, nor fish, and yet besides, he would make a great
slaughter amongst them.

Their resurrection.
They think that their Werowances and Priests which they also esteem
Quiyoughcosughes, when they are dead, do go beyond the mountains toward the
setting of the sun, and ever remain there in form of their Okee, with their
heads painted with oil and Pocones, finely trimmed with feathers, and shall
have beads, hatchets, copper, and Tobacco, doing nothing but dance and sing,
with all their Predecessors. But the common people they suppose shall not live
after death, but rot in their graves like dead dogs.

To divert them from this blind Idolatry, we did our best endeavors, chiefly
with the Werowance of Quiyoughcohanock, whose devotion, apprehension, and good
disposition, much exceeded any in those Countries, with whom although we could
not as yet prevail, to forsake his false Gods, yet this he did believe that
our God as much exceeded theirs, as our Gunnes did their Bows and Arrows, and
many times did send to me to James Town, entreating me to pray to my God for
rain, for their Gods would not send them any. And in this lamentable ignorance
do these poor souls sacrifice themselves to the Devil, not knowing their
Creator; and we had not language sufficient, so plainly to express it as make
them understand it; which God grant they may.

For, Religion it is that does distinguish us,
From their bruit humor, well we may it know;
That can with understanding argue thus,
Our God is truth, but they cannot do so.
Of the manner of the Virginians Government.
ALthough the Country people be very barbarous, yet have they amongst them such
government, as that their Magistrates for good commanding, and their people for
due subjection, and obeying, excel many places that would be counted very
civil. The form of their Commonwealth is a Monarchical government, one as
Emperor rules over many Kings or Governors. Their chief ruler is called
Powhatan, and takes his name of his principal place of dwelling called
Powhatan. But his proper name is Wahunsonacock. Some Countries he has which
have been his ancestors, and came unto him by inheritance, as the Country
called Powhatan, Arrohateck, Appamatuck, Pamavnkee, Youghtanund, and
Mattapanient. All the rest of his Territories expressed in the Map, they
report have been his several Conquests. In all his ancient inheritances, he
has houses built after their manner like arbours, some 30. some 40. yards
long, and at every house provision for his entertainment according to the
time. At Werowcomoco on the Northside of the river Pamavnkee, was his
residence, when I was delivered him prisoner, some 14 miles from James Town,
where for the most part, he was resident, but at last he took so little
pleasure in our near neighborhood, that he retired himself to Orapakes, in
the desert betwixt Chickahaman^a and Youghtanund. He is of personage a tall
well proportioned man, with a sower look, A description of Powhatan.
his head somewhat gray, his beard so thin, that it seems none at all, his
age near sixty; of a very able and hardy body to endure any labor. About his
person ordinarily attends a guard of 40 or 50 of the tallest men his Country
does afford. His attenda^ce and watch.
Every night upon the four quarters of his house are four Sentinels, each
from other a flight shoot, and at every half hour one from the Corpse du guard
does hollow, shaking his lips with his finger between them; unto whom every
Sentinel does answer round from his stand: if any fail, they presently send
forth an officer that beats him extremely.

A mile from Orapakes in a thicket of wood, His treasury.
he has a house in which he keeps his kind of Treasure, as skins, copper,
pearl, and beads, which he storeth up against the time of his death and
burial. Here also is his store of red paint for ointment, bows and arrows,
Targets and clubs. This house is fifty or sixty yards in length, frequented
only by Priests. At the four corners of this house stand four Images as
Sentinels, one of a Dragon, another a Bear, the third like a Leopard, and the
fourth like a giantlike man, all made evil favouredly, according to their best
workmanship.

His wives.
He has as many women as he will, whereof when he lies on his bed, one sits
at his head, and another at his feet, but when he sits, one sits on his
right hand and another on his left. As he is weary of his women, he bestows
them on those that best deserve them at his hands. When he dineth or suppeth,
one of his women before and after meat, brings him water in a wooden platter
to wash his hands. Another waits with a bunch of feathers to wipe them in
stead of a Towell, and the feathers when he has wiped are dried again. His
kingdoms descend not to his sons nor children, His successors
but first to his brethren, whereof he has 3. namely, Opitchapan,
Opechancanough, and Catataugh, and after their decease to his sisters. First to
the eldest sister, then to the rest, and after them to the heirs male or
female of the eldest sister, but never to the heirs of the males.

He nor any of his people understand any letters, whereby to write or read,
only the laws whereby he rules is custom. Yet when he lists his will is a
law and must be obeyed: Their authority.
not only as a King, but as half a God they esteem him. His inferior Kings
whom they call Werowances, are tied to rule by customs, and have power of life
and death at their command in that nature. But this word Werowance, which we
call and construe for a King, is a common word, whereby they call all
commanders: for they have but few words in their language, and but few
occasions to use any officers more then one commander, which commonly they call
Werowance, The tenor of their lands.
or Caucorouse, which is Captain. They all know their several lands, and
habitations, and limits, to fish, soul, or hunt in, but they hold all of their
great Werowance Powhatan, unto whom they pay tribute of skins, beads, copper,
pearl, dear, turkies, wild beasts, and corn. What he commands they dare
not disobey in the least thing. It is strange to see with what great fear and
adoration, all these people do obey this Powhatan. For at his feet they
present whatsoever he commands, and at the least frown of his brow, their
greatest spirits will tremble with fear: and no marvel, for he is very
terrible and tyrannous in punishing such as offend him. For example, His manner
of punishments.
he caused certain malefactors to be bound hand and foot, then having of many
fires gathered great store of burning coals, they rake these coals round in
the form of a cockpit, and in the midst they cast the offenders to broyle to
death. Sometimes he causes the heads of them that offend him, to be laid upon
the altar or sacrificing stone, and one with clubbes beats out their brains.
When he would punish any notorious enemy or malefactor, he causes him to be
tied to a tree, and with Mussell shells or reeds, the executioner cutteth off
his joints one after another, ever casting what they cut of into the fire; then
does he proceed with shells and reeds to case the skin from his head and face;
then do they rip his belly and so burn him with the tree and all. Thus
themselves reported they executed George Cassen. ^ 46.
Their ordinary correction is to beat them with cudgels. We have seen a man
kneeling on his knees, and at Powhatans command, two men have beat him on the
bare skin, till he has fallen senseless in a sound, and yet never cry nor
complained. And he made a woman for playing the whore, sit upon a great stone,
on her bare breech twenty-foure hours, only with corn and water, every three
days, till nine days were past, yet he loved her exceedingly: notwithstanding
there are common whores by profession.

In the year 1608, he surprised the people of Payankatank his near neighbors
and subjects. The occasion was to us unknown, but the manner was thus. First
he sent diverse of his men as to lodge amongst them that night, then the
Ambuscadoes environed all their houses, and at the hour appointed, they all
fell to the spoil, twenty-foure men they slew, the long hair of the one side
of their heads, with the skin cased off with shells or reeds, they brought
away. They surprised also the women, and the children, and the Werowance. All
these they presented to Powhatan. The Werowance, women and children became his
prisoners, and do him service. The locks of hair with their skins he
hanged on a line betwixt two trees. And thus he made ostentation of his triumph
at Werowocomoco, where he intended to have done as much to me and my company.

And this is as much as my memory can call to mind worthy of note; which I
have purposely collected, to satisfy my friends of the true worth and quality
of Virginia. Yet some bad natures will not stick to slander the Country, that
will slovenly spit at all things, especially in company where they can find
none to contradict them. Who though they were scarce en^r ten miles from James
Town, or at the most but at the falls; yet holding it a great disgrace that
amongst so much action, their actions were nothing, exclaim of all things,
though they never adventured to know any thing; nor ever did any thing but
devour the fruits of other men's labors. Being for most part of such tender
educations, and small experience in Martial accidents, because they found not
English Cities, nor such fair houses, nor at their own wishes any of their
accustomed dainties, with feather beds and down pillowes, Tavernes and
Alehouses in every breathing place, neither such plenty of gold and silver and
dissolute liberty, as they expected, had little or no care or any thing, but
to pamper their bellies, to fly away with our Pinnaces, or procure their means
to return for England. For the Country was to them a misery, a ruin, a death,
a hell, and their reports here, and their actions there according.

Some other there were that had yearly stipends to pass to and again for
transportation: who to keep the mystery of the business in themselves,
though they had neither time nor means to know much of themselves; yet all
men's actions or relations they so formally tuned to the temporizing times
simplicity, as they could make their ignorances seem much more, then all the
true actors could by their experience. And those with their great words deluded
the world with such strange promises, as abused the business much worse then
the rest. For the business being builded upon the foundation of their fained
experience, the planters, the money and means have still miscarried: yet they
ever returning, and the planters so far absent, who could contradict their
excuses? which, still to maintain their vain glory and estimation, from time
to time have used such diligence as made them pass for truths, though nothing
more false. And that the adventurers might be thus abused, let no man wonder;
for the wisest living is soonest abused by him that has a fair tongue and a
dissembling heart.

There were many in Virginia merely proiecting, verbal, and idle
contemplators, and those so devoted to pure idleness, that though they had
lived two or three years in Virginia, lordly, necessity it self could not
compel them to pass the Peninsula, or Pallisadoes of James Town, and those
witty spirits, what would they not affirm in the behalf of our transporters,
to get victual from their ships, or obtain their good words in England, to
get their passes. Thus from the clamors, and the ignorance of false informers,
are sprung those disasters that sprung in Virginia: and our ingenious
verbalists were no less plague to us in Virginia, then the Locusts to the
Egyptians. For the labor of twenty or thirty of the best only preserved in
Christianity by their industry, the idle livers of near two hundred of the
rest: who living near ten months of such natural means, as the Country
naturally of it self afforded, notwithstanding all this, and the worst fury of
the Salvages, the extremity of sickness, mutinies, faction, ignorances, and
want of victual; in all that time I lost but seven or eight men, yet
subjected the salvages to our desired obedience, and received contribution from
thirty five of their Kings, to protect and assist them against any that should
assault them, in which order they continued true and faithful, and as subjects
to his Majesty, so long after as I did govern there, until I left the
Country: since, how they have revolted, the Country lost, and again
replanted, and the businesses has succeeded from time to time, I refer you to
the relations of them returned from Virginia, that have been more diligent in
such Observations.

John Smith writ this with his own hand.

Because many do desire to know the manner of their Language, I have inserted
these few words.
KA katorawines yowo. What call you this. Nemarough, a man. Crenepo, a woman.
Marowanchesso, a boy. Yehawkans, Houses. Matchcores, Skins, or garments.
Mockasins, Shoes. Tussan, Beds. Pokatawer, Fire. Attawp, A bow. Attonce,
Arrows. Monacookes, Swords. Aumouhhowgh, A Target. Pawcussacks, Gunnes.
Tomahacks, Axes. Tockahacks, Pickaxes. Pamesacks, Knives. Accowprets, Sheares.
Pawpecones, Pipes. Mattassin, Copper Vssawassin, Iron, Brass, Silver, or any
white metal. Musses, Woods. Attasskuss, Leaves, weeds, or grass. Chepsin,
Land. Shacquohocan. A stone. Wepenter, A cookold. Suckahanna, Water. Noughmass,
Fish. Copotone, Sturgeon. Weghshaughes, Flesh. Sawwehone, Blood. Netoppew,
Friends. Marrapough, Enemies. Maskapow, the worst of the enemies. Mawchick
chammay, The best of friends Casacunnakack, peya quagh acquintan
vttasantasough, In how many days will there come hither any more English
Ships.
Their Numbers.
Necut, 1. Ningh, 2. Nuss, 3. Yowgh, 4. Paranske, 5. Comotinch, 6. Toppawoss, 7
Nusswash, 8. Kekatawgh, 9. Kaskeke 10 They count no more but by tennes as
follows. Case, how many. Ninghsapooeksku, 20. Nussapooeksku, 30.
Yowghapooeksku, 40. Parankestassapoocksku, 50. Comatinchtassapooeksku, 60.
Nussswashtassapooeksku, 70. Kekataughtassapooeksku, 90. Necuttoughtysinough,
100. Necuttwevnquaough, 1000. Rawcosowghs, Days. Keskowghes, Suns.
Toppquough. Nights. Nepaww^showghs, Moons. Pawpaxsoughes, Years. Pummahumps,
Stars. Osies, Heavens. Okees, Gods. Quiyoughcosoughs, Petty Gods, and their
affinities. Righcomoughes, Deaths. Kekughes, Lives. Mowchick woyawgh tawgh
^oeragh kaqueremecher, I am very hungry? what shall I eat? Tawnor nehiegh
Powhatan, Where dwells Powhatan. Mache, nehiegh yourowgh, Orapaks. Now he dwells
a great way hence at Orapaks. Vittapitchewayne anpechitchs nehawper
Werowacomoco, You lie, he staid ever at Werowacomoco. Kator nehiegh mattagh
near vttapitchewayne, Truly he is there I do not lie. Spaughtynere keragh
werowance mawmarinough k^kate^ wawgh peyaquaugh. Run you then to the King
Mawmarynough and bid him come hither. Vtteke, e peya weyack wighwhip, Get you
gone, and come again quickly. Kekaten Pokahontas patiaquagh niugh tanks
manotyens near mowchick rawrenock audowgh, Bid Pokahontas bring hither two
little Baskets, and I will give her white Beads to make her a Chain.
FINIS.
OLD VIRGINIA
C: S Their triumph about him C: Smith bound to a tree to be shot to death 1602

C. S. How they took him prisoner in the Oaze 1607 C.S. C. Smith binds a
saluage to his arm, fights with the King of Pamaunkee and all his company,
and slew 3 of them.

C: Smith takes the King of Paspahegh prisoner. Ao. 1609.

A Coniurer.

Their Idol

A priest

Their Coniuration about C: Smith 160^

A description of part of the adventures of Cap: Smith in Virginia.

A state of 10 Leau^es. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Graven and extracted out of ye general history of Virginia, New England, and
Som^er Ises, by Robert Vaughan.

C. Smith takes the King of Pamavnkee prisoner 1608

The Country we now call Virginia begins at Cape Henry aistant from
Roanoack 60 miles, where was Sr. Walter Raleigh's psantation. and because the
people differ very little from t^em of Powhatan in any thing, I have inserted
those figures in this place because of the convenience.

C.S. King Powhatan com^ands C. Smith to be slain, his daughter Pokahontas
beg his life his thankfullness and how he subjected 30 of their kings. read
^ history.

printed by James Reeve



The third Book.
THE PROCEEDINGS AND ACCIDENTS OF The English Colony in Virginia, Extracted
from the Authors following, by WILLIAM SIMONS, Doctor of Divinity.

CHAPTER I.
Sir Thomas Smith Treasurer.
a Country so fair (as Virginia is) and a people so tractable, would long ere
this have been quietly possessed, to the satisfaction of the adventurers, and
the eternizing of the memory of those that effected it. But because all the
world do see a defailement; this following Treatise shall give satisfaction to
all indifferent Readers, how the business has bin carried: where no doubt
they will easily understand and answer to their question, how it came to pass
there was no better speed and success in those proceedings. The first mover of
the action,


Captain Bartholomew Gosnoll, one of the first movers of this plantation,
having many years solicited many of his friends, but found small assistants;
at last prevailed with some Gentlemen, as Captain John Smith, Mr Edward-maria
Wingfield, Mr Robert Hunt, and diverse others, who depended a year upon his
proiects, but nothing could be effected, till by their great charge and
industry, it came to be apprehended by certain of the Nobility, Gentry, and
Merchants, so that his Majesty by his letters patents, gave commission for
establishing Councels, to direct here; and to govern, and to execute there. To
effect this, was spent another year, and by that, three ships were provided,
one of 100 Tuns, another of 40. and a Pinnace of 20. The transportation of the
company was committed to Captain Christopher Newport, a Mariner well
practiced for the Western parts of America. Orders for government.
But their orders for government were put in a box, not to be opened, nor the
governors known until they arrived in Virginia.

On the 19 of December, 1606. we set sail from Blackwall, but by unprosperous
winds, were kept six weeks in the sight of England; all which time, Mr Hunt
our Preacher, was so weak and sick, that few expected his recovery. Yet
although he were but twenty miles from his habitation (the time we were in the
Downs) and notwithstanding the stormy weather, nor the scandalous imputations
(of some few, little better then Atheists, of the greatest rank amongst us)
suggested against him, all this could never force from him so much as a seeming
desire to leave the business, but preferred the service of God, in so good a
voyage, before any affection to contest with his godless foes, whose
disasterous designs (could they have prevailed) had even then overthrown the
business, so many discontents did then arise, had he not with the water of
patience, and his godly exhortations (but chiefly by his true devoted examples)
quenched those flames of envy, and dissension.

We watered at the Canaries, we traded with the Salvages at Dominica; three
weeks we spent in refreshing our selves amongst these West India Isles; in
Gwardalupa we found a bath so hot, as in it we boiled Porck as well as over the
fire. And at a little Isle called Monica, Monica an unfrequented Isle full of
Birds.
we took from the bushes with our hands, near two hogsh-heads full of Birds
in three or four hours. In Mevis, Mona, and the Virgin Isles, we spent some
time, where, with a loathsome beast like a Crocodil, called a Gwayn, Tortoises,
Pellicans, Parrots, and fishes, we daily feasted. Gone from thence in search of
Virginia, the company was not a little discomforted, seeing the Mariners had 3
days passed their reckoning and found no land, so that Captain Ratliffe
(Captain of the Pinnace) rather desired to bear up the helm to return for
England, then make further search. But God the guider of all good actions,
forcing them by an extreme storm to hull all night, did drive them by his
providence to their desired Port, beyond all their expectations, for never any
of them had seen that coast. The first land they made they called Cape Henry;
where thirty of them recreating themselves on shore, Their first landing.
were assaulted by five Salvages, who hurt two of the English very dangerously.
That night was the box opened, and the orders read, in which Bartholomew
Gosnoll, John Smith, Edward Wingfield, Christopher Newport, John Ratliffe, John
Martin, and George Kendall, were named to be the Council, and to choose a
President amongst them for a year, who with the Council should govern.
Matters of moment were to be examined by a Jury, but determined by the mayor
part of the Council, in which the President had two voices. Until the 13 of
May they sought a place to plant in, Matters of government.
then the Council was sworn, Mr Wingfield was chosen President, and an
Oration made, why Captain Smith was not admitted of the Council as the rest.

Now falls every man to work, the Council contriue the Fort, the rest cut
down trees to make place to pitch their Tents; some provide clapbord to relade
the ships, some make gardens, some nets, etc. The Salvages often visited us
kindly. The Presidents overweening jealousy would admit no exercise at arms,
or fortification, but the boughs of trees cast together in the form of a half
moon by the extraordinary pains and diligence of Captain Kendall. Newport,
Smith, and twenty others, The discovery of the Falls and Powhatan.
were sent to discover the head of the river: by diverse small habitations they
passed, in six days they arrived at a Town called Powhatan, consisting of
some twelve houses, pleasantly seated on a hill; before it three fertile Isles,
about it many of their cornefields, the place is very pleasant, and strong by
nature, of this place the Prince is called Powhatan, and his people Powhatans,
to this place the river is navigable: but higher within a mile, by reason of
the Rocks and Isles, there is not passage for a small Boat, this they call the
Falls, the people in all parts kindly entreated them, till being returned
within twenty miles of James town, they gave just cause of jealousy, but had
God not blessed the discoverers otherwise then those at the Fort, there had
then been an end of that plantation; for at the Fort, where they arrived the
next day, The Fort assaulted by the Salvages.
they found 17 men hurt, and a boy slain by the Salvages, and had it not
chanced a cross bar shot from the Ships struck down a bough from a tree
amongst them, that caused them to retire, our men had all been slain, being
securely all at work, and their arms in dry fats.

Hereupon the President was contented the Fort should be pallisadoed, the
Ordnance mounted, his men armed and exercised, for many were the assaults, and
ambuscadoes of the Salvages, and our men by their disorderly straggling were
often hurt, when the Salvages by the nimblenesse of their heels well escaped.
What toil we had, with so small a power to guard our workmen adays, watch
all night, resist our enemies, and effect our business, to relade the ships,
cut down trees, and prepare the ground to plant our Corn, etc, I refer to
the Readers consideration. Six weeks being spent in this manner, Captain
Newport (who was hired only for our transportation) was to return with the
ships. Now Captain Smith, who all this time from their departure from the
Canaries was restrained as a prisoner upon the scandalous suggestions of some
of the chief (envying his repute) who fained he intended to usurp the
government, murder the Council, and make himself King, that his confederats
were dispersed in all the three ships, and that diverse of his confederats that
revealed it, would affirm it, for this he was committed as a prisoner:
thirteen weeks he remained thus suspected, and by that time the ships should
return they pretended out of their commisserations, to refer him to the
Council in England to receive a check, rather then by particulating his
designs make him so odious to the world, as to touch his life, or utterly
overthrow his reputation. But he so much scorned their charity, and publicly
defied the uttermost of their cruelty, he wisely prevented their policies,
though he could not suppress their envies, yet so well he demeaned himself in
this business, as all the company did see his innocence, and his adversaries
malice, and those suborned to accuse him, accused his accusers of subornation;
many untruths were alleged against him; but being so apparently disproved,
begat a general hatred in the hearts of the company against such unjust
Commanders, that the President was adjudged to give him 200l. so that all he
had was seized upon, in part of satisfaction, which Smith presently returned to
the Store for the general use of the Colony. Many were the mischiefs that
daily sprung from their ignorant (yet ambitious) spirits; but the good Doctrine
and exhortation of our Preacher Mr Hunt reconciled them, and caused Captain
Smith to be admitted of the Council; the next day all received the Communion,
Captain Newports return for England.
the day following the Salvages voluntarily desired peace, and Captain Newport
returned for England with news; leaving in Virginia 100. the 15 of June 1607.

By this observe;

Good men did never their Countries ruin bring.
But when evil men shall injuries begin;
Not caring to corrupt and violate
The iudgements-seats for their own Lucr's sake:
Then look that Country cannot long have peace,
Though for the present it have rest and ease.
Sir Thomas Smith Treasurer.


Council.
Mr Edward Maria Wingfield. Captain Bartholomew Gosnoll. Captain John Smith.
Captain John Ratliffe. Captain John Martin. Captain George Kendall.
Gent.
Mr Robert Hunt Preacher. Mr George Percie. Anthony Gosnoll. George Flower.
Cap. Gabriell Archer. Robert Fenton. Robert Ford. William Bruster. Edward
Harrington. Dru Pickhouse. Thomas Jacob. John Brooks. Ellis Kingston. Thomas
Sands. Benjamin Beast. Iehu Robinson. Thomas Mouton. Eustace Clovill. Stephen
Halthrop. Kellam Throgmorton. Edward Morish. Nathaniell Powell. Edward Brown.
Robert Bebethland. John Penington. Jeremy Alicock. George Walker. Thomas
Studley. Richard Crofts. Nicholas Houlgraue. Thomas Webbt. John Waller. John
Short. William Tankard. William Smethes. Francis Snarsbrough. Richard Simons.
Edward Brooks. Richard Dixon. John Martin. Roger Cook. Anthony Gosnold. Tho:
Wotton, Chirurg. John Stevenson. Thomas Gore. Henry Adling. Francis Midwinter.
Richard Frith.
Carpenters.
William Laxon. Edward Pising. Thomas Emry. Robert Small.
Laborers.
John Laydon. William Cassen. George Cassen. Thomas Cassen. William Rodes.
William White. Old Edward. Henry Tavin. George Goulding. John Dods. William
Johnson. William Vnger.
Iam: Read, Blacksmith. Jonas Profit, Sailer. Tho: Cowper, Barber. Will:
Garret, Bricklayer. Edward Brinto, Mason. William Love, Tailor. Nic: Scot,
Drum. Will: Wilkinson, Chirurg. Samuel Collier, boy. Not. Pecock, boy. James
Brumfield, boy. Richard Mutton, boy.
With diverse others to the number of 100.

CHAP. II.
What happened till the first supply.

The occasion of sickness.
BEing thus left to our fortunes, it fortuned that within ten days scarce ten
amongst us could either go, or well stand, such extreme weakness and sickness
oppressed us. And thereat none need marvel, if they consider the cause and
reason, which was this; whilst the ships stayed, our allowance was somewhat
bettered, The Sailers abuses.
by a daily proportion of Biscuit, which the sailers would pilfer to sell, give,
or exchange with us, for money, Saxefras, furs, or love. But when they
departed, there remained neither tavern, beere*house, nor place of relief,
but the common Kettell. Had we been as free from all sins as gluttony, and
drunkenness, we might have been canonized for Saints; But our President would
never have been admitted, for engrossing to his private, Oatmeale, Sack,
Oil, Aquavitae, Beef, Eggs, or what not, but the Kettell; that indeed he
allowed equally to be distributed, and that was half a pint of wheat, and as
much barley boiled with water for a man a day, and this having fried some 26.
weeks in the ships hold, contained as many worms as grains; so that we might
truly call it rather so much bran then corn, our drink was water, our
lodgings Castles in the air: with this lodging and diet, our extreme toil in
bearing and planting Pallisadoes, so strained and bruised us, and our
continual labor in the extremity of the heat had so weakened us, as were
cause sufficient to have made us as miserable in our native Country, or any
other place in the world. From May, to September, those that escaped, lived
upon Sturgeon, A bad President.
and Sea-crabs, fifty in this time we buried, the rest seeing the Presidents
proiects to escape these miseries in our Pinnace by flight (who all this time
had neither felt want nor sickness) so moved our dead spirits, as we deposed
him; and established Ratcliffe in his place, ( Gosnoll being dead) Kendall
deposed, Smith newly recovered, Martin and Ratcliffe was by his care preserved
and relieved, and the most of the soldiers recovered, with the skillful
diligence of Mr Thomas Wotton our Chirurgian general. But now was all our
provision spent, the Sturgeon gone, all helps abandoned, each hour expecting
the fury of the Salvages; when God the patron of all good indevours, in that
desperate extremity so changed the hearts of the Salvages, Plenty unexpected.
that they brought such plenty of their fruits, and provision, as no man wanted.

And now where some affirmed it was ill done of the Council to send forth men
so badly provided, this incontradictable reason will show them plainly they
are too ill advised to nourish such ill conceits; first, the fault of our going
was our own, what could be thought fitting or necessary we had, but what we
should find, or want, or where we should be, we were all ignorant, and
supposing to make our passage in two months, with victual to live, and the
advantage of the spring to work; we were at Sea five months, where we both
spent our victual and lost the opportunity of the time, and season to plant,
by the unskillful presumption of our ignorant transporters, that understood not
at all, what they undertook.

Such actions have ever since the worlds beginning been subject to such
accidents, and every thing of worth is found full of difficulties, but nothing
so difficult as to establish a Commonwealth so far remote from men and
means, and where men's minds are so untoward as neither do well themselves,
nor suffer others. But to proceed.

The new President and Martin, being little beloved, of weak judgment in
dangers, and less industry in peace, committed the managing of all things
abroad to Captain Smith: who by his own example, good words, and fair
promises, set some to mow, others to bind thatch, some to build houses, others
to thatch them, The building of James Town.
himself always bearing the greatest task for his own share, so that in
short time, he provided most of them lodgings, neglecting any for himself.
This done, seeing the Salvages superfluity begin to decrease (with some of
his workmen) shipped himself in the Shallop to search the Country for trade.
The want of the language, knowledge to manage his boat without sails, the
want of a sufficient power, (knowing the multitude of the Salvages) apparel
for his men, and other necessaries, were infinite impediments, yet no
discouragement. Being but six or seven in company he went down the river to
Kecoughtan, where at first they scorned him, as a famished man, and would in
derision offer him a handful of Corn, The beginning of Trade abroad.
a piece of bread, for their swords and muskets, and such like proportions also
for their apparel. But seeing by trade and courtesy there was nothing to be
had, he made bold to try such conclusions as necessity enforced, though
contrary to his Commission: Let fly his muskets, ran his boat on shore, whereat
they all fled into the woods. So marching toward their houses, they might see
great heaps of corn: much ado he had to restrain his hungry soldiers from
present taking of it, expecting as it happened that the Salvages would assault
them, as not long after they did with a most hydeous noise. Sixty or seaventie
of them, some black, some red, some white, some party-colored, came in a
square order, singing and dancing out of the woods, with their Okee (which was
an Idol made of skins, stuffed with moss, all painted and hung with chains
and copper) borne before them: and in this manner being well armed, with Clubs,
Targets, Bows and Arrows, they charged the English, that so kindly received
them with their muskets laden with Pistol shot, that down fell their God,
and diverse lay sprauling on the ground; the rest fled again to the woods, and
ere long sent one of their Quiyoughkasoucks to offer peace, and redeem their
Okee. Smith told them, if only six of them would come unarmed and load his
boat, he would not only be their friend, but restore them their Okee, and give
them Beads, Copper, and Hatchets besides: which on both sides was to their
contents performed: and then they brought him Venison, Turkies, wild-foule,
bread, and what they had, singing and dancing in sign of friendship till they
departed. In his return he discovered the Town and Country of Warraskoyack.

Thus God vnboundlesse by his power,
Made them thus kind, would us devour.
Smith perceiving (notwithstanding their late misery) not any regarded but
from hand to mouth (the company being well recovered) caused the Pinnace to be
provided with things fitting to get provision for the year following; Amoris,
a Salvage his best friend slain for loving us.
but in the interim he made 3. or 4. iournies and discovered the people of
Chickahamania: yet what he carefully provided the rest carelessly spent.
Wingfield and Kendall living in disgrace, The Discovery of Chickahamine.
seeing all things at random in the absence of Smith, the companies dislike of
their Presidents weakness, and their small love to Martins never mending
sickness, strengthened themselves with the sailers, and other confederates to
regaine their former credit and authority, or at least such means abord the
Pinnace, (being fitted to sail as Smith had appointed for trade) to alter her
course and to go for England. Smith unexpectedly returning had the plot
discovered to him, much trouble he had to prevent it, till with store of sakre
and musket shot he forced them stay or sink in the river, which action cost
the life of captain Kendall. These brawles are so disgustfull, as some will
say they were better forgotten, yet all men of good judgment will conclude, it
were better their baseness should be manifest to the world, then the business
bear the scorn and shame of their excused disorders. The President and
captain Archer not long after intended also to have abandoned the country,
which project also was curbed, Another project to abandon the country.
and suppressed by Smith. The Spaniard never more greedily desired gold then he
victual, nor his soldiers more to abandon the Country, then he to keep it.
But finding plenty of Corn in the river of Chickahamania where hundreds of
Salvages in diverse places stood with baskets expecting his coming. And now the
winter approaching, the rivers became so covered with swans, geese, duckes, and
cranes, that we daily feasted with good bread, Virginia pease, pumpions, and
putchamins, fish, foul, and diverse sorts of wild beasts as fat as we could
eat them: so that none of our Tuftasfaty humorists desired to go for England.
But our Comaedies never endured long without a Tragedy; some idle exceptions
being muttered against Captain Smith, for not discovering the head of
Chickahamania river, and taxed by the Council, to be too slow in so worthy an
attempt. The next voyage he proceeded so far that with much labor by
cutting of trees in sunder he made his passage, but when his Barge could pass
no farther, he left her in a broad bay out of danger of shot, commanding none
should go a shore till his return: himself with two English and two Salvages
went up higher in a Canowe, but he was not long absent, but his men went a
shore, whose want of government, gave both occasion and opportunity to the
Salvages to surprise one George Cassen, whom they slew, and much failed not to
have cut of the boat and all the rest. Smith little dreaming of that accident,
being got to the marshes at the rivers head, twenty miles in the desert, had
his Iehu Robinson and Thomas Emry slain.
two men slain (as is supposed) sleeping by the Canowe, whilst himself by
fowling sought them victual, who finding he was beset with 200. Salvages, two
of them he slew, still defending himself with the aid of a Salvage his guide,
whom he bound to his arm with his garters, and used him as a buckler, yet he
was shot in his thigh a little, and had many arrows that stuck in his
clothes but no great hurt, till at last they took him prisoner. When this
news came to James town, much was their sorrow for his loss, few expecting
what ensued. Six or seven weeks those Barbarians kept him prisoner, many
strange triumphs and coniurations they made of him, yet he so demeaned
himself amongst them, as he not only diverted them from surprising the Fort,
but procured his own liberty, and got himself and his company such
estimation amongst them, that those Salvages admired him more then their own
Quiyouckosucks. The manner how they used and delivered him, is as follows.

Captain Smith taken prisoner.
The Salvages having drawn from George Cassen whether Captain Smith was gone,
prosecuting that opportunity they followed him with. 300. bowmen, conducted by
the King of Pamavnkee, who in divisions searching the turnings of the river,
found Robinson and Emry by the fire side, those they shot full of arrows and
slew. Then finding the Captain* as is said, that used the Salvage that was his
guide as his sheld (three of them being slain and diverse other so gauld) all
the rest would not come near him. Thinking thus to have returned to his boat,
regarding them, as he marched, more then his way, slipped up to the middle in
an oasie creek and his Salvage with him, yet durst they not come to him till
being near dead with cold, he threw away his arms. Then according to their
composition they drew him forth and led him to the fire, where his men were
slain. Diligently they chafed his benumbed limbs. He demanding for their
Captain, they showed him Opechankanough, King of Pamavnkee, to whom he gave a
round Ivory double compass Dyall. Much they marvailed at the playing of the Fly
and Needle, which they could see so plainly, and yet not touch it, because of
the glass that covered them. But when he demonstrated by that Globe-like
Jewel, the roundnesse of the earth and skies, the sphere of the Sun, Moon,
and Stars, and how the Sun did chase the night round about the world
continually; the greatness of the Land and Sea, the diversity of Nations,
variety of complexions, and how we were to them Antipodes, and many other such
like matters, they all stood as amazed with admiration. Notwithstanding, within
an hour after they tied him to a tree, and as many as could stand about him
prepared to shoot him, but the King holding up the Compass in his hand, they
all laid down their Bows and Arrows, and in a triumphant manner led him to
Orapaks, where he was after their manner kindly feasted, and well used.

Their order in conducting him was thus; Drawing themselves all in fyle, The
order they observed in then trivmph.
the King in the midst had all their Pieces and Swords borne before him.
Captain Smith was led after him by three great Salvages, holding him fast by
each arm: and on each side six went in fyle with their Arrows nocked. But
arriving at the Town (which was but only thirty or forty hunting houses
made of Mats, which they remove as they please, as we our tents) all the women
and children staring to behold him, the soldiers nrst all in fyle performed
the form of a Bissom so well as could be; and on each flank, officers as
Serieants to see them keep their orders. A good time they continued this
exercise, and then cast themselves in a ring, dancing in such several
Postures, and singing and yelling out such hellish notes and screeches; being
strangely painted, every one his quiver of Arrows, and at his back a club; on
his arm a Fox or an Otters skin, or some such matter for his vambrace; their
heads and shoulders painted red, with Oil and Pocones mingled together, which
Scarlet-like color made an exceeding handsome show; his Bow in his hand, and
the skin of a Bird with her wings abroad dried, tied on his head, a piece of
copper, a white shell, a long feather, with a small rattle growing at the
tails of their snaks tied to it, or some such like toy. All this while Smith
and the King stood in the midst guarded, as before is said, and after three
dances they all departed. Smith they conducted to a long house, where thirty
or forty tall fellows did guard him, and ere long more bread and venison was
brought him then would have served twenty men, I think his stomach at that
time was not very good; what he left they put in baskets and tied over his
head. About midnight they set the meat again before him, all this time not
one of them would eat a bit with him, till the next morning they brought him
as much more, and then did they eat all the old, and reserved the new as they
had done the other, which made him think they would fat him to eat him. Yet in
this desperate estate to defend him from the cold, one Maocassater brought him
his gown, in requital of some beads and toys Smith had given him at his
first arrival in Virginia.

Two days after a man would have slain him (but that the guard prevented it)
for the death of his son, How he should have been slain at Orapacks.
to whom they conducted him to recover the poor man then breathing his last.
Smith told them that at James town he had a water would do it, if they would
let him fetch it, but they would not permit that; but made all the preparations
they could to assault James town, craving his advice, and for recompense he
should have life, liberty, land, and women. In part of a Table book he writ
his mind to them at the Fort, what was intended, how they should follow that
direction to affright the messengers, and without fail send him such things as
he writ for. And an Inventory with them. The difficulty and danger, he told
the Salvages, of the Mines, great gunnes, and other Engines exceedingly
affrighted them, yet according to his request they went to James town, in as
bitter weather as could be of fro^t and snow, and within three days returned
with an answer. How he saved James town from being surprised.


But when they came to Iame town, seeing men sally out as he had told them
they would, they fled; yet in the night they came again to the same place
where he had told them they should receive an answer, and such things as he had
promised them, which they found accordingly, and with which they returned with
no small expedition, to the wonder of them all that heard it, that he could
either divine, or the paper could speak: then they led him to the
Youthtanunds, the Mattapanicuts, the Payankatanks, the Nantaughtacunds, and
Onawmanients upon the rivers of Rapahanock, and Patawomek, over all those
rivers, and back again by diverse other several Nations, How they did Conjure
him at Pamavnkee.
to the Kings habitation at Pamavnkee, where they entertained him with most
strange and fearful Coniurations;

As if near led to hell,
Amongst the Devils to dwell.
Not long after, early in a morning a great fire was made in a long house, and
a mat spread on the one side, as on the other, on the one they caused him to
sit, and all the guard went out of the house, and presently came skipping in a
great grim fellow, all painted over with coal, mingled with oil; and many
Snakes and Wesels skins stuffed with moss, and all their tails tied together,
so as they met on the crown of his head in a tassell; and round about the
tassell was as a Coronet of feathers, the skins hanging round about his head,
back, and shoulders, and in a manner covered his face; with a hellish voice
and a rattle in his hand. With most strange gestures and passions he began his
invocation, and environed the fire with a circle of meal; which done, three
more such like devils came rushing in with the like antique tricks, painted
half black, half red: but all their eyes were painted white, and some red
strokes like Mutchato's, along their cheeks: round about him those fiends
daunced a pretty while, and then came in three more as ugly as the rest; with
red eyes, and white strokes over their black faces, at last they all sat
down right against him; three of them on the one hand of the chief Priest,
and three on the other. Then all with their rattles began a song, which ended,
the chief Priest laid down five wheat corns: then strayning his arms and
hands with such violence that he sweat, and his veins swelled, he began a
short Oration: at the conclusion they all gave a short groan; and then laid
down three grains more. After that, began their song again, and then another
Oration, ever laying down so many corns as before, till they had twice
incirculed the fire; that done, they took a bunch of little sticks prepared
for that purpose, continuing still their devotion, and at the end of every song
and Oration, they laid down a slicke betwixt the divisions of Corn. Till
night, neither he nor they did either eat or drink, and then they feasted
merrily, with the best provisions they could make. Three days they used this
Ceremony; the meaning whereof they told him, was to know if he intended them
well or no. The circle of meal signified their Country, the circles of corn
the bounds of the Sea, and the sticks his Country. They imagined the world to
be flat and round, like a trencher, and they in the midst. After this they
brought him a bag of gunpowder, which they carefully preserved till the next
spring, to plant as they did their corn; because they would be acquainted with
the nature of that seed. Opitchapam the Kings brother invited him to his
house, where, with as many platters of bread, soul, and wild beasts, as did
environ him, he bid him welcome; but not any of them would eat a bit with
him, but put up all the remainder in Baskets. At his return to
Opechancanoughs, all the Kings women, and their children, flocked about him for
their parts, as a due by Custom, to be merry with such fragments.

But his waking mind in hydeous dreams did often see wondrous shapes,
Of bodies strange, and huge in growth, and of stupendous makes.
At last they brought him to Meronocomoco, How Powhatan entertained him.
where was Powhatan their Emperor. Here more then two hundred of those grim
Courtiers stood wondering at him, as he had been a monster; till Powhatan and
his train had put themselves in their greatest braveries. Before a fire upon a
seat like a bedsted, he sat covered with a great robe, made of Rarowcun
skins, and all the tails hanging by. On either hand did sit a young wench of
16 or 18 years, and along on each side the house, two rows of men, and behind
them as many women, with all their heads and shoulders painted red; many of
their heads bedecked with the white down of Birds; but every one with
something: and a great chain of white beads about their necks. At his entrance
before the King, all the people gave a great shout. The Queen of Appamatuck
was appointed to bring him water to wash his hands, and another brought him a
bunch of feathers, in stead of a Towell to dry them: having feasted him after
their best barbarous manner they could, a long consultation was held, but the
conclusion was, two great stones were brought before Powhatan: then as many as
could laid hands on him, dragged him to them, and thereon laid his head, and
being ready with their clubs, to beat out his brains, Pocahontas the Kings
dearest daughter, when no entreaty could prevail, got his head in her arms,
and laid her own upon his to save him from death: whereat the Emperor was
contented he should live to make him hatchets, and her bells, beads, and
copper; How Pocahontas saved his life.
for they thought him as well of all occupations as themselves. For the King
himself will make his own robes, shoes, bows, arrows, pots; plant, hunt,
or do any thing so well as the rest.

They say he bore a pleasant show,
But sure his heart was sad.
For who can pleasant be, and rest,
That lives in fear and dread:
And having life suspected, does
It still suspected lead.
Two days after, Powhatan having disguised himself in the most fearefullest
manner he could, caused Capt: Smith to be brought forth to a great house in the
woods, and there upon a mat by the fire to be left alone. Not long after from
behind a mat that divided the house, was made the most dolefullest noise he
ever heard; then Powhatan more like a devil then a man with some two hundred
more as black as himself, came unto him and told him now they were friends,
How Powhatan sent him to James Town.
and presently he should go to James town, to send him two great gunnes, and
a gryndstone, for which he would give him the Country of Capahowosick, and for
ever esteem him as his son Nantaquoud. So to James town with 12 guides
Powhatan sent him. That night they quarterd in the woods, he still expecting
(as he had done all this long time of his imprisonment) every hour to be put
to one death or other: for all their feasting. But almighty God (by his divine
providence) had mollified the hearts of those stern Barbarians with
compassion. The next morning betimes they came to the Fort, where Smith having
used the Salvages with what kindness he could, he showed Rawhunt, Powhatans
trusty servant two demi-Culverings and a millstone to carry Powhatan: they
found them somewhat too heavy; but when they did see him discharge them, being
loaded with stones, among the boughs of a great tree loaded with Isickles, the
ye and branches came so tumbling down, that the poor Salvages ran away half
dead with fear. But at last we regained some conference with them, and gave
them such toys; and sent to Powhatan, his women, and children such presents,
as gave them in general full content. Now in James Town they were all in
combustion, the strongest preparing once more to run away with the Pinnace;
which with the hazard of his life, with Sakre falcon and musket shot, The
third project to abandon the Country.
Smith forced now the third time to stay or sink. Some no better then they
should be, had plotted with the President, the next day to have* put him to
death by the Leviticall law, for the lives of Robinson and Emry, pretending the
fault was his that had led them to their ends: but he quickly took such order
with such Lawyers, that he laid them by the heels till he sent some of them
prisoners for England. Now ever once in four or five days, Pocahontas with
her attendants, brought him so much provision, that saved many of their lives,
that else for all this had starved with hunger.

Thus from numbe death our good God sent relief,
The sweet asswager of all other grief.
A true proof of Gods love to the action.
His relation of the plenty he had seen, especially at Warawocomoco, and of the
state and bounty of Powhatan, (which till that time was unknown) so revived
their dead spirits (especially the love of Pocahontas) as all men's fear was
abandoned. Thus you may see what difficulties still crossed any good endeavor:
and the good success of the business being thus often brought to the very
period of destruction; yet you see by what strange means God has still
delivered it. As for the insufficiency of them admitted in Commission, that
error could not be prevented by the Electors; there being no other choice; and
all strangers to each others education, qualities, or disposition. And if any
deem it a shame to our Nation to have any mention made of those inormities,
let them pervse the Histories of the Spaniards Discoveries and Plantations,
where they may see how many mutinies, disorders, and dissentions have
accompanied them, and crossed their attempts: which being known to be
particular men's offenses; does take away the general scorn and contempt,
which malice, presumption, covetousness, or ignorance might produce; to the
scandal and reproach of those, whose actions and valiant resolutions deserve a
more worthy respect.

Now whether it had been better for Captain Smith, to have concluded with any
of those several proiects, to have abandoned the Country, with some ten or
twelve of them, who were called the better sort, and have left Mr Hunt our
Preacher, Master Anthony Gosnoll, a most honest, worthy, and industrious
Gentleman, Master Thomas Wotton, and some 27 others of his Countrymen to the
fury of the Salvages, famine, Of two evils the less was chosen.
and all manner of mischiefs, and inconveniences, (for they were but forty in
all to keep possession of this large Country;) or starve himself with them
for company, for want of lodging: or but adventuring abroad to make them
provision, or by his opposition to preserve the action, and save all their
lives; I leave to the censure of all honest men to consider. But

We men imagine in our Iolitie,
That it is all one, or good or bad to be.
But then anon we alter this again,
If happily we feel the sense of pain;
For then we are turned into a mourning vain.
Written by Thomas Studley, the first Cape Merchant in Virginia, Robert Fenton,
Edward Harrington, and I. S.
CHAP. III. The Arrival of the first supply, with their Proceedings, and the
Ships return.
ALL this time our care was not so much to abandon the Country; but the
Treasurer and Council in England, were as diligent and careful to supply us.
Two good ships they sent us, with near a hundred men, well furnished with all
things could be imagined necessary, both for them and us; The one commanded by
Captain Newport: the other by Captain Francis Nelson, an honest man, and an
expert Mariner. But such was the lewardnesse of his Ship (that though he was
within the sight of Cape Henry) by stormy contrary winds was he forced so far
to Sea, that the West Indies was the next land, for the repair of his Masts,
and relief of wood and water. The Phoenix from Cape Henry forced to the West
Indies.
But Newport got in and arrived at James Town, not long after the redemption
of Captain Smith. To whom the Salvages, as is said, every other day repaired,
with such provisions that sufficiently did serve them from hand to mouth: part
always they brought him as Presents from their Kings, or Pocahontas; the rest
he as their Market Clarke set the price himself, how they should sell: so he
had enchanted these poor souls being their prisoner; and now Newport, whom he
called his Father arriving, near as directly as he foretold, they esteemed him
as an Oracle, and had them at that submission he might command them what he
listed. That God that created all things they knew he adored for his God: they
would also in their discourses term the God of Captain Smith.

Thus the Almighty was the bringer on, Their opinion of our God.

The guide, path, term, all which was God alone.
But the President and Council so much envied his estimation among the
Salvages, (though we all in general equally participated with him of the good
thereof,) that they wrought it into the Salvages understandings (by their great
bounty in giving four times more for their commodities then Smith appointed)
that their greatness and authority as much exceeded his, as their bounty and
liberality. Now the arrival of this first supply so overioyed us, that we
could not devise too much to please the Mariners. We gave them liberty to
trucke or trade at their pleasures. But in a short time it followed, that could
not be had for a pound of Copper, which before was sold us for an ounce: thus
ambition and sufferance cut the throat of our trade, but confirmed their
opinion of the greatness of Capt. Newport, (wherewith Smith had possessed
Powhatan) especially by the great presents Newport often sent him, before he
could prepare the Pinnace to go and visti him: so that this great Savage
desired also to see him. A great coil there was to set him forward. When he
went he was accompanied with Captain Smith, and Mr Scrivener, a very wise
understanding Gentleman, newly arrived and admitted of the Council, with
thirty or forty choisen men for their guard. Arriving at Werowocomoco,
Newports conceit of this great Savage bred many doubts and suspicions of
trecheries, Smith: revisiting Bowhatan.
which Smith to make appear was needless, with twenty men well appointed,
undertook to encounter the worst that could happen: Knowing

All is but one, and selfsame hand, that thus
Both one while scourges, and that helps us.
Nathaniell Powell. Gent. Robert Behethland. Gent. Mitchell ^hittiplace. Gent.
William ^hittiplace. Gent. Anthony Gosnoll. Gent. Richard Wyssin. Gent. John
Taverner. Gent. William Dyer. Gent. Thomas Coe. Gent. Thomas Hope. Gent. Anas
Todkill. Gent.
These, with nine others (whose names I have forgotten) coming ashore, landed
amongst a many of creekes, over which they were to pass such poor bridges,
Powhatan his entertainment.
only made of a few cratches, thrust in the ose, and three or four poles laid
on them, and at the end of them the like, tied together only with barks of
trees, that it made them much suspect those bridges were but traps. Which
caused Smith to make diverse Salvages go over first, keeping some of the
chief as hostage till half his men were passed, to make a guard for himself
and the rest. But finding all things well, by two or three hundred Salvages
they were kindly conducted to their town. Where Powhatan strained himself to
the utmost of his greatness to entertain them, with great shouts of joy,
Orations of protestations; and with the most plenty of victuals he could
provide to feast them. Sitting upon his bed of mats, his pillow of leather
imbrodered (after their rude manner with pearl and white Beads) his attire a
fair robe of skins as large as an Irish mantell: at his head and feet a
handsome young woman: on each side his house sat twenty of his Concubines,
their heads and shoulders painted red, with a great chain of white beads about
each of their necks. Before those sat his chiefest men in like order in his
arbour-like house, and more then forty platters of fine bread stood as a guard
in two fyles on each side the door. Four or five hundred people made a guard
behind them for our passage; and Proclamation was made, none upon pain of
death to presume to do us any wrong or discourtesie. With many pretty
Discourses to renew their old acquaintance, this great King and our Captain
spent the time, till the ebb left our Barge aground. Then renewing their
feasts with fears, dancing and singing, and such like nurth, we quartered
that night with Powhatan. The next day Newport came a shore and received as
much content as those people could give him: a boy named Thomas Salvage was
then given unto Powhatan, whom Newport called his son; The excha^ge of a
Christian for a Salvage.
for whom Powhatan gave him Namontack his trusty servant, and one of a shrewd,
subtle capacity. Three or four days more we spent in feasting, dancing,
and trading, wherein Powhatan carried himself so proudly, yet discreetly (in
his salvage manner) as made us all admire his natural gifts, considering his
education. As scorning to trade as his subjects did; he bespake Newport in this
manner.

Powhatant speech.
Captain Newport it is not agreeable to my greatness, in this pedling manner
to trade for triftes; and I esteem you also a great Werowance. Therefore lay
me down all your commodities together; what I like I will take, and in
recompense give you what I think fitting their value. Captain Smith being our
interpreter, regarding Newport as his father, knowing best the disposition of
Powhatan, could us his intent was but only to cheat us; yet Captain Newport
thinking to out brave this Salvage in ostentation of greatness, and so to
bewitch him with his bounty, as to have what he listed, it so happened, that
Powhatan having his desire, valued his corn at such a rate, that I think it
better cheap in Spain: for we had not four bushells for that we expected to
have twenty hogsheads. Differences of opinions.
This bred some unkindness between our two Captains; Newport seeking to
please the insatiable desire of the Salvage, Smith to cause the Salvage to
please him; but smothering his distaste to avoid the Saluages suspicion, glanced
in the eyes of Powhatan many trifles, who fixed his humor upon a few blew
beads. A long time he importunately desired them, but Smith seemed so much the
more to affect them, as being composed of a most rare substance of the color
of the skies, and not to be worn but by the greatest kings in the world. This
made him half mad to be the owner of such strange Jewels: so that ere we
departed, for a pound or two of blew beads, be brought over my king for 2. or
300. Bushells of corn; yet parted good friends. The like entertainment we
found of Opechankanough king of Pamavnkee, whom also he in like manner fitted
(at the like rates) with blew beads, which grew by this means, of that
estimation, that none durst wear any of them but their great kings, their
wives and children. And so we returned all well to James town, James town
burnt.
where this new supply being lodged with the rest, accidentally fired their
quarters and so the town, which being but thatched with reeds, the fire was so
fierce as it burnt their Pallisado's, (though eight or ten yards distant) with
their Arms, bedding, apparel, and much private provision. Good Master Hunt
our Preacher lost all his Library and all he had but the clothes on his back:
yet none never heard him repine at his loss. This happned in the winter in
that extreme frost. 1607. Now though we had victual sufficient I mean only
of Oatmeale, A ship I dely loytering 14. weeks.
meal and corn, yet the Ship staying 14. weeks when she might as well have
been gone in 14. days, spent a great part of that, and near all the rest
that was sent to be landed. When they departed what there discretion could
spare us, to make a little poor meal or two, we called feasts, to relish our
mouths: of each somewhat they left us, yet I must confess, those that had
either money, spare clothes credit to give bills of payment, gold rings,
furrs, or any such commodities, were ever welcome to this removing tavern,
such was our patience to obey such vile Commanders, and buy our own provisions
at 15. times the value, suffering them feast (we bearing the charge) yet must
not repine, but fast, least we should incur the censure of factious and
seditious persons: and then leakage, ship-rats, and other casuallties
occasioned them loss, but the vessels and remnants (for totals) we were glad
to receive with all our hearts to make up the account, highly commending their
providence for preserving that, least they should discourage any more to come
to us. Now for all this plenty our ordynary was but meal and water, so that
this great charge little relieved our wants, whereby with the extremity of the
bitter cold frost and those defects, more then half of us dyed; I cannot deny
but both Smith and Skriuener did their best to amend what was amiss, but with
the President went the mayor part, that there horns were to short. The effect
of mere Verbalists.
But the worst was our gilded refiners with their golden promises made all men
their slaves in hope of recompenses; there was no talk, no hope, no work, but
dig gold, wash gold, refine gold, load gold, such a bruit of gold, that one
mad fellow desired to be buried in the sands least they should by there art
make gold of his bones: little need there was and less reason, the ship
should stay, there wages run on, our victuals consume 14. weeks, that the
Mariners might say, they did help to build such a golden Church that we can
say the rain washed near to nothing in 14. days. A needless charge.
Were it that captain Smith would not applaude all those golden inventions,
because they admitted him not to the sight of their trialls nor golden
consultations, I know not; but I have heard him often question with Captain
Martin and tell him, except he could show him a more substantial trial, he
was not inamoured with their durty skill, breathing out these and many other
passions, never any thing did more torment him, then to see all necessary
business neglected, to fraught such a drunken ship with so much gilded dirt.
Till then we never accounted, Captain Newport a refiner, who being ready to
set sail for England, and we not having any use of Parliaments, Plays, A
return^ to England.
Petitions, Admiralls, Recorders, Interpreters, Chronologers, Courts of Plea,
nor Justices of peace, sent Master Wingfield and Captain Archer home with him,
that had engrossed all those titles, to seek some better place of employment.

Oh cursed gold those, hunger-starved movers,
To what misfortunes lead'st thou all those lovers!
For all the China wealth, nor Indies can
Suffice the mind of an av'ritious man.
CHAP. IIII. The Arrival of the Phoenix; her return; and other Accidents.
THe authority now consisting in Captain Martin, The rebuilding James Town.
and the still sickly President, the sale of the Stores commodities maintained
his estate, as an inheritable revenew. The spring approaching, and the Ship
departing, Mr Scrivener and Captain Smith divided betwixt them the rebuilding
James town; the repairing our Pallizadoes; the cutting down trees; preparing
our fields; planting our corn, and to rebuild our Church, and recover our
Store house. All men thus busy at their several labors, Master Nelson
arrived with his lost Phoenix; lost (I say) for that we all deemed him lost.
Landing safely all his men, (so well he had managed his ill hap,) causing the
Indian Isles to feed his company, that his victual to that we had gotten, as
is said before, was near after our allowance sufficient for half a year. He
had not any thing but he freely imparted it, which honest dealing (being a
Mariner) caused us admire him: we would not have wished more then he did for
us. Now to relade this ship with some good tidings, the President (not holding
it stood with the dignity of his place to leave the Fort) gave order to
Captain Smith to discover and search the commodities of the Monacans Country
beyond the Falls. Sixty appointed to discover the Monacans.
Sixty able men was allotted them, the which within six days, Smith had so
well trained to their arms and orders, that they little feared with whom they
should encounter: yet so unseasonable was the time, and so opposite was Captain
Martin to any thing, but only to fraught this ship also with his fantastical
gold, as Captain Smith rather desired ^o relade her with Cedar, (which was a
present dispatch) then either with dirt, or the hopes and reports of an
uncertain discovery, which he would perform when they had less charge and
more leisure.

But, The God of Heaven, He easily can
Immortalize a mortal man,
With glory and with fame.
The same God, even as easily may
Afflict a mortal man, I say,
With sorrow and with shame.
Whilst the conclusion was a resolving, this happened.

Powhatan (to express his love to Newport) when he departed, presented him
with twenty Turkies, An ill example to sell swords to Salvages.
conditionally to return him twenty ^words, which immediately was sent him;
now after his departure he presented Captain Smith with the like luggage, but
not finding his humor obeyed in not sending such weapons as he desired, he
caused his people with twenty devices to obtain them. At last by ambuscadoes
at our very Ports they would take them perforce, surprise us at work, or any
way; which was so long permitted, they became so insolent there was no rule;
the command from England was so strait not to offend them, The Presidents
weakness.
as our authoritie-bearers (keeping their houses) would rather be any thing
then peace-breakers. This charitable humor prevailed, till well it chanced they
meddled with Captain Smith, who without farther deliberation gave them such an
encounter, as some he so hunted up and down the Isle, Smiths attempt to
suppress the Salvages insolences.
some he so terrified with whipping, beating, and impriso^ment, as for revenge
they surprised two of our forraging disorderly soldiers, and having assembled
their forces, boldly threatened at our Ports to force Smith to redeliver seven
Salvages, which for their villainies he detained prisoners, or we were all but
dead men. But to try their furies he sallied out amongst them, and in less
then an hour, he so hampred their insolences, they brought them his two men,
desiring peace without any further composition for their prisoners. Those he
examined, and caused them all believe, by several vollies of shot one of their
companions was shot to death, because they would not confess their intents and
plotters of those villainies. And thus they all agreed in one point, they were
directed only by Powhatan to obtain him our weapons, to cut our own throats,
with the manner where, how, and when, Powhatans excuse.
which we plainly found most true and apparent: yet he sent his messengers, and
his dearest daughter Pocahontas with presents to excuse him of the injuries
done by some rash untoward Captains his subjects, desiring their liberties for
this time, with the assurance of his love for ever. After Smith had given the
prisoners what correction he thought fit, used them well a day or two after,
and then delivered them Pocahontas, for whose sake only he feigned to have
saved their lives, and gave them liberty. The patient Council that nothing
would move to war with the Salvages, would gladly have wrangled with Captain
Smith for his cruelty, yet none was slain to any man's knowledge, but it
brought them in such fear and obedience, as his very name would sufficiently
affright them; where before, we had sometime peace and war twice in a day,
and very seldom a week, but we had some treacherous villainy or other.

The fraught of this Ship being concluded to be Cedar, by the diligence of the
Master, A ship fraught with Cedar.
and Captain Smith, she was quickly reladed: Master Scrivener was neither idle
nor slow to follow all things at the Fort; the Ship being ready to set sail,
Captain Martin being always very sickly, and unserviceable, and desirous to
enjoy the credit of his supposed Art of finding the golden Mine, was most
willingly admitted to return for England. For

He has not filled his lapp,
That still does hold it oap.
From the writings of Thomas Studley, and Anas T^dkill.

Their Names that were landed in this Supply. Sir Thomas Smith Treasurer.

Matthew Scrivener appointed to be one of the Council. Gent.
Michaell Phittiplace. William Phittiplace. Ralph Morton. Richard Wyffing. John
Taverner. William Cantrell. Robert Barnes. Richard Fetherstone. George Hill.
George Pretty. Nathaniell Causy. Peter Pory. Robert Gutler. Michaell
Sicklemore. William Bentley. Thomas Coe. Doctor Russell. Ieffrey Abbot. Edward
Gurgana. Richard Worley. Timothy Leeds. Richard Killingbeck. William Spence.
Richard ^rodger. Richard Pots. Richard Mullinax. William Bayley. Francis
Perkins. John Harper. George Forest. John Nichols. William Griuell.
Laborers.
Raymo^d Goodison. William Simons. John Spearman. Richard Bristow. William
Perce. James Watkins. John Bouth. Christopher Rods. Richard Burket. James
Burre. Nicholas Ven. Francis Perkins. Richard Gradon. Rawland Nelstrop. Richard
Savage. Thomas Savage. Richard Milmer. William May. Vere. Michaell. Bishop
Wiles.
Taylers.
Thomas Hope. William Ward. John Powell. William Young. William Beckwith.
Larence Towtales.
Apothecaries.
Thomas Field. John Harford.
Dani: Stallings, Ieweller. Will: Dawson, a refiner. Abram Ransack, a refiner.
Will. Johnson, a Goldsmith. Peter Keffer, a gunsmith. Rob. Alberton, a perfumer.
Richard Belfuld, a Goldsmith. Post Ginnat, a Chirurg. John Jews, a Cooper.
Robert Cotton, a Tobacco-pipe-maker. Richard Dole, a Blacksmith. And diverse
others to the number of 120.
CHAPTER V. The Accidents that happened in the Discovery of the Bay of Chisapeack.
THe prodigality of the Presidents state went so deep into our small store,
that Smith and Scrivener tied him and his Parasites to the rules of proportion.
But now Smith being to depart, the Presidents authority so overswayed the
discretion of Mr Scrivener, that our store, our time, our strength and labors
were idely consumed to fulfill his fantasies. The second of June 1608. Smith
left the Fort to perform his Discovery with this Company.

Walter Russell, Doctor of Physic. Gentlemen.
Ralfe Murton. Thomas Momford. William Cantrill. Richard Fetherston. James
Burn. Michell Sicklemore.
Soldiers.
Jonas Profit. Anas Todkill. Robert Small. James Watkins. John Powell. James
Read. Richard Keale.

These being in an open Barge near three tuns burden, leaving the Phoenix a^
Cape Henry, they crossed the Bay to the Eastern shore, and fell with the Isles
called Smiths Isles, after our Captains name. The first people we saw were two
grim and stout Salvages upon Cape Charles, with long poles like lauelings,
headed with bone, they boldly demanded what we were, and what we would; but
after many circumstances they seemed very kind, and directed us to Accomack,
the habitation of their Werowance, where we were kindly entreated. This King
was the comliest, proper, civil Salvage we incountred. His Country is a
pleasant fertile clay ^oyle, some small creekes; good Harbors for small Barks,
but not for Ships. He told us of a strange accident lately happened him, and it
was, two children being dead; some extreme passions, A strange mortality of
Salvages.
or dreaming visions, fantasies, or affection moved their parents again to
revisit their dead carkases, whose benumbed bodies reflected to the eyes of the
beholders such delightful countenances, as though they had regained their
vital spirits. This as a miracle drew many to behold them, all which being a
great part of his people, not long after dyed, and but few escaped. They spoke
the language of Powhatan, wherein they made such descriptions of the Bay,
Isles, and rivers, that often did us exceeding pleasure. Passing along the
coast, searching every inlet, and Bay, fit for harbors and habitations. Seeing
many Isles in the midst of the Bay we bore up for them, but ere we could
obtain them, such an extreme gust of wind, rain, thunder, and lightening
happened, that with great danger we escaped the unmerciful raging of that
Ocean-like water. The highest land on the main, yet it was but low, Russels
Isles.
we called Keales hill, and these uninhabited Isles, Russels Isles. The next
day searching them for fresh water, we could find none, the defect whereof
forced us to follow the next Eastern Channel, Wighcocomoco.
which brought us to the river of Wighcocomoco. The people at first with great
fury seemed to assault us, yet at last with songs and daunces and much mirth
became very tractable, but searching their habitations for water, we could fill
but three barricoes, and that such puddle, that never till then we ever knew
the want of good water. We dug and searched in many places, but before two
days were expired, An extreme want of fresh water.
we would have refused two barricoes of gold for one of that puddle water of
Wighcocomoco. Being past these Isles which are many in number, but all naught
for habitation, falling with a high land upon the main, we found a great Pond
of fresh water, but so exceeding hot we supposed it some bath; that place we
called point Ployer, in honor of that most honorable House of Mousay in
Britain, that in an extreme extremity once relieved our Captain. From
Wighcocomoco to this place, all the coast is low broken Isles of Morap, grown
a mile or two in breadth, and ten or twelve in length, good to cut for hay in
Summer, and to catch fish and foul in Winter: but the Land beyond them is all
covered over with wood, as is the rest of the Country.

Being thus refreshed in crossing over from the maine to other Isles, we
discovered the wind and waters so much increased with thunder, lightning, and
rain, that our mast and sail blew ouerbord and such mighty waves ouerracked
us in that small barge that with great labor we kept her from sinking by
freeing out the water. Their Barge near sunk in a gust.
Two days we were enforced to inhabit these uninhabited Isles which for the
extremity of gusts, thunder, rain, storms, and ill wether we called Limbo.
Repairing our sail with our shirts, we set sail for the maine and fell with a
pretty convenient river on the East called Cuskarawaok, Cuskarawaock.
the people ran as amazed in troops from place to place, and diverse got into
the tops of trees, they were not sparing of their arrows, nor the greatest
passion they could express of their anger. Long they shot, we still ryding at
an Anchor without there reatch making all the signs of friendship we could.
The next day they came unarmed, with every one a basket, dancing in a ring, to
draw us on shore: but seeing there was nothing in them but villainy, we
discharged a volly of muskets charged with pistol shot, whereat they all lay
tumbling on the grownd, creeping some one way, some another into a great
cluster of reeds hard by; where there companies lay in Ambuscado. Toward the
evening we wayed, and approaching the shore, discharging five or six shot
among the reeds, we landed where there lay a many of baskets and much blood,
but saw not a Salvage. A smoke appearing on the other side the river, we rowed
thither, where we found two or three little houses, in each a fire, there we
left some pieces of copper, beads, bells, and looking glasses, and then went
into the bay, but when it was dark we came back again. Early in the morning
four Salvages came to us in their Canow, whom we used with such courtesy, not
knowing what we were, nor had done, having been in the bay a fishing, bad^ us
stay and ere long they would return, which they did and some twenty more with
them; with whom after a little conference, two or three thousand men women and
children came clustring about us, every one prese^ting us with something, which
a little bead would so well require, that we became such friends they would
contend who should fetch us water, stay with us for hostage, conduct our men
any whither, and give us the best content. Here does inhabit the people of
Sarapinagh, Nause, Arseek, and Nantaquak the best Merchants of all other
Salvages. The first notice o^ the Massawomeks,
They much extolled a great nation called Massawomekes, in search of whom we
ret^^^ed by Limbo: this river but only at the ^nt^ance is very narrow, and the
people of small stature as them of Wightcocomoco, the Land but low, yet it may
prove very commodious, because it is but a ridge of land betwixt the Bay and
the maine Ocean. Finding this Eastern shore, shallow broken Isles, and for
most part without fresh water, we passed by the straites of Limbo for the
Western shore: so broad is the bay here, we could scarce perceive the great
high clifts on the other side: by them we Anchored that night and called them
R^ccards Clift^s. 30. leagues we sailed more Northwards not finding any
inhabitants, leaving all the Eastern shore, low Islandes, but ouergrowne with
wood, as all the Coast beyond them so far as we could see: the Western
shore by which we sailed we found all along well watered, but very mountanous
and barren, the valleys very fertile, but extreme thick of small wood so well
as trees, and much frequented with Wolves, Bears, Dear and other wild beasts.
We passed many shallow creekes, but the first we found Nauigable for a ship, we
called Bolus, for that the clay in many places under the clifts by the high
water mark, did grow up in red and white knots as gum out of trees; and in
some places so participated together as though they were all of one nature,
excepting the color, the rest of the earth on both sides being hard sandy
gravel, Bolus River.
which made us think it Bole-Armoniack and Terra sigillata. When we first set
sail some of our Gallants doubted nothing but that our Captain would make too
much have home, but having lien in this small barge not above 12. or 14. days,
often tired at the Oars, our bread spoiled with wet so much that it was rotten
(yet so good were their stomachs that they could digest it) they did with
continual complaints so importune him now to return, as caused him bespeake
them in this manner.

Gentlemen if you would remember the memorable history of Sir Ralph Layne,
Smith^ speech to his soldiers.
how his company importuned him to proceed in the discovery of Moratico,
alleging they had yet a dog, that being boiled with Saxafras leaves, would
richly feed them in their returns; then what a shame would it be for you
(that have bin so suspicious of my tenderness) to force me return, with so
much provision as we have, and scarce able to say where we have been, nor yet
heard of that we were sent to seek? You cannot say but I have shared with you
in the worst which is past; and for what is to come, of lodging, diet, or
whatsoever, I am contented you allot the worst part to my self. As for your
fears that I will lose my self in these unknown large waters, or be
swallowed up in some stormy gust; abandon these childish fears, for wor^e
then to past ^s not likely to happen: and there is as much danger to return as
to proceed. Regaine therefore your old spirits for return I will not (if God
please) till I have (...) the Massawomeks, found Patawomek, The discovery of
Patawomek.
or the head of this water you conceit to be endl^sse. Two or 3. days we
expected wind and wether, whose adverse extremities added such discouragement,
that three or four fell sick, whose pitiful complaints caused us to to
return, leaving the bay some nine miles broad, at nine and ten fadome water.

The 16. of June we fell with the river Patowomek: fear being gone,
Ambuscadoes of Salvages.
and our men recovered, we were all content to take some pains, to know the
name of that seven mile broad river: for thirty miles sail, we could see no
inhabitants: then we were conducted by two Savages up a little bayed creek,
toward Onawmanient, where all the woods were laid with ambuscado's to the
number of three or four thousand Salvages, so strangely painted, grimed and
disguised, shouting, yelling and crying as so many spirits from hell could not
have showed more terrible. Many brauado's they made, but to appeal their fury,
our Captain prepared with as seeming a willingness (as they) to encounter
them. But the grazing of our bullets upon the water (many being shot on purpose
they might see them) with the Ecco of the of the woods so amazed them, as down
went their bows and arrows; (and exchanging hostage) James Watkins was sent
six miles up the woods to their Kings habitation. We were kindly used of those
Salvages, of whom we understood, they were commanded to betray us, by the
direction of Powhatan, and he so directed from the discontents at James town,
because our Captain did cause them stay in their country against their w^lls.

A treacherous project.
The like incounters we found at Patowomek Cecocawonee and diverse other places:
but at Moyaones, Nacotchtant and Toegs the people did their best to content us.
Having gone so high as we could with the boat, we met diverse Saluages in
Canowes, well laden with the flesh of Bears, ^eere and other beasts, whereof
we had part, here we found mighty Rocks, growing in some places above the
grownd as high as the shrubby trees, and diverse other solid quarries of diverse
tinctures: and diverse places where the waters had fallen from the high
mountains they had left a tinctured spa^gled skurfe, that made many bare
places seem as gilded. Digging the grown above in the highest clifts of
rocks, we saw it was a claie sand so mingled with yeallow spangles as if it had
been half pin-dust. In our return inquiring still for this Matchqueon, the
king of Patawomeke gave us guides to conduct us up a little river called
Quiyough, up which we rowed so high as we could. Leaving the boat, with six
shot, and diverse Salvages, he marched seven or eight mile before they came to
the mine: leading his hostages in a small chain they were to have for their
pains, being proud so richly to be adorned. The mine is a great Rocky
mountain like Antimony; A mine like Antimony.
wherein they dug a great hole with shells and hatchets: and hard by it,
runs a fair brook of Christal-like water, where they wash a way the dross
and keep the remainder, which they put in little baggs and sell it all over
the country to paint there bodies, faces, or Idols; which makes them look like
Blackmores dusted over with silver. With so much as we could carry we returned
to our bote, kindly requiting this kind king and all his kind people. The
cause of this discovery was to search this mine, of which Newport did assure us
that those small baggs (we had given him) in England he had tried to hold half
silver; but all we got proved of no value: also to search what furrs, the best
whereof is at Cuscarawaoke, where is made so much Rawranoke or white beads that
occasion as much dissension among the the Salvages, as gold and silver amongst
Christians; and what other mineralls, rivers, rocks, nations, woods, fishings,
fruits, victual, and what other commodities the land afforded: and whether
the bay were endles^e or how far it extended: of mines we were all ignorant,
but a few Beuers, Otters, Bears, Martins and minkes we found, and in diverse
places that abundance of fish, lying so thick with their heads above the
water, as for want of nets (our barge driving amongst them) we attempted to
catch them with a frying pan: but we found it a bad instrument to catch fish
with: An abundant plenty of fish.
neither better fish, more pl^nty, nor more variety for small fish, had any of
us ever seen in any place so swimming in the water, but they are not to be
caught with frying pans: some small codd also we did see swim close by the
shore by Smiths Isles, and some as high as Riccards Clifts. And some we have
found dead upon the shore.

To expressed all our quarrels, trecheries and incounters amongst those Salvages
I should be too tedious: How to deal with the Salvages.
but in brief, at all times we so incountred them, and curbed their
insolences, that they concluded with presents to purchase peace; yet we lost
not a man: at our first meeting out Captain ever observed this order to demand
their bows and arrows, swords, mantells and furrs, with some child or two
for hostage, whereby we could quickly perceive, when they intended any villainy.
Having finished this discovery (though our victual was near spent) he
intended to see his imprisonment-acquaintances upon the river of Rapahanock, by
many called Toppahanock, but our bote by reason of the ebb, Captain Smith
near killed with a Stingray.
chansing to grownd upon a many shoules lying in the entrances, we spyed many
fishes lurking in the reeds: our Captain spotting himself by nayling them to
the grownd with his sword, set us all a fishing in that manner: thus we took
more in own hour then we could eat in a day. But it chansed our Captain
taking a fish from his sword (not knowing her condition) being much of the
fashion of a Thornback, but a long tail like a ryding rod, whereon the
midst is a most poisoned sting, of two or three inches long, bearded like a
saw on each side, which she struck into the wrest of his arm near an inch
and a half: no blood nor wound was seen, but a little blew spot, but the
torment was instantly so extreme, that in four hours had so swolen his hand,
arm and shoulder, we all with much sorrow concluded his funeral, and prepared
his grave in an Island by, as himself directed: yet it pleased God by a
precious oil Docter Russell at the first applied to it when he sounded it with
pro^e (ere night) his tormenting pain was so well assuaged that he eat of the
fish to his supper, which gave no less joy and content to us then ease to
himself, for which we called the Island Stingray Isle after the name of the
fish.

Having neither Chirurgian, nor Surgery, The Salvages affrighted with their
own suspicion.
but that preservative oil we presently set sails for James town, passing
the mouths of the rivers of Payankatank, and Pamavnkee, the next day we safely
arrived at Kecougtan. The simple Salvages seeing our Captain hurt, and an
other bloody by breaking his shinne, our numbers of bows, arrows, swords,
mantles, and furrs, would needs imagine we had been at wars (the truth of
these accidents would not satisfy them) but impatiently importuned us to know
with whom. Finding their aptness to believe we failed not (as a great secret)
to tell them any thing that might affright them, what spoil we had got and
made of the Massawomeks. This rumor went faster up the river then our Barge,
that arrived at Waraskoyack the 20 of July; where trimming her with painted
streamers, and such devises as we could, we made them at James town jealous of
a Spanish Frigot, where we all God be thanked safely arrived the 21 of July.
There we found the last Supply were all sick, the rest some lame, some
bruised, Needless misery at James town.
all unable to do any thing but complain of the pride and unreasonable
needless cruelty of the silly President, that had riotously consumed the
store: and to fulfill his follies about building him an unnecessary building
for his pleasure in the woods, had brought them all to that misery; that had we
not arrived, they had as strangely tormented him with revenge: but the good
news of our Discovery, and the good hope we had by the Salvages relation, that
our Bay had stretched into the South Sea, or somewhat near it, appeased their
fury; but conditionally that Ratliffe should be deposed, and that Captain
Smith would take upon him the government, as by course it did belong. Their
request being effected, he substituted Mr Scrivener his dear friend in the
Presidency, equally distributing those private provisions the other had
engrossed, appointing more honest officers to assist master Scrivener (who then
lay exceeding sick of a Callenture) and in regard of the weakness of the
company, and heat of the year, they being unable to work, he left them to
live at ease, to recover their healths, but embarked himself to finish his
Discovery.

Written by Walter Russell, Anas Todkill, and Thomas Momford.

CHAP. VI. The Government surrendered to Master Scrivener. What happened the
second Voyage in discovering the Bay.
THe 24 of July, Captain Smith set forward to finish the discovery with twelve
men: their names were Gentlemen.
Nathaniell Powell. Thomas Momford. Richard Fetherston. Michell Sicklemore.
James Bourne. Anthony Bagnall, Chir.
Soldiers.
Jonas Profit. Anas Todkill. Edward Pising. Richard Keale. James Watkins.
William Ward.


The wind being contrary caused our stay two or three days at Kecoughtan: the
King feasted us with much mirth, his people were persuaded we went purposely to
be revenged of the Massawomeks. The Salvages admire fireworkes.
In the evening we fired a few rackets, which flying in the air so terrified
the poor Salvages, they supposed nothing impossible we attempted; and desired
to assist us. The first night we anchored at Stingray Isle. The next day
crossed Patawomeks river, and hasted to the river Bolus. We went not much
further before we might see the Bay to divide in two heads, and arriving there
we found it divided in four, all which we searched so far as we could sail
them. Two of them we found inhabited, but in crossing the Bay, we incountred 7
or 8 Canowes full of Massawomeks, An Encounter with the Massawomeks at the head
of the Bay.
we seeing them prepare to assault us, left our Oars and made way with our
sail to encounter them, yet were we but five with our Captain that could
stand, for within 2 days after we left Kecoughtan, the rest (being all of the
last supply) were sick almost ^o death, until they were seasoned to the
Country. Having shut them under our Tarpawling, we put their hats upon sticks
by the Barges side, and betwixt two hats a man with two pieces, to make us
seem many, and so we think the Indians supposed those hats to be men, for
they fled with all possible speed to the shore, and there stayed, staring at
the sailing of our barge till we anchored right against them. Long it was ere
we could draw them to come unto us. At last they sent two of their company
unarmed in a Canow, the rest all followed to second them if need required.
These two being but each presented with a bell, brought aboard all their
fellows, presenting our Captain with venison, bears flesh, fish, bows,
arrows, clubs, targets, and beares-skinnes. We understood them nothing at all,
but by signs, whereby they signified unto us they had been at wars with the
Tockwoghes, the which they confirmed by showing us their green wounds, but the
night parting us, we imagined they appointed the next morning to meet, but
after that we never saw them.

An Encounter with the Tockwhoghs.
Entering the river of Tockwogh, the Salvages all armed, in a fleet of boats,
after their barbarous manner, round environed us; so it chanced one of them
could speak the language of Powhatan, who persuaded the rest to a friendly
parley. But when they saw us furnished with the Massawomeks weapons, and we
faining the invention of Kecoughtan, to have taken them perforce; they
conducted us to their pallizado^d town, mantelled with the barks of trees,
with scaffolds like mounts, brested about with breasts very formally. Their men,
women, and children with daunces, songs, fruits, furs, and what they had,
kindly welcomed us, spreading mat^ for us to sit on, stretching their best
abilities to express their loves.

Hatchets from the Sasquesahanocks.
Many hatchets, knives, pieces of iron, and brass, we saw amongst them, which
they reported to have from the Sasquesahanocks, a mighty people and mortal
enemies with the Massawomeks. The Sasquesahanocks inhabit upon the chief
Spring of these four branches of the Bays head, two days journey higher then
our barge could pass for rocks, yet we prevailed with the Interpreter to take
with him another Interpreter, to persuade the Sasquesahanocks to come visit us,
for their language are different. Three or four days we expected their
return, then sixty of those gyant-like people came down, with presents of
Venison, Tobacco pipes three foot in length, Baskets, Targets, Bows and
Arrows. Five of their chief Werowances came boldly aboard us to cross the
Bay for Tockwhogh, leaving their men and Canowes; the wind being so high they
durst not pass.

Our order was daily to have Prayer, with a Psalm, at which solemnity the
poor Salvages much wondered, our Prayers being done, a while they were busied
with a consultation till they had contrived their business. Then they began in
a most passionate manner to hold up their hands to the Sun, with a most
fearful song, The Sasquesahanocks offer to the English.
then embracing our Captain, they began to adore him in like manner: though he
rebuked them, yet they proceeded till their song was finished: which done with
a most strange furious action, and a hellish voice, began an Oration of their
loves; that ended, with a great painted Bears skin they covered him: then one
ready with a great chain of white Beads, weighing at least six or seven
pound, hung it about his neck, the others had 18 mantels, made of diverse sorts
of skins sowed together; all these with many other toys they laid at his
feet, stroking their ceremonious hands about his neck for his Creation to be
their Governor and Protector, promising their aids, victuals, or what they
had to be his, if he would stay with them, to defend and revenge them of the
Massawomecks. But we left them at Tockwhogh, sorrowing for our departure, yet
we promised the next year again to visit them. Many descriptions and
discourses they made us, of Atquanachuck, Massawomek, and other people,
signifying they inhabit upon a great water beyond the mountains, which we
understood to be some great lake, or the river of Canada: and from the French
to have their hatchets and Commodities by trade. These know no more of the
territories of Powhatan, then his name, and he as little of them, but the
Atquanachuks are on the Ocean Sea.

The highest mountain we saw Northward we called Perigrines mount, and a
rocky river, where the Massawomeks went up, Willowbyes river, in honor of the
town our Captain was borne in, and that honorable house the Lord Willowby,
his most honored good friend. The Sasquesahanocks river we called Smiths
falls; the next point to Tockwhogh, Pisings point; the next it point Bourne.
Powells Isles and Smals point is by the river Bolus; and the little Bay at the
head Profits poole; Watkins, Reads, and Momfords points are on each side Limbo;
Ward, Cantrell, and Sicklemore, betwixt Patawomek and Pamavnk^e, after the
names of the discoverers. In all those places and the furthest we came up the
rivers, we cut in trees so many crosses as we would, and in many places made
holes in trees, wherein we writ notes, and in some places crosses of brass, to
signify to any, Englishmen had been there.

Thus having sought all the inlets and rivers worth noting, we returned to
discover the river of Pawtuxunt; these people we found very tractable,
Pawtuxunt, R.
and more civil then any, we promised them, as also the Patawomeks to revenge
them of the Massawomeks, but our purposes were crossed.

In the discovery of this river some call Rapathanock, Rapahanock, R.
we were kindly entertained by the people of Moraughtacund; here we incountered
our old friend Mosco, a lusty Salvage of Wighcocomoco upon the river of
Patawomek, we supposed him some French man's son, because he had a thick
black bush beard, and the Salvages seldom have any at all, of which he was
not a little proud, The exceeding love of the Salvage Mosco.
to see so many of his Countrymen. Wood and water he would fetch us, guide us
any whether, nay, cause diverse of his Countrymen help us towe against wind or
tide from place to place till we came to Patawomek: there he rested till we
returned from the head of the river, and occasioned our conduct to the mine we
supposed Antimony. And in the place he failed not to do us all the good he
could, persuading us in any case not to go to the Rapahanocks, for they would
kill us for being friends with the Moraughtacunds that but lately had stolen
three of the Kings women. This we did think was but that his friends might
only have our trade: so we crossed the river to the Rapahanocks. Our fight
with the Rapahanocks.
There some 12 or 16 standing on the shore, directed us a little Creek where
was good landing, and Commodities for us in three or four Canowes we saw lie
there: but according to our custom, we demanded to exchange a man in sign of
love, which after they had a little consulted, four or five came up to the
middles, to fetch our man, and leave us one of them, showing we need not fear
them, for they had neither clubs, bows, nor arrows. Notwithstanding, Anas
Todkill, being sent on shore to see if he could discover any Ambuscadoes, or
what they had, desired to go over the plain to fetch some wood, but they were
unwilling, except we would come into the Creek, where the boat might come
close ashore. Todkill by degrees having got some two stones throws up the
plain, perceived two or three hundred men (as he thought) behind the trees, so
that offering to return to the Boat, the Salvages assayed to carry him away
perforce, that he called to us we were betrayed, and by that he had spoke the
word, our hostage was over-boord, but Watkins his keeper slew him in the water.
Immediately we let fly amongst them, so that they fled, and Todkill escaped, yet
they shot so fast that he fell flat on the ground ere he could recover the
boat. Here the Massawomek Targets stood us in good stead, for upon Mosco's
words, we had set them about the forepart of our Boat like a forecastle, from
whence we securely beat the Salvages from off the plain without any hurt: yet
they shot more then a thousand Arrows, and then fled into the woods. Arming
our selves with these light Targets (which are made of little small sticks
woven betwixt strings of their hemp and silk grass, as is our Cloth, but so
firmly that no arrow can possibly pierce them:) we rescued Todkill, who was
all bloody by some of them who were shot by us that held him, but as God
pleased he had no hurt; and following them up to the woods, we found some
slain, and in diverse places much blood. It seems all their arrows were spent,
for we heard no more of them. Their Canows we took; the arrows we found we
broke, save them we kept for Mosco, to whom we gave the Canowes for his
kindness, that entertained us in the best trivmphing manner, and warlike order
in arms of conquest he could procure of the Moraughtacunds.

The Salvages disguised like bushes fight.
The rest of the day we spent in accomodating our Boat, in stead of thoules we
made sticks like Bedstaues, to which we fastened so many of our Massawomek
Targets, that environed her as wast clothes. The next morning we went up the
river, and our friend Mosco followed us along the shore, and at last desired to
go with us in our Boat. But as we passed by Pisacack, Matchopeak, and
Mecuppom, three Towns situated upon high white clay clifts; the other side all
a low plain marish, and the river there but narrow. Thirty or forty of the
Rapahanocks, had so accommodated themselves with branches, as we took them for
little bushes growing among the sedge, still seeing their arrows strike the
Targets, and dropped in the river: where-at Mosco fell flat in the Boat on his
face, crying the Rapahanocks, which presently we espied to be the bushes, which
at our first volley fell down in the sedge: when we were near half a mile
from them, they showed themselves dancing and singing very merrily.

The Kings of Pissassack, Nandtaughtacund, and Cuttatawomen, used us kindly,
and all their people neglected not any thing to Mosco to bring us to them.
Betwixt Secobeck and Massawteck is a small Isle or two, which causes the river
to be broader then ordinary; there it pleased God to take one of our Company
called Mr Fetherstone, that all the time he had been in this Country, had
behaved himself, honestly, valiantly, and industriously, where in a little Bay
we called Fetherstones Bay we buried him with a volley of shot: the rest
notwithstanding their ill diet, and bad lodging, crowded in so small a Barge,
in so many dangers never resting, but always tossed to and again, had all
well recovered their healths. The next day we sailed so high as our Boat would
float, there setting up crosses, and graving our names in the trees. Our
Sentinel saw an arrow fall by him, though we had ranged up and down more then
an hour in digging in the earth, looking of stones, herbs, and springs, not
seeing where a Salvage could well hide himself.

Our fight with the Manahaacks.
Upon the alarm by that we had recovered our arms, there was about an hundred
nimble Indians skipping from tree to tree, letting fly their arrows so fast as
they could: the trees here served us for Baricadoes as well as they. But Mosco
did us more service then we expected, for having shot away his quiver of
Arrows, he ran to the Boat for more. The Arrows of Mosco at the first made
them pause upon the matter, thinking by his bruit and skipping, there were many
Salvages. About half an hour this continued, A Salvage shot and taken
prisoner.
then they all vanished as suddenly as they approached. Mosco followed them so
far as he could see us, till they were out of sight. As we returned there lay
a Salvage as dead, shot in the knee, but taking him up we found he had life,
which Mosco seeing, never was Dog more furious against a Bear, then Mosco was
to have beat out his brains, so we had him to our Boat, where our Chirurgian
who went with us to cure our Captains hurt of the Stingray, so dressed this
Salvage that within an hour after he looked somewhat chearefully, and did eat
and speak. In the mean time we contented Mosco in helping him to gather up
their arrows, which were an armefull, whereof he gloried not a little. Then we
desired Mosco to know what he was, and what Countries were beyond the
mountains; the poor Salvage mildly answered, he and all with him were of
Hasinninga, where there are three Kings more, like unto them, namely the King
of Stegora, the King of Tauxuntania, and the King of Shakahonea, that were come
to Moha^kahod, which is only a hunting Town, and the bounds betwixt the
Kingdom of the Mannahocks, and the Nandtaughtacunds, but hard by where we
were. We demanded why they came in that manner to betray us, that came to them
in peace, and to seek their loves; he answered, they heard we were a people
come from under the world, to take their world from them. We asked him how many
worlds he did know, he replied, he knew no more but that which was under the
sky that covered him, which were the Powhatans, with the Monacans, and the
Massawomeks, that were higher up in the mountains. Then we asked him what was
beyond the mountains, His relation of their countries.
he answered the Sun: but of any thing else he knew nothing; They cannot
travel but where the woods are burnt.
because the woods were not burnt. These and many such questions we demanded,
concerning the Massawomeks, the Monacans, their own Country, and where were
the Kings of Stegora, Tauxsintania, and the rest. The Monacans he said were
their neighbors and friends, and did dwell as they in the hilly Countries by
small rivers, living upon roots and fruits, but chiefly by hunting. The
Massawomeks did dwell upon a great water, and had many boats, and so many men
that they made war with all the world. For their Kings, they were gone every
one a several way with their men on hunting: But those with him came thither a
fishing till they saw us, notwithstanding they would be altogether at night at
Mahaskahod. For his relation we gave him many toys, with persuasions to go
with us, and he as earnestly desired us to stay the coming of those Kings that
for his good usage should be friends with us, for he was brother to Hasinninga.
But Mosco advised us presently to be gone, for they were all naught, yet we
told him we would not till it was night. All things we made ready to entertain
what came, and Mosco was as diligent in trimming his arrows. The night being
come we all embarked, for the river was so narrow, had it been light the land
on the one side was so high, they might have done us exceeding much mischief.
All this while the K. of Hasinninga was seeking the rest, and had consultation
a good time what to do. But by their espi^s seeing we were gone, it was not
long before we heard their arrows dropping on every side the Boat; we cause^
our Salvages to call unto them, but such a yelling and hallowing they made that
they heard nothing, but now and then a piece, aiming so near as we could where
we heard the most voices. More then 12 miles they followed us in this manner;
then the day appearing, we found our selves in a broad Bay, out of danger of
their shot, where we came to an anchor, and fell to breakfast. Not so much as
speaking to them till the Sun was risen; being well refreshed, we untied our
Targets that covered us as a Deck, and all showed our selves with those shields
on our arms, and swords in our hands, and also our prisoner Amoroleck; a long
discourse there was betwixt his Countrymen and him, how good we were, how well
we used him, how we had a Patawomek with us, loved us as his life, that would
have slain him had we not preserved him, and that he should have his liberty
would they be but friends; How we concluded peace with the four kings of
Monahoke.
and to do us any hurt it was impossible. Upon this they all hung their Bows
and Quivers upon the trees, and one came swimming aboard us with a Bow tied on
his head, and another with a Quiver of Arrows, which they delivered our
Captain as a present, the Captain having used them so kindly as he could,
told them the other three Kings should do the like, and then the great King of
our world should be their friend, whose men we were. It was no sooner demanded
but performed, so upon a low Moorish point of Land we went to the shore, where
those four Kings came and received Amoroleck: nothing they had but Bows,
Arrows, Tobacco-bags, and Pipes: what we desired, none refused to give us,
wondering at every thing we had, and heard we had done: our Pistols they took
for pipes, which they much desired, but we did content them with other
Commodities, and so we left four or five hundred of our merry Mannahocks,
singing, dancing, and making merry, and set sail for Moraughtacund.

In our returns we visited all our friends, How we became friends with the
Rapahanocks.
that rejoiced much at our Victory against the Mannahocks, who many times had
Wars also with them, but now they were friends, and desired we would be
friends with the Rapahanocks, as we were with the Mannahocks. Our Captain told
them, they had twice assaulted him that came only in love to do them good,
and therefore he would now burn all their houses, destroy their corn, and for
ever hold them his enemies, till they made him satisfaction; they desired to
know what that should be: he told them they should present him the Kings Bow
and Arrows, and not offer to come armed where he was; that they should be
friends with the Moraughtacunds his friends, and give him their Kings son in
pledge to perform it, and then all King James his men should be their friends.
Upon this they presently sent to the Rapahanocks to meet him at the place
where they first fought, where would be the Kings of Nantautacund and
Pissassac: which according to their promise were there so soon as we; where
Rapahanock presented his Bow and Arrows, and confirmed all we desired, except
his son, having no more but him he could not live without him, but in stead
of his son he would give him the three women Moraughtacund had stol^e. This
was accepted: and so in three or four Canowes, so many as could went with us
to Moraughtacund, where Mosco made them such relations, and gave to his friends
so many Bows and Arrows, that they no less loved him then admired us. The 3
women were brought our Captain, to each he gave a chain of Beads: and then
causing Moraughtacund, Mosco, and Rapahanock stand before him, bid Rapahanock
take her he loved best, and Moraughtacund choose next, and to Mosco he gave the
third. Upon this away went their Canowes over the water, to fetch their
venison, and all the provision they could, and they that wanted Boats swam over
the river: the dark commanded us then to rest. The next day there was of men,
women, and children, as we coniectured, six or seven hundred, dancing, and
singing, and not a Bow nor Arrow seen amongst them. Mosco changed his name
V^tasantascugh, which we interpret Stranger, for so they call us. All promising
ever to be our friends, and to plant Corn purposely for us; and we to provide
hatchets, beads, and copper for them, we departed, giving them a Volley of
shot, and they us as loud shouts and cries as their strengths could utter. The
discovery of Payankatank.
That night we anchored in the river of Payankatank, and discovered it so high
as it was navigable, but the people were most a hunting, save a few old men,
women, and children, that were tending their corn, of which they promised us
part when we would fetch it, as had done all the Nations where ever we had yet
been.

In a fair calm, rowing toward point Comfort, we anchored in Gosnolls Bay,
but such a sudden gust surprised us in the night with thunder and rain, that
we never thought more to have seen James Town. Yet running before the wind,
we sometimes saw the Land by the flashes of fire from heaven, by which light
only we kept from the splitting shore, until it pleased God in that black
darkness to preserve us by that light to find point Comfort: there refreshing
our selves, because we had only but heard of the Chisapeacks and Nandsamunds,
we thought it as fit to know all our neighbors near home, as so many Nations
abroad.

So setting sail for the Southern shore, A notable treachery of the
Nandsamunds.
we sailed up a narrow river up the country of Chisapeack; it has a good
channel, but many shoules about the entrance. By that we had sailed six or
seven miles, we saw two or three little garden plots with their houses, the
shores overgrowne with the greatest Pyne and Fur trees we ever saw in the
Country. But not seeing nor hearing any people, and the river very narrow, we
returned to the great river, to see if we could find any of them. Coasting the
shore toward Nandsamund, which is most Oyster-bankes; at the mouth of that
river, we espied six or seven Salvages making their wires, who presently fled:
ashore we went, and where they wrought we threw diverse toys, and so departed.
Far we were not gone ere they came again, and began to sing, and dance, and
recall us: and thus we began our first acquaintance. At last one of them
desired us to go to his house up that river, into our Boat voluntarily he
came, the rest ran after us by the shore with all show of love that could be.
Seven or eight miles we sailed up this narrow river: at last on the Western
shore we saw large Cornefields, in the midst a little Isle, and in it was
abundance of Corn; the people he told us were all a hunting, but in the Isle
was his house, to which he invited us with much kindness: to him* his wife,
and children, we gave such things as they seemed much contented them. The
others being come, desired us also to go but a little higher to see their
houses: here our host left us, the rest rowed by us in a Canow, till we were so
far past the Isle the river became very narrow. Here we desired some of them to
come abord us, whereat pausing a little, they told us they would but fetch their
bows and arrows and go all with us, but being ashore and thus armed, they
persuaded us to go forward, but we could neither persuade them into their
Canow, nor into our Boat. This gave us cause to provide for the worst. Far we
went not ere seven or eight Canowes full of men armed appeared following us,
staying to see the conclusion. The fight with the Chisapeacks and Nandsamund^.
Presently from each side the river came arrows so fast as two or three
hundred could shoot them, whereat we returned to get the open. They in the
Canowes let fly also as fast, but amongst them we bestowed so many shot, the
most of them leaped overboard and swam ashore, but two or three escaped by
rowing, being against their playnes: our Muskets they found shot further then
their Bows, for we made not twenty shot ^re they all retired behind the next
trees. Being thus got out of their trap, we seized on all their Canowes, and
moored them in the midst of the open. More then an hundred arrows stuck in
our Targets, and about the boat, yet none hurt, only Anthony Bagnall was shot
in his Hat, and another in his sleeue. But seeing their multitudes, and
suspecting as it was, that both the Nandsamunds, and the Chisapeacks were
together, we thought it best to ride by their Canowes a while, to bethink if
it were better to burn all in the Isle, or draw them to composition, till we
were provided to take all they had, which was sufficient to feed all our
Colony: but to burn the Isle at night it was concluded. In the interim we
began to cut in pieces their Canowes, and they presently to lay down their
bows, How they became friends.
making signs of peace: peace we told them we would accept, would they bring
us their Kings bows and arrows, with a chain of pearl; and when we came
again give us four hundred baskets full of Corn, otherwise we would break
all their boats, and burn their houses, and corn, and all they had. To
perform all this they alleged only the want of a Canow; so we put one a
drift and bad them swim to fetch her: and till they performed their promise,
we would but only break their Canowes. They cried to us to do no more, all
should be as we would: which presently they performed, away went their bows
and arrows, and tagge and ragge came with their baskets: so much as we could
carry we took, and so departing good friends, we returned to James Town,
where we safely arrived the 7. of September, The proce^ding at James Town.
1608. There we found Mr Scrivener, and diverse others well recovered: many
dead; some sick: the late President prisoner for mutiny: by the honest
diligence of Master Scrivener, the harvest gathered, but the provision in the
store much spoiled with rain. Thus was that summer (when little wanted)
consumed and spent, and nothing done (such was the government of Captain
Ratliffe) but only this discovery; wherein to express all the dangers,
accidents, and incounters this small number passed in that small Barge, by the
scale of proportion, about three thousand miles, with such watery diet in those
great waters and barbarous Countries (till then to any Christian utterly
unknown) I rather refer their merit to the censure of the courteous and
experienced Reader, then I would be tedious or partial being a party.

But to this place to come who will adventure,
with judgments guide and reason how to enter:
Finds in this worlds broad sea, with wind and tide,
There Is safer sail then any where beside,
But 'cause to wanton novices it is
A Province full of fearfulness I wiss;
Into the great vast deep to venture out:
Those shallow rivers let them coast about.
And by a small Boat learn there first, and mark,
How they may come to make a greater Bark.
Written by Anthony Bagnall, Nathanaell Powell, and Anas Todkill.
CHAPTER VII. The Presidency surrendered to Captain Smith: the Arrival and
return of the second Supply. And what happened.
THe tenth of September, by the Election of the Council, and request of the
Company, Captain Smith received the Letters Patents: which till then by no
means he would accept, though he was often importuned thereunto. Now the
building of Ratliffes Palace stayed as a thing needless; the Church was
repaired; the Storehouse recovered; buildings prepared for the Supplies, we
expected; the Fort reduced to a fiue-square form; the order of the Watch
renewed; the squadrons (each setting of the Watch) trained; the whole Company
every Saturday exercised, in the plain by the west Bulwark, prepared for that
purpose, we called Smithfield: where sometimes more then an hundred Salvages
would stand in an amazement to behold, how a fyle would batter a tree, where he
would make them a mark to shoot at; the boats trimmed for trade, which being
sent out with Lieutenant Percy, in their Journey incountred the second Supply,
that brought them back to discover the Country of Monacan. How or why Captain
Newport obtained such a private Commission, as not to return without a lump
of gold, a certainty of the South sea, or one of the lost company sent out by
Sir Water Raleigh, I know not; nor why he brought such a five peeced Barge, not
to bear us to that South sea, till we had borne her over the mountains, which
how far they extend is yet unknown. Powhatans scorn when his courtesy was
most deserved.
As for the Coronation of Powhatan, and his presents of Basin and Ewer, Bed,
Bedstead, Clothes, and such costly novelties, they had been much better well
spared then so ill spent, for we had his favor much better only for a plain
piece of Copper, till this stately kind of soliciting, made him so much
overvalue himself, that he respected us as much as nothing at all. As for the
hyring of the Poles and Dutchmen, to make Pitch, Tar, Glass* Milles, and Soap
ashes, when the Country is replenished with people, and necessaries, would have
done well, but to send them and seauentie more without victuals to work, was
not so well advised nor considered of, as it should have been. Yet this could
not have hurt us had they been 200. though then we were 130 that wanted for
our selves. For we had the Salvages in that decorum (their harvest being newly
gathered, that we feared not to get victuals for 500. No better way to
overthrow the business then by our instructors.
Now was there no way to make us miserable, but to neglect that time to make
provision whilst it was to be had, the which was done by the direction from
England to perform this strange discovery, but a more strange Coronation to
loose that time, spend that victuals we had, tire and starve our men, having
no means to carry victuals, munition, the hurt or sick, but on their own
backs. How or by whom they were invented I know not: but Captain Newport we
only accounted the Author, who to effect these proiects, had so gilded men's
hopes with great promises, that both Company and Council concluded his
resolution for the most part: God does know they little knew what they did, nor
understood their own estates to conclude his conclusions, against all the
inconveniences the foreseeing President alleged. Of this Supply there was
added to the Council, A consultation, where all the Council was against the
President.
one Captain Richard Waldo, and Captain Win, two ancient Soldiers, and
valiant Gentlemen, but yet ignorant of the business, (being but newly arrived.)
Ratliffe was also permitted to have his voice, and Mr Scrivener, desirous to
see strange Countries: so that although Smith was President, yet the Mayor part
of the Council had the authority and ruled it as they listed. As for clearing
Smiths objections, how Pitch and Tar, Wainscot, Clapbord, Glass, and Soap
ashes, could be provided, to relade the ship, or provision got to live withal,
when none was in the Country, and that we had, spent, before the ship departed
to effect these projects. The answer was, Captain Newport undertook to
fraught the Pinnace of twenty tons with Corn in going and returning in his
Discovery, and to refraught her again from Werowocomoco of Powhatan. Also
promising a great proportion of victuals from the Ship; inferring that Smiths
propositions were only devices to hinder his journey, to effect it himself;
and that the cruelty he had used to the Salvages, might well be the occasion
to hinder these Designs, and seek revenge on him. For which taxation all
works were left, and 120 chosen men were appointed for Newports guard in this
Discovery. But Captain Smith to make clear all those seeming suspicions, that
the Salvages were not so desperate as was pretended by Captain Newport, and
how willing (since by their authority they would have it so) he was to assist
them what he could, because the Coronation would consume much time, he
undertook himself their message to Powhatan, to entreat him to come to James
Town to receive his presents. And where Newport durst not go with less then
120. he only took with him Captain Waldo, Mr Andrew Buckler, Edward Brinton,
and Samuel Collier: with these four he went over land to Werowocomoco, some 12
miles; Capt. Smith goes with 4. to Powhatan, when Newport feared with 120.
there he passed the river of Pamavnkee in a Salvage Canow. Powhatan being 30
miles of, was presently sent for: in the mean time, Pocahontas and her women
entertained Captain Smith in this manner.

In a fair plain field they made a fire, before which* he sitting upon a mat,
suddenly amongst the woods was heard such a hydeous noise and shreeking, that
the English betook themselves to their arms, and seized on two or three old
men by them, supposing Powhatan with all his power was come to surprise them.
But presently Pocahontas came, willing him to kill her if any hurt were
intended, A Virginia Mask.
and the beholders, which were men, women, and children, satisfied the Captain
there was no such matter. Then presently they were presented with this anticke;
thirty young women came naked out of the woods, only covered behind and
before with a few green leaves, their bodies all painted, some of one color,
some of another, but all differing, their leader had a fair pair of Bucks
horns on her head, and an Otters skin at her girdle, and another at her
arm, a quiver of arrows at her back, a bow and arrows in her hand; the next
had in her hand a sword, another a club, another a pot-sticke; all horned
alike: the rest every one with their several devises. These fiends with most
hellish shouts and cries, rushing from among the trees, cast themselves in a
ring about the fire, singing and dancing with most excellent ill variety, often
falling into their infernal passions, and solemnly again to sing and dance;
having spent near an hour in this Mascarado, as they entered in like manner
they departed.

Having reacco^modated themselves, they solemnly invited him to their lodgings,
The Women's entertainment.
where he was no sooner within the house, but all these Nymphs more tormented
him then ever, with crowding, pressing, and hanging about him, most tediously
crying, Love you not me? love you not me? This salutation ended, the feast was
set, consisting of all the Salvage dainties they could devise: some attending,
others singing and dancing about them; which mirth being ended, with
firebrarnds in stead of Torches they conducted him to his lodging.

Thus did they show their feats of arms, and others art in dancing:
Some other used there oaten pipe, and others voices chanting.
Captain Smiths message.
The next day came Powhatan: Smith delivered his message of the presents sent
him, and redelivered him Namontack he had sent for England, desiring him to
come to his Father Newport, to accept those presents, and conclude their
revenge against the Monacans. Whereunto this subtle Savage thus replied.

If your King have sent me Presents, I also am a King, and this is my land:
eight days I will stay to receive them. Powhatans answer.
Your Father is to come to me, not I to him, nor yet to your Fort, neither will
I bite at such a bait: as for the Monacans I can revenge my own injuries, and
as for Atquanachuk, where you say your brother was slain, it is a contrary way
from those parts you suppose it; but for any salt water beyond the mountains,
the Relations you have had from my people are false. Whereupon he began to draw
plots upon the ground (according to his discourse) of all those Regions. Many
other discourses they had (yet both content to give each other content in
complementall Courtesies) and so Captain Smith returned with this Answer.

Powhatans Coronation.
Upon this the Presents were sent by water which is near an hundred miles, and
the Captains went by land with fifty good shot. All being met at Werowocomoco,
the next day was appointed for his Coronation, then the presents were brought
him, his Basin and Ewer, Bed and furniture set up, his scarlet Cloak and
apparel with much ado put on him, being persuaded by Namontack they would not
hurt him: but a soul trouble there was to make him kneel to receive his
Crown, he neither knowing the majesty nor meaning of a Crown, nor bending of
the knee, endured so many persuasions, examples, and instructions, as tired
them all; at last by leaning hard on his shoulders, he a little stooped, and
three having the crown in their hands put it on his head, when by the warning
of a Pistol the Boats were prepared with such a volley of shot, that the King
start up in a horrible fear, till he saw all was well. Then remembering
himself, to congratulate their kindness, he gave his old shoes and his
mantell to Captain Newport: but perceiving his purpose was to discover the
Monacans, he labored to divert his resolution, refusing to lend him either men
or guides more then Namontack; and so after some small complement all kindness
on both sides, in requital of his presents he presented Newport with a heap
of wheat ears that might contain some 7 or 8 Bushels, and as much more we
bought in the Town, wherewith we returned to the Fort.

The discovery of Monacan.
The Ship having disburdened her self of 70 persons, with the first Gentlewoman
and woman-seruant that arrived in our Colony. Captain Newport with 120 chosen
men, led by Captain Waldo, Lieutenant Percie, Captain Win, Mr West, and Mr
Scrivener, set forward for the discovery of Monacan, leaving the President at
the Fort with about 80. or 90. (such as they were) to relade the Ship. Arriving
at the Falls we marched by land some forty miles in two days and a half,
and so returned down the same path we went. Two towns we discovered of the
Monacans, called Massinacak and Mowhemenchouch, the people neither used us well
nor ill, yet for our security we took one of their petty Kings, and led him
bound to conduct us the way. And in our returns searched many places we
supposed Mines, about which we spent some time in refyning, having one William
Gallicut, a refyner fitted for that purpose. From that crust of earth we
dug, he persuaded us to believe he extracted some small quantity of silver;
and (not unlikely) better stuff might be had for the digging. With this poor
trial, being contented to leave this fair, fertile, well watered Country; and
coming to the Falls, the Salvages feigned there were diverse ships come into
the Bay, How the Salvages deluded Cap. Newport.
to kill them at James Town. Trade they would not, and find their Corn we
could not; for they had hid it in the woods: and being thus deluded, we arrived
at James Town, half sick, all complaining, and tired with toil, famine, and
discontent, to have only but discovered our gilded hopes, and such fruitless
certainties, as Captain Smith fortold us.

But those that hunger seek to slake,
Which thus abounding wealth would rake:
Not all the gemmes of Ister shore,
Nor all the gold of Lydia's store,
Can fill their greedy appetite;
It is a thing so infinite.
No sooner were we landed, but the President dispersed so many as were able,
some for Glass, others for Tar, Pitch, and Sope-ashes, leaving them with the
Fort to the Councels oversight, but 30 of us he conducted down the river some
5 miles from James town, to learn to make Clapbord, cut down trees, and lie
in woods. Amongst the rest he had chosen Gabriel Beadle, and John Russell, the
only two gallants of this last Supply, and both proper Gentlemen. Strange were
these pleasures to their conditions; yet lodging, eating, and drinking, working
or playing, they but doing as the President did himself. All these things were
carried so pleasantly as within a week they became Masters: making it their
delight to hear the trees thunder as they fell; but the Axes so often blistered
their tender fingers, that many times every third blow had a loud oath to
drown the echo; for remedy of which sin, the President devised how to have
every man's oaths numbered, A punishment for swearing.
and at night for every oath to have a Cann of water powered down his sleeue,
with which every offender was so washed (himself and all) that a man should
scarce hear an oath in a week.

For he who scorns and makes but jests of cursings, and his oath,
He does contemn, not man but God, nor God, nor man, but both.
By this, let no man think that the President and these Gentlemen spent their
times as common Wood-haggers at felling of trees, or such other like labors,
or that they were pressed to it as hirelings, or common slaves; for what they
did, after they were but once a little invred, it seemed and some conceited it,
only as a pleasure and recreation, yet 30 or 40 of such voluntary Gentlemen
would do more in a day then 100 of the rest that must be pressed to it by
compulsion, 3. Men better then 100.
but twenty good workmen had been better then them all.

Master Scrivener, Captain Waldo, and Captain Win at the Fort, every one in
like manner carefully regarded their charge. The President returning from
amongst the woods, seeing the time consumed and no provision gotten, (and the
Ship lay idle at a great charge and did nothing) presently embarked himself in
the discovery barge, giving order to the Council to send Lieutenant Percie
after him with the next barge that arrived at the Fort; two Barges he had
himself and 18 men, but arriving at Chickahamania, The Chickahamania's forced
to contribution.
that dogged Nation was too well acquainted with our wants, refusing to trade,
with as much scorn and insolency as they could express. The President
perceiving it was Powhatans policy to starve us, told them he came not so much
for their Corn, as to revenge his imprisonment, and the death of his men
murdered by them, and so landing his men and ready to charge them, they
immediately fled: and presently after sent their Ambassadors with corn, fish,
foul, and what they had to make their peace, (their Corn being that year but
bad) they complained extremely of their own wants, yet fraughted our Boats
with an hundred Bushels of Corn, and in like manner Lieutenant Percies, that
not long after arrived, and having done the best they could to content us, we
parted good friends, and returned to James town.

Though this much contented the Company, A bad reward for well-doing.
(that feared nothing more then starving) yet some so envied his good success,
that they rather desired to hazard a starving, then his pains should prove so
much more effectual then theirs. Some proiects there were invented by Newport
and Ratliffe, not only to have deposed him, but to have kept him out of the
Fort; for that being President, he would leave his place and the Fort without
their consents, but their horns were so much too short to effect it, as they
themselves more narrowly escaped a greater mischief.

All this time our old Tavern made as much of all them that had either money
or ware as could be desired: A good Tavern in Virginia.
by this time they were become so perfect on all sides (I mean the soldiers,
sailors, and Salvages) as there was ten times more care to maintain their
damnabl^ and private trade, then to provide for the Colony things that were
necessary. Neither was it a small policy in Newport and the Mariners to report
in England we had such plenty, A bad trade of the masters and sailors.
and bring us so many men without victuals, when they had so many private
Factors in the Fort, that within six or seven weeks, of two or three hundred
Axes, Chissels, Hows, and Pick-axes, scarce twenty could be found: and for
Pike-heads, shot, Powder, or any thing they could steal from their f^llowes,
was vendible; they knew as well (and as secretly) how to convey them to trade
with the Salvages for Furs, Baskets, Mussaneeks, young Beasts, or such like
Commodities, as exchange them with the Sailors for Butter, Cheese, Beef,
Porke, Aqua vitae, Beer, Biscuit, Oatmeale, and Oil: and then feign all was
sent them from their friends And though Virginia affoorded no Furs for the
Store, yet one Master in one voyage has got so many by this indirect means,
as he confessed to have sold in England for 30l.

Those are the Saint-seeming Worthies of Virginia, that have notwithstanding
all this meat, drink, and wages; but now they begin to grow weary, their
trade being both perceived and prevented; none has been in Virginia that has
observed any thing, which knows not this to be true, and yet the loss, the
scorn, the misery, and shame, was the poor Officers, Gentlemen, and careless
Governors, who were all thus bought and sold; the adventurers cousened, and
the action overthrown by their false excuses, informations, and directions. By
this let all men judge, how this business could prosper, being thus abused ^y
such pilfring occasions. And had not Captain Newport cried Peccavi, the
President would have discharged the ship, and caused him to have stayed one
year in Virginia, to learn to speak of his own experience.

Master Scriveners voyage to Werowocomoco.
Master Scrivener was sent with the Barges and Pinnace to Werowocomoco, where he
found the Salvages more ready to fight then trade; but his vigilance was such
as prevented their proiects, and by the means of Namontack got three or four
hogsheads of Corn, and as much Pocones, which is a red root, which then was
esteemed an excellent Dye.

Captain Newport being dispatched, with the trials of Pitch, Tar, Glass,
Frankincense, Soap ashes; with that Clapboord and Waynscot that could be
provided: met with Mr Scrivener at point Comfort, and so returned for England.
We remaining were about two hundred.

The Copy of a Letter sent to the Treasurer and Council of Virginia from
Captain Smith, then President in VIRGINIA.
Right Honorable, etc.
I Received your Letter, wherein you write, that our minds are so set upon
faction, and idle conceits in dividing the Country without your consents, and
that we feed You but with ifs and ands, hopes, and some few proofs; as if we
would keep the myste^y of the business to our selves: and that we must
expressly follow your instructions sent by Captain Newport: the charge of whose
voyage amounts to near two thousand pounds, the which if we cannot defray by
the Ships return, we are like to r^main as banished men. To these particulars
I humbly entreat your Pardons if I offend you with my rude Answer.

For our factions, unless you would have me run away and leave the Country, I
cannot prevent them, because I do make many stay that would else fly any
whether. For the i^le Letter sent to my Lord of Salisbury, by the President and
his conf^derats, for dividing the Country etc. What it was I know not, for you
saw no hand of mine to it; nor ever dreamed I of any such matter. That we feed
you with hopes, etc. Though I be no scholar, I am past a school boy; and I
desire but to know, what either you, and these here do know, but that I have
learned to tell you by the continual hazard of my life. I have not concealed
from you any thing I know; but I fear some cause you to believe much more then
is true.

Expressly to follow your direstions by Captain Newport, though they be
performed, I was directly against it; but according to our Commission, I was
content to be overrul^d by the mayor part of the Council, I fear to the
hazard of us all; which now is generally confessed when it is too late. Only
Captain Win and Captain Waldo I have sworn of the Council, and Crowned
Powhatan according to you instructions.

For the charge of this Voyage of two or three thousand pounds, we have not
received the value of an hundred pounds. And for the quartred Boat to be borne
by the Soldiers over the Falls, Newport had 120 of the best men he could
choose. If he had burnt her to ash^s, one might have carried her in a bag, but
as she is, five hundred cann^t, to a navigable place above the Falls. And for
him at that time to find in the South Sea, a Mine of gold; or any of them sent
by Sir Walter Raleigh: at our Consultation I told them was as likely as the
rest. But during this great discovery of thirty miles, (which might as well
have been done by one man, and much more, for the value of a pound of Copper
at a seasonable time) they had the Pinnace and all the Boats with them, but one
that remained with me to serve the Fort. In their absence I followed the new
begun works of Pitch and Tar, Glass, Sope-ashes, and Clapboord, whereof
some small quantities we have sent you. But if you rightly consider, what an
infinite toil it is in Russia and Swethland, where the woods are proper for
naught else, and though there be the help both of man and beast in those
ancient Commonwealths, which many an hundred years have used it, yet
thousands of those poor people can scarce g^t necessaries to live, but from
h^nd to mouth. And though your Factors there can buy as much in a week as will
fraught you a ship, or as much as you please; you must not expect from us any
such matter, which are but a many of ignorant miserable souls, that are scarce
able to get wherewith to live, and defend our selves against the inconstant
Salvages: finding but here and there a tree fit for the purpose, and want all
things else the Russians have. For the Coronation of P^whatan, by whose advice
you sent him such presents, I know not; but this give me leave to tell you, I
fear they will be the confusion of us all ere we hear from you again. At
your Ships arrival, the Salvages harvest was newly gathered, and we going to
buy it, our own not being half sufficient for so great a number. As for the
two ships loading of Corn N^wport pr^mised to provide us from Powhatan, he
brought us but fourteen Bushels; and from the Monacans nothing, but the most
of the men sick and near famished. From your Ship we had not provision in
victuals worth twenty pound, and we are more then two hundred to live upon
this: the one half sick, the other little better. For the Sailors (I
confess) they daily make good cheer, but our diet is a little meal and
water, and not sufficient of that. Though there be fish in the Sea, fowls in
the air, and Beasts in the woods, their bounds are so large, they so wild,
and we so weak and ignorant, we cannot much trouble them. Captain Newport we
much suspect to be the Author of those inventions. Now that you should know, I
have made you as great a discovery as he, for less charge then he spends you
every meal; I have sent you this Map of the Bay and Rivers, with an annexed
Relation of the Countries and Nations that inhabit them, as you may see at
large. Also two barrels of stones, and such as I take to be good Iron ore at
the least; so divided, as by their notes you may see in what places I found
them. The Soldiers say many of your officers maintain their families out of
that you send us: and that Newport has an hundred pounds a year for carrying
news. For every master you have yet sent can find the way as well as he, so
that an hundred pounds might be spared, which is more then we have all, that
help to pay him wages. Cap. Ratliffe is now called Sickl^more, a poor
counterfeited Imposture. I have sent you him home, least the company should cut
his throat. What he is, now every one can tell you: if he and Archer return
again, they are sufficient to keep us always in factions. When you send
again I entreat you rather send but thirty Ca^penters, husbandmen, gardiners,
fisher men, blacksmiths, masons, and diggers up of trees, roots, well provided;
then a thousand of such as we have: for except we be able both to lodge them,
and feed them, the most will consume with want of necessaries before they can
be made good for any thing. Thus if you please to consider this account, and of
the unnecessary wages to Captain Newport, or his ships so long lingering and
staying here (for notwithstanding his boasting to leave us victuals for 12
mon^ths, though we had 89 by this discovery lame and sick, and but a pint of
Corn a day for a man, we were constrained to give him three hogsheads of that
to victual him homeward) or yet to send into Germany or Poleland for
glasse-men and the rest, till we be able to sustain our selves, and relieve
them when they come. It were better to give five hundred pound a tun for those
gross Commodities in Denmark, then send for them hither, till more necessary
things be provided. For in over-toyling our weak and unskillful bodies, to
satisfy this desire of present profit, we can scarce ever recover our selves
from one Supply to another. And I humbly entreat you hereafter, let us know
what we should receive, and not stand to the Sailors courtesy to leave us what
they please, else you may charge us with what you will, but we not you with any
thing. These are the causes that have kept us in Virginia, from laying such a
foundation, that ^re this might have given much better content and
satisfaction; but as yet you must not look for any profitable returns: so I
humbly rest.


The Names of those in this Supply, were these: with their Proceedings and
Accidents.
Captain Peter Win, Captain Richard Waldo,
were appointed to be of the Council. Master Francis West, brother to the Lord
La War. Gent.
Thomas Graves. Raleigh Chroshaw. Gabriel Beadle. John Beadle. John Russell.
William Russell. John Cuderington. William Sambage. Henry Leigh. Henry Philpot.
Harmon Harrison. Daniel Tucker. Henry Collins. Hugh Wolleston. John Hoult.
Thomas Norton. George Yarington. George Burton. Thomas Abbay. William Dowman.
Thomas Maxes. Michael Lowick. Master Hunt. Thomas F^rr^st. John Dauxe.
Tradsmen.
Thomas Ph^lps. John Prat. John Clarke. Ieffrey Shortridge. Dionis Oconor. Hugh
Win. David ap Hugh. Thomas Bradley. John Burra^. Thomas L^vander. Henry Bell.
Master Powell. David Ellis. Thomas Gibson.
Laborers.
Thomas Dawse. Thomas Mallard. William Tailor. Thomas Fox. Nicholas Hancock.
Walker. Williams. Flood. Morley. Rose. Scot. Hardwyn.
Boys.
Milman. Hilliard.

Mistress Forest, and Anne Burras her maid; eight Dutch men and Poles, with
some others, to the number of seaventie persons, etc.

These poor conclusions so affrighted us all with famine, Nandsamund forced to
contribution.
that the President provided for N^ndsamund, and took with him Captain Win,
and Mr Scrivener, then returning from Captain Newport. These people also long
denied him not only the 400 Baskets of Corn they promised, but any trade at
all; (excusing themselves they had ^pent most they had, and were commanded by
Powhatan to keep that they had, and not to let us come into their river) till
we were constrained to begin with them perforce. Upon the discharging of our
Muskets they all fled and shot not an Arrow; the first house we came to we set
on fire, which when they perceived, they desired we would make no more spoil,
and they would give us half they had: how they collected it I know not, but
before night they loaded our three Boats; and so we returned to our quarter
some four miles down the River, which was only the open woods under the lay
of a hill, where all the ground was covered with snow, and hard frozen; the
snow we dug away and made a great fire in the place; when the ground was
well dried, we turned away the fire; and covering the place with a mat, there
we lay very warm. To keep us from the wind we made a shade of another Mat;
as the wind turned we turned our shade, and when the ground grew cold we
removed the fire. And thus many a cold winter night have we lain in this
miserable manner, yet those that most commonly went upon all those occasions,
were always in health, lusty, and sat. For sparing them this year, the n^xt
year they promised to plant purposely for us; and so we returned to James
town. About this time there was a marriage betwixt John Laydon and Anne
Burras; The first marriage in Virginia.
which was the first marriage we had in Virginia.

Long he stayed not, but fitting himself and Captain Waldo with two Barges.
From Chawopoweanock, and all parts thereabouts, all the people were fled, as
being jealous of our intents; till we discovered the riv^r and people of
Apamatuck; where we found not much, that they had we equally divided, Apamatuck
discovered.
but gave them copper, and such things as contented them in consideration.
Master Scrivener and Lieutenant Percie went also abroad, but could find nothing.

The President seeing the procrastinating of time, was no course to live,
resolved with Captain Waldo (whom he knew to be sure in time of need) to
surprise Powhatan, and all his provision, but the unwillingness of Captain
Win, and Master Scrivener, for some private respect, plotted in England to
ruin Captain Smith, did their best to hinder their project; but the President
whom no persuasions could persuade to starve, being invited by Powhatan to come
unto him: and if he would send him but men to build him a house, give him a
gryndstone, fifty swords, some pieces, a cock and a hen, with much copper and
beads, he would lo^d his Ship with Corn. The President not ignorant of his
devises and subtlety, yet unwilling to neglect any opportunity, presently
sent three Dutchmen and two English, having so small allowance, few were able
to do any thing to purpose: knowing there needed no better a Castle to effect
this project, took order with Captain Waldo to second him, if need required;
Scrivener he left his substitute, and set forth with the Pinnace, two Barges,
and fortie-six men, which only were such as voluntarily offered themselves for
his Journey, the which by reason of Mr Scriveners ill success, was censured
very desperate, they all knowing Smith would not return empty, if it were to
be had; howsoever, it caused many of those that he had appointed, to find
excuses to stay behind.

CHAP. VIII. Captain Smiths Journey to Pamavnkee.
THe twentie-nine of December he set forward for Werowocomoco: his Company were
these;

In the Discovery Barge himself.
Gent. Robert Behethland. Nathanael Graves. John Russell. Raleigh Chrashow.
Michael Sicklemore. Richard Worley.
Soldiers.
Anas Todkill. William Love. William Bentley. Ieffrey Shortridge. Edward
Pising. William Ward.

In the Pinnace.
Lieutenant Percie, brother to the Earl of Northumberland. Master Francis
West, brother to the Lord La War. William Phittiplace, Captain of the
Pinnace. Gent.
Michael Phittiplace. Ieffrey Abbot, Serieant. William Tankard. George
Yarington. James Brown. Edward Brinton. George Burton. Thomas Coe.
Jonas Profit, Master. Robert Ford, Clarke of the Council. John Dods,
Soldier. Henry Powell, Soldier.
Thomas Gipson, David Ellis, Nathanael Peacock, Sailors. John Prat, George
Acrig, James Read, Nicholas Hancock, James Watkins, Thomas Lambert, four
Dutchmen, and Richard Salvage were sent by land before to build the house for
Powhatan against our Arrival.

This company being victualled but for three or four days, lodged the first
night at Warraskoyack, where the President took sufficient provision. This
kind King did his best to divert him from seeing Powhatan, but perceiving he
could not prevail, he advised in this manner. The good counsel of
Warraskoyack.
Captain Smith, you shall find Powhatan to use you kindly, but trust him not,
and be sure he have no opportunity to seize on your Arms; for he has sent for
you only to cut your throats. The Captain thanking him for his good counsel:
yet the better to try his love, desired guides to Chawwonock; for he would send
a present to that King, to bind him his friend. To perform this journey was
sent Mr Sicklemore, a very valiant, honest, and a painful Soldier: with him
two guides, and directions how to seek for the lost company of Sir Walter
Raleighs, and silk Grass. Then we departed thence, the President assuring the
King perpetual love; and left with him Samu^l Collier his Page to learn the
Language.

So this Kings deeds by sacred Oath adiur'd.
More wary proves, and circumspect by ods:
Fearing at least his double forfeiture;
To offend his friends, and sin against his Gods.
The next night being lodged at Kecoughtan; six or seven days the extreme
wind, Plenty of victuals.
rain, frost and snow caused us to keep Christmas among the Salvages, where
we were never more merry, nor fed on more plenty of good Oysters, Fish, Flesh,
Wild-soule, and good bread; nor never had better fires in England, then in the
dry, smoaky houses of Kecoughtan: but departing thence, when we found no houses
we were not curious in any weather to lie three or four nights together under
the trees by a fire, 148 Fowls killed at three shootes.
as formerly is said. An hundred forty eight fowls the President, Anthony
Bagnall, and Serieant Pising did kill at three shoots. At Kiskiack the frost
and contrary winds forced us three or four days also (to suppress the
insolency of those proud Salvages) to quarter in their houses, yet guard our
Barge, and cause them give us what we wanted; though we were but twelve and
himself, yet we never wanted shelter where we found any houses. The 12 of
January we arrived at Werowocomoco, where the river was frozen near half a
mile from the shore; but to neglect no time, the President with his Barge so
far had approached by breaking the ice, as the ebb left him amongst those
oasie shoules, yet rather then to lie there froze^ to death, by his own
example he taught them to march near middle deep, a flight shot through this
muddy frozen oase. When the Barge floated, he appointed two or three to return
her aboard the Pinnace. Where for want of water in melting the ice, they made
fresh water, for the river there was salt. But in this march Mr Russell, (whom
none could persuade to stay behind) being somewhat ill, and exceeding heavy,
so overtoyled himself as the rest had much ado (ere he got ashore) to regaine
life into his dead benumbed spirits. Quartering in the next houses we found, we
sent to Powhatan for provision, who sent us plenty of bread, Turkies, and
Venison; the next day having feasted us after his ordinary manner, he began to
ask v^, when we would be gone: fayning he sent not for us, neither had he any
corn; and his people much less: yet for forty swords he would procure us
forty Baskets. The President showing him the men there present that brought
him the message and conditions, asked Powhatan how it chanced he became so
forgetful; thereat the King concluded the matter with a merry laughter, asking
for our Commodities, but none he liked without gunnes and swords, valuing a
Basket of Corn more precious then a Basket of Copper; saying he could rate his
Corn, but not the Copper.

Captain Smith seeing the intent of this subtle Salvage began to deal with
him after this manner. Powhatan, though I had many courses to have made my
provision, Cap. Smiths discourse to Powhatan.
yet believing your promises to supply my wants, I neglected all to satisfy
your desire: and to testify my love, I sent you my men for your building,
neglecting mine own. What your people had you have engrossed, forbidding them
our trade: and now you think by consuming the time, we shall consume for want,
not having to fulfill your strange demands. As for swords and gunnes, I told
you long ago I had none to spare; and you must know those I have can keep me
from want: yet steal or wrong you I will not, nor dissolve that friendship we
have mutually promised, except you constrain me by our bad usage.

The King having attentively listened to this Discourse, promised that both he
and his Country would spare him what he could, the which within two days they
should receive. Powhatans reply and flattery.
Yet Captain Smith, says the King, some doubt I have of your coming hither,
that makes me not so kindly seek to relieve you as I would: for many do
inform me, your coming hither is not for trade, but to invade my people, and
possess my Country, who dare not come to bring you Corn, seeing you thus
armed with your men. To free us of this fear, leave aboard your weapons, for
here they are ne^alesse, we being all friends, and for ever Powhatans.

With many such discourses they spent the day, quartering that night in the
Kings houses. The next day he renewed his building, which he little intended
should proceed. For the Dutchmen finding his plenty, and knowing our want,
and perceiving his preparations to surprise us, little thinking we could escape
both him and famine; (to obtain his favor) revealed to him so much as they
knew of our estates and proiects, and how to prevent them. One of them being of
so great a spirit, judgment, and resolution, and a hireling that was certain
of his wages for his labor, and ever well used both he and his Countrymen;
that the Pr^sident knew not whom better to trust; and not knowing any fitter
for that employment, had sent him as a spy to discover Powhatans intent, then
little doubting his honesty, nor could ever be certain of his villainy till
near half a year after.

Whilst we ^xpected the coming in of the Country, we wrangled out of the King
ten quarters of Corn for a copper Kettell, the which the President perceiving
him much to affect, valued it at a much greater rate; but in regard of his
scarcity he would accept it, provided we should have as much more the next
year, or else the Country of Monacan. Wherewith each seemed well contented, and
Powhatan began to expostulate the difference of Peace and War after this
manner.

Captain Smith, you may understand that I having seen the death of all my
people thrice, Powhatan discourse of peace and war.
and not any one living of those three generations but my self; I know the
difference of Peace and War better then any in my Country. But now I am old
and ere long must die, my brethren namely Opitchapam, Opechancanough, and
Kekataugh my two sisters, and their two daughters, are distinctly each others
successors. I wish their experience no less then mine, and your love to them
no less then mine to you. But this bruit from Nandsamund, that you are come to
destroy my Country, so much affrighteth all my people as they dare not visit
you. What will it avail you to take that by force you may quickly have by
love, or to destroy them that provide you food. What can you get by war, when
we can hide our provisions and fly to the woods? whereby you must famish by
wronging us your friends And why are you thus jealous of our loves seeing us
unarmed, and both do, and are willing still to feed you, with that you cannot
get but by our labors? Think you I am so simple, not to know it is better to
eat good meat, lie well, and sleep quietly with my women and children, laugh
and be merry with you, have copper, hatchets, or what I want being your friend:
then be forced to fly from all, to lie cold in the woods, feed upon Acornes,
roots, and such trash, and be so hunted by you, that I can neither rest, eat,
nor sle^pe; but my tired men m^st watch, and if a twig but break, every one
cries there comes Captain Smith: then must I fly I know not whether: and
thus with miserable fear, end my miserable life, leaving my pleasures to such
youths as you, which through your rash unadvisedness may quickly as miserably
end, for want of that, you never know where to find. Let this therefore assur^
you of our loves, and every year our friendly trade shall furnish you with
Corn; and now also, if you would come in friendly manner to see us, and not
thus with your guns and swords as to invade your foes. To this subtle
discourse, the President thus replied.

Capt. Smiths Reply.
Seeing you will not rightly conceive of our words, we strive to make you know
our thoughts by our deeds; the vow I made you of my love, both my self and my
men have kept. As for your promise I find it every day violated by some of your
subjects: yet we finding your love and kindness, our custom is so far from
being ungrateful, that for your sake only, we have curbed our thirsting
desire of revenge; else h^d they known as well the cruelty we use to our
enemies, as our true love and courtesy to our friends. And I think your
iudg^ment sufficient to conceive, as well by the adventures we have undertaken,
as by the advantage we have (by our Arms) of yours: that had we intended you
any hurt, long ere this we could have effected it. Your people coming to James
Town are entertained with their Bows and Arrows without any exceptions; we
esteeming it with you as it is with us, to wear our arms as our apparel. As
for the danger of our enemies, in such wars consist our chiefest pleasure:
for your riches we have no use: as for the hiding your provision, or by your
flying to the woods, we shall not so unadvisedly starve as you conclude, your
friendly care in that behalf is needless, for we have a rule to find beyond
your knowledge.

Many other discourses they had, till at last they began to trade. But the King
seeing his will would not be admitted as a law, our guard dispersed, nor our
men disarmed, Powhatans importunity to have us unarmed to betray us.
he (sighing) breathed his mind once more in this manner.

Captain Smith, I never use any Werowance so kindly as your self, yet from
you I receive the least kindness of any. Captain Newport gave me swords,
copper, clothes, a bed, towels, or what I desired; ever taking what I offered
him, and would send away his gunnes when I entreated him: none does deny to lie
at my feet, or refuse to do what I desire, but only you; of whom I can have
nothing but what you regard not, and yet you will have whatsoever you demand.
Captain Newport you call father, and so you call me; but I see for all us both
you will do what you list, and we must both seek to content you. But if you
intend so friendly as you say, send hence your arms, that I may believe you;
for you see the love I bear you, does cause me thus nakedly to forget my self.

Smith seeing this Salvage but trifle the time to cut his throat, procured the
salvages to break the ice, that his Boat might come to fetch his corn and
him: and gave order for more men to come on shore, to surprise the King, with
whom also he but trifled the time till his men were landed: Cap. Smiths
discourse to delay time, till he found opportunity to surprise the King.
and to keep him from suspicion, entertained the time with this reply.

Powhatan you must know, as I have but one God, I honor but one King; and I
live not here as your subject, but as your friend to pleasure you with what I
can. By the gifts you bestow on me, you gain more then by trade: yet would you
visit me as I do you, you should know it is not our custom, to sell our
courtesies as a vendible commodity. Bring all your country with you for your
guard, I will not dislike it as being over jealous. But to content you,
tomorrow I will leave my Arms, and trust to your promise. I call you father
indeed* and as a father you shall see I will love you: but the small care you
have of such a child caused my men persw^de m^ to look to my self. Powhatans
plot to have murdered Smith.


By this time Powhatan having knowledge his m^n were ready whil^st the ice was
a breaking, with his luggage women and children, fled. Yet to avoid suspicion,
left two or three of the women talking with the Captain, whilst he secretly
ran away, and his men that secretly beset the house. Which being pr^sently
discovered to Captain Smith, with his pistol, sword, and target he made such
a passage among these naked Devils; that at his first shoot, they next him
rumbled one over another, and the rest quickly fled some one way some another:
so that without any hurt, only accompanied with John Russell, he obtained the
c^rps du guard. When they perceived him so well escaped, and with his eighteen
men (for he had no more with him a s^^re) to the uttermost of their skill they
sought excuses to dissemble the matter: and Powhatan to excuse his flight and
the sudden com^ing of this multitude, sent our Captain a great bracelet and a
chain of pearl, A chain of pearl sent the Captain for a present.
by an ancient Orator that bespoke us to this purpose, perceiving even then
from our Pinnace, a Barge and men departing and coming unto us.

Captain Smith, our Werowance is fled, fearing your gunnes, and knowing when
the ice was broken there would come more men, sent these numbers but to guard
his corn from stealing, that might happen without your knowledge: now though
some be hurt by your ^^sprision, yet Powhatan is your friend and so will for
ever continue. Now since the ice is open, he would have you send away your
corn, and if you would have his company, send away also your gunnes, which so
affright his people, that they dare not come to you as he promised they should.

Then having provided baskets for our men to carry our corn to the boats,
Pretending to kill our men loaded with baskets, we caused them do it themselves.
they kindly offered their service to guard our Arms, that none should steal
them. A great many they were of goodly well proportioned fellows, as grim as
Devils; yet the very sight of cocking our matches, and being to let fly, a few
words caused them to leave their bows and arrows to our guard, and bear
down our corn on their backs; we needed not imp^rtune them to make
dispatch. But our Barges being left on the oase by the ebb, caused us stay
till the next high water, ^o that we returned again to our old quarter.
Powhatan and his Dutchmen brusting with desire to have the head of Captain
Smith, for if they could but kill him, they thought all was theirs, neglected
not any opportunity to effect his purpose. The Indians with all the merry sports
they could devise, spent the time till night: then they all returned to
Powhatan, who all this time was making ready his forces to surprise the house
and him at supper. Notwithstanding the eternal all-seeing God did prevent h^^,
and by a strange means. For Pocahontas his dearest jewel and daughter,
Pocahontas bewrayes her fathers deceit to kill us.
in that dark night came through the irksome woods, and told our Captain
great cheer should be sent us by and by: but Powhatan and all the power he
could make, would after come k^ll us all, if they that brought it could not
kill us with our own weapons when we were at supper. Therefore if we would
live she wished us presently to be gone. Such things as she delighted in, he
would have given her: but with the tears running down her cheeks, she said
she durst not be seen to have any: for if Powhatan should know it, she were
but dead, and so she ran away by her self as she came. Within less then an
hour came eight or ten lusty fellows, with great platters of venison and
other victual, very importunate to have us put out our matches (whose smoke
made them sick) and sit down to our victual. But the Captain made them taste
every dish, which done he sent some of them back to Powhatan, to bid him make
haste for he was prepared for his coming. As for them he knew they came to
betray him at his supper: but he would prevent them and all their other
intended villainies: so that they might be gone. Not long after came more
messengers, to see what news; not long after them others. Thus we spent the
night as vigilantly as they, till it was high water, yet seemed to the saluages
as friendly as they to us: and that we were so desirous to give Powhatan
content, as he requested, we did leave him Edward Brynton to kill him foul,
an^ the Dutchmen to finish his house; thinking at our return from Pamavnkee
the frost would be gone, and then we might find a better opportunity if
necessity did occasion it, little dreaming yet of the Dutch-mens treachery,
whose humor well suited this verse:

Is any free, that may not live as freely as he list?
Let us live so, then we are as free, and brutish as the best.
CHAP. IX. How we escaped surprising at Pamavnkee.
The Dutch men deceive Cap. Win.
WE had no sooner set sail but Powhatan returned, and sent Adam and Francis
(two stout Dutchmen) to James town: who faining to Captain Win that all
things were well, and that Captain Smith had use of their arms, wherefore
they requested new (the which were given them) they told him their coming was
for some extraordinary tools, and shift of apparel; by which colorable
excuse they obtained six or seven more to their confederacy, such expert
thieves, that presently furnished them with a great many swords, pike-heads,
pieces, shot, powder and such like: Saluages they had at hand to carry it away,
and the next day they returned unsuspected, leaving their confederates to
follow, and in the interim to convay them such things as they could: for which
service they should live with Powhatan as his chief affected, free from those
miseries that would happen the Colony. Samuel their other consort Powhatan kept
for their pledge, whose diligence had provided them three hundred of their
kind of hatchets; the rest fifty swords, eight pieces, and eight pikes.
Brynton and Richard Salvage seeing the Dutchmen so diligent to accommodate the
Saluages with weapons, attempted to have gotten to James town, but they were
apprehended, and expected ever when to be put to death. The Dutch men furnish
the Saluages with Arms.


Within two or three days we arrived at Pamavnkee, the King as many days
entertained us with feasting and much mirth. And the day appointed to begin
our trade, the President, Lieutenant Percie, Mr. West, Mr. Russell, Mr.
Behethland, Mr. Crashaw* Mr. Powell, Mr. Ford, and some others to the number of
fifteen, went up to Opechancanoughs house a quarter of a mile from the river)
where we found nothing but a lame fellow and a boy: and all the houses round
about of all things abandoned. Not long we stayed ere the King arrived, and
after him came diverse of his people laden with bows and arrows: but such
pinching commodities, and those esteemed at such a value, as our Captain began
with the King after this manner. Smiths Speech to Opechancanough.


Opechancanough, the great love you profess with your tongue, seems mere
deceit by your actions. Last year you kindly fraughted out ship: but now you
have invited me to starve with hunger: you know my want, and I your plenty; of
which by some means I must have part: remember it is fit for Kings to keep
their promise. Here are my commodities; whereof take your choice, the rest I
will proportion fit bargains for your people.

The King seemed kindly to accept his offer, and the better to color his
project, sold us what they had to our own content, promising the next day more
company, better provided. The Barges and Pinnace being committed to the charge
of Mr. Phetiplace; the President with his old fifteen marched up to the Kings
house, where we found four or five men newly arrived, each with a great
basket. Not long after came the King, 700. Saluages beset the English being but
16.
who with a strained cheerfulness held us with discourse what pains he had
taken to keep his promise; till Mr. Russell brought us in news that we were
all betrayed: for at least seven hundred Saluages well armed, had environed the
house, and beset the fields. The King coniecturing what Russell related, we
could well perceive how the extremity of his fear bewrayed his intent: whereat
some of our company seeming dismayed with the thought of such a multitude; the
Captain encouraged us to this effect.

Worthy Contrymen, Smiths speech to his Company.
were the mischiefs of my seeming friends no more then the danger of these
enemies, I little cared were they as many more: if you dare do, but as I. But
this is my torment, that if I escape them, our malicious Council with their
open mouthed Minions, will make me such a peace breaker (in their opinions in
England) as will break my neck. I could wish those here, that make these
seem Saints, and me an oppressor. But this is the worst of all, wherein I pray
you aid me with your opinions. Should we begin with them and surprise the
King, we cannot keep him and defend well our selves. If we should each kill
our man, and so proceed with all in the house; the rest will all fly: then
shall we get no more then the bodies that are slain, and so starve for
victual. As for their fury it is the least danger, for well you know, being
alone assaulted with two or three hundred of them, I made them by the help of
God compound to save my life. And we are sixteen, and they but seven hundred
at the most; and assure your selves, God will so assist us, that if you dare
stand but to discharge your pieces, the very smoke will be sufficient to
affright them. Yet howsoever, let us fight like men, and not die like sheep:
for by that means you know God has often delivered me, and so I trust will
now. But first, I will deal with them, to bring it to pass we may fight for
something, and draw them to it by conditions. If you like this motion, promise
me you will be valiant.

The time not permitting any argument, all vowed to execute whatsoever he
attempted, or die: whereupon the Captain in plain terms told the King this.

I see Opechancanough your plot to murder me, but I fear it not. Smiths offer
to Opechancanough.
As yet your men and mine have done no harm, but by our direction. Take
therefore your Arms, you see mine, my body shall be as naked as yours: the
Isle in your river is a fit place, if you be contented: and the conqueror (of
us two) shall be Lord and Master over all our men. If you have not enough, take
time to fetch more, and bring what number you will; so every one bring a basket
of corn, against all which I will stake the value in copper, you see I have
but fifteen, and our game shall be, the Conqueror take all.

The King being guarded with forty or fifty of his chief men, Opecahncanoughs
deuic^ to betray Smith.
seemed kindly to appease Smiths suspicion of unkindness, by a great present
at the door, they entreated him to receive. This was to draw him out of the
door, where the bait was guarded with at least two hundred men, and thirty
lying under a great tree (that lay thwart as a barricado) each his arrow nocked
ready to shoot. The President commanded one to go see what what kind of deceit
this was, and to receive the present; but he refused to do it: yet the
Gentlemen and all the rest were importunate to go, but he would not permit
them, being vexed at that Coward: and commanded Lieutenant Percie, Master West,
and the rest to make good the house; Master Powell and Master Behethland he
commanded to guard the door, and in such a rage snatched the King by his long
lock in the midst of his men, Smith takes the King prisoner.
with his Pistol ready bent against his breast. Thus he led the trembling
King, near dead with fear amongst all his people: who delivering the Captain
his Vambrace, Bow, and Arrows, all his men were easily entreated to cast down
their Arms, little dreaming any durst in that manner have used their King: who
then to escape himself bestowed his presents in good sadness, and causing a
great many of them come before him unarmed, holding the King by the hair (as
is said) he spoke to them to this effect.

I see ( you Pamavnkees) the great desire you have to kill me, and my long
suffering your injuries has imboldened you to this presumption. The cause I
have forborne your insolences, Smiths discourse to the Pamavnkees.
is the promise I made you (before the God I serve) to be your friend, till you
give me just cause to be your enemy. If I keep this vow, my God will keep me,
you cannot hurt me, if I break it, he will destroy me. But if you shoot but
one Arrow to shed one drop of blood of any of my men, or steal the least of
these Beads, or Copper, I spurn here before you with my foot; you shall see I
will not cease revenge (if once I begin) so long as I can hear where to find
one of your Nation that will not deny the name of Pamavnk. I am not now at
Rassaweak half drowned with mire, where you took me prisoner; yet then for
keeping your promise and your good usage and saving my life, I so affect you,
that your denyals of your treachery, do half persuade me to mistake my self.
But if I be the mark you aim at, here I stand, shoot he that dare. You
promised to fraught my Ship ere I departed, and so you shall, or I mean to
load her with your dead carcasses, yet if as friends you will come and trade, I
once more promise not to trouble you, except you give me the first occasion,
and your King shall be free and be my friend, for I am not come to hurt him or
any of you.

Upon this away went their Bows and Arrows, and men, women, and children
brought in their Commodities: The Salvages dissemble their intent.
two or three hours they so thronged about the President and so overwearied
him, as he retired himself to rest, leaving Mr Behethland and Mr Powell to
receive their presents, but some Salvages perceiving him fast asleep, and the
guard somewhat carelessly dispersed, forty or (...) of their choi^e men each
with a club, or an English sword in his hand began to enter the house with two
or three hundred others, that pressed to second them. The noise and have they
made in, did so shake the house they awoke him from his sleep, and being half
amazed with this sudden sight, bet^oke him strait to his sword and Target; Mr
Chrashaw and some others charged in like manner; whereat they quickly thronged
faster back then before forward. The house thus cleansed, the King and some of
his ancients we kept yet with him, Their excuse and reconcilement.
who with a long Oration, excused this intrusion. The rest of the day was spent
with much kindness, the company again renewing their presents with their
best provisions, and whatsoever he gave them they seemed therewith well
contented.

Now in the mean while since our departure, this happened at our Fort. Master
Scrivener having received Letters from England to make himself either Caesar
or nothing, he began to decline in his affection to Captain Smith, that ever
regarded him as himself, and was willing to cross the surprising of Powhatan*
Some certain days after the Presidents departure, he would needs go visit
the Isle of Hogs, and took with him Captain Waldo (though the President had
appointed him to be ready to second his occasions) with Mr Anthony Gosnoll and
eight others; but so violent was the wind (that extreme frozen time) that the
Boat sunk, but where or how none does know. The loss of Mr. Scrivener and
others with a Skiff.
The Skiff was much over laden, and would scarce have lived in that extreme
tempest had she been empty: but by no persuasion he could be diverted, though
both Waldo and an hundred others doubted as it happened. The Salvages were the
first that round their bodies, which so much the more encouraged them to effect
their proiects. To advertise the President of this heavy news, none could be
found would undertake it, but the Journey was often refused of all in the Fort,
until Master Richard Wyffin undertook alone the performance thereof.

In this Journey he was incountred with many dangers and difficulties in all
parts as he passed. Master Wyffins desperate journey.
As for that night he lodged with Powhatan, perceiving such preparation for
war, not finding the President there: he did assure himself some mischief
was intended. Pocahontas hid him for a time, and sent them who pursued him the
clean contrary way to seek him; but by her means and extraordinry bribes and
much trouble in three days travel, at length he found us in the midst of
these turmoyles. This unhappy news the President swore him to conceal from
the company, and so di^^embling his sorrow with the best countenances he could,
when the night approached went safely aboard with all his Soldiers; leaving
Opechancanough at liberty, according to his promise, the better to have
Powhatan in his return.

Powhatan constrains his men to be treacherous.
Now so extremely Powhatan had threatened the death of his men, if they did not
by some means kill Captain Smith; that the next day they appointed all the
country should come to trade unarmed: yet unwilling to be treacherous, but that
they were constrained, hating fighting with him almost as ill as hanging, such
fear they had of bad success. The next morning the Sun had not long
appeared, but the fields appeared covered with people and Baskets, to tempt us
on shore: but nothing was to be had without his presence, nor they would not
endure the sight of a gun. When the President saw them begin to depart, The
third attempt to betray us.
being unwilling to loose such a booty, he so well conceived the Pinnace, and
his Barges with Ambuscadoes, as only with Lieutenant Percie, Mr West, and Mr
Russell, with their Arms went on shore; others he appointed unarmed to receive
what was brought. The Salvages flocked before him in heaps, and the bank
serving as a trench for a retreat, he drew them fair open to his Ambuscado's.
For he not being to be persuaded to go visit their King* the King knowing the
most of them unarmed, came to visit him with two or three hundred men, in the
form of two half Moons; and with some twenty men, and many women laden
with painted Baskets. But when they approached somewhat near us, their women
and children ^led. For when they had environed and beset the fields in this
manner, they thought their purpose sure, yet so trembled with fear as they
were scarce able to ^^ck their Arrows: Smith standing with his three men ready
bent, beholding them till they were within danger of our Ambuscado's, who upon
the word di^cov^r^d themselves, and he retired to the Barge. Which the Salvages
no sooner perceived, then away they fled, esteeming their heels for their best
advan^age.

That night we sent Mr Chr^shaw, and Mr Ford to James town to Cap. Win* In
the way between Wer^wocomoco and the Fort they met four or five of the
Dutch-mens Confederates going to Powhatan: the which to excuse those Gentlemen's
suspicion of their running to the Salvages, returned to the Fort and there
continued.

The Salvages hearing our Barge go down the river in the night, were so
terribly affrayde, that we sen^ for more men (we having to much threatened their
ruin, A chain of pearl sent to obtain peace.
and the rasing of their houses, boats, and wires) that the next day the King
sent our Captain a chain of Pearl, to alter his purpose and stay his men:
promising though they wanted t^emselues, to fraught our ship and bring it
aboard to avoid suspicion. So that five or six days after, from all parts of
the Country within ten or twelve miles in the extreme frost and snow, they
brought us provision on their naked backs.

Yet notwithstanding this kindness and trade, had their art and poison been
sufficient, the President, with Mr West, and some others had been poisoned;
The President poisoned: the offend^r punished.
it made them sick, but exp^ll^d it self. Wecuttanow, a stout young fellow,
knowing he was suspected for bringing this present of poison, with forty or
fifty of his chief companions (seeing the President but with a few men at
Potavneak) so proudly braued it, as though he expected to encounter a revenge.
Which the President perceiving in the midst of hi^ company, did not only
beat, but spurned him like a dog, as scorning to do him any worse
mischief. Whereupon all of them fled into the woods, thinking they had done a
great matter to have so well escaped: and the townsmen remaining presently
fraughted our Barge to be rid of our companies, framing many ^^c^ses to excuse
Wecuttanow, (being son to their chief King, but Po^hatan) and told us if we
would show them him that brought the poison, they would deliver him to us to
punish as we pleased. Men may think it strange there should be such a stir
for a little corn, but had it been gold with more ease we might have got it;
and had it wanted, the whole Colony had starued. We may be thought very
patient to endure all those injuries, yet only with fearing them we got what
they had. Whereas if we had taken revenge, then by their loss, we should have
lost our selves. We searched also the Countries of Youghtanund and
Mattapanient, The Salvages want and poverty.
where the people imparted that little they had with such complaints and tears
from the eyes of women and children, as he had been too cruel to have been a
Christian, that would not have been satisfied and moved with compassion. But
had this happened in October, November, and December, when that unhappy
discovery of Monacan was made, we might have fraughted a ship of forty tuns,
and twice as much might have been had from the Rivers of Rapahanock,
Patawomek, and Pawtuaunt.

The maine occasion of our thus temporizing with them was, to part friends as
we did, to give the less cause of suspicion to Powhatan to fly, by whom we now
returned with a purpose to have surprised him and his provision. For effecting
whereof (when we came against the Town) the President sent Mr Wyffin and Mr
Coe ashore to discover and make way for his intended project. But they found
that those damned Dutchmen had caused Powhatan to abandon his new house and
Werowocomoco, The Dutchmen did much hurt.
and to carry away all his corn and provision: and the people they found so
ill affected, that they were in great doubt how to escape with their lives. So
the President finding his intent frustrated, and that there was nothing now to
be had, and therefore an unfit time to revenge their abuses, sent Master
Michael Phittiplace by Land to James town, whether we sailed with all the
speed we could; we having in this Journey (for 25^. of Copper, and 50^. of
Iron and Beads) enough to keep 46 men six weeks, and every man for his reward
a months provision extraordinary (no Trade being allowed but for the store) we
got near ^00^ weight of dear suct, and delivered to the Cape Merchant 479
Bushels of Corn.

Those temporizing proceedings to some may seem too charitable, to such a
daily daring treacherous people: to others not pleasing, that we washed not the
gr^und with their bloods, nor showed such strange inventions in mangling,
murdering, ransacking, and destroying (as did the Spaniards) the simple bodies
of such ignorant souls; nor delightful, because not stuffed with Relations of
heaps and ioynes of gold and silver, nor such rare commodities, as the
Portugals and Spany^rds found in the East and West Indies. The want whereof
has begot us (that were the first undertakers) no less sco^ne and contempt,
then the noble conquests and valiant adventures beautified with it, praise and
honor. Too much I confess the world cannot attribute to their ever memorable
merit: and to clear us from the blind worlds ignorant censure, these few words
may suffice any reasonable understanding.

An Apology for the first Planters.
It was the Spaniards good hap to happen in those parts where were infinite
numbers of people, who had manured the ground with that providence, it
affoorded victuals at all times. And time had brought them to that perfection,
they had the use of gold and silver, and the most of such commodities as those
Countries affoorded: so that, what the Spanyard got was chiefly the spoil and
pillage of those Country people, and not the labors of their own hands. But
had those fruitful Countries been as salvage, as barbarous, as ill peopled,
as little planted, labored, and manured, as Virginia: their proper labors it
is likely would have produced as small profit as ours. But had Virginia been
peopled, planted, manured, and adorned with such store of precious Jewels, and
rich commodities as was the Indies: then had we not gotten and done as much as
by their examples might be expected from us, the world might then have traduced
us and our merits, and have made shame and infamy our recompense and reward.

But we chanced in a Land even as God made it, where we found only an idle,
improvident, scattered people, ignorant of the knowledge of gold or silver, or
any commodities, and careless of any thing but from hand to mouth, except
bables of no worth; nothing to encourage us, but what accidentally we found
Nature afforded. Which ere we could bring to recompense our pains, defray our
charges, and satisfy our Adventurers; we were to discover the Country, subdue
the people, bring them to be tractable, civil, and industrious, and teach them
trades, that the fruits of their labors might make us some recompense, or
plant such Colonies of our own, that must first make provision how to live of
themselves, ere they can bring to perfection the commodities of the Country:
which doubtless will be as commodious for England as the west Indies for
Spain, if it be rightly managed: notwithstanding all our homebred opinions,
that will argue the contrary, as formerly some have done against the Spaniards
and Portugalls. But to conclude, against all rumor of opinion, I only say
this, for those that the three first years began this Plantation;
notwithstanding all their factions, mutinies, and miseries, so gently
corrected, and well prevented: pervse the Spanish Decades; the Relations of
Master Hackl^^, and tell me how many ever with such small means as a Barge of
22 tuns, sometimes with seven, eight, or nine, or but at most, twelve or
sixteen men, did ever discover so many fair and navigable Rivers, subject so
many several Kings, people, and Nations, to obedience, and contribution, with
so little bloodshed.

And if in the search of those Countries we had happened where wealth had been,
we had as surely had it as obedience and contribution, but if we have
overskipped it, we will not envy them that shall find it: yet can we not but
lament, it was our fortunes to end when we had but only learned how to begin,
and found the right course how to proceed.

By Richard Wyffin, William Phittiplace, Ieffrey Abbot, and Anas Todkill.
CHAP. X. How the Salvages became subject to the English.
WHen the Ships departed, all the provision of the Store (but that the
President had gotten) was so rotten with the last Summers rain, and eaten with
Rats and Worms, as the Hogs would scarcely eat it. Yet it was the Soldiers
diet till our returns, so that we found nothing done, but our victuals spent,
and the most part of our tools, and a good part of our Arms conveyed to the
Salvages. But now casting up the Store, and finding sufficient till the next
harvest, the fear of starving was abandoned, and the company divided into
tens, fifteens, or as the business required; six hours each day was spent in
work, the rest in Pastime and merry exercises, but the untowardness of the
greatest number caused the President advise as follows.

Countrymen, the long experience of our late miseries, The Presidents advice to
the Company.
I hope is sufficient to persuade every one to a present correction of
himself, and think not that either my pains, nor the Adventurers purses, will
ever maintain you in idleness and sloth. I speak not this to you all, for
diverse of you I know deserve both honor and reward, better then is yet here to
be had: but the greater part must be more industrious, or starve, how ever you
have been heretofore tolerated by the authority of the Council, from that I
have often commanded you. You see now that power rests wholly in my self:
you must obey this now for a Law, that he that will not work shall not eat
(except by sickness he be disabled:) for the labors of thirty or forty
honest and industrious men shall not be consumed to maintain an hundred and
fifty idle loyterers. And though you presume the authority here is but a
shadow, and that I dare not touch the lives of any but my own must answer it:
the Letters patents shall each week be read to you, whose Contents will tell
you the contrary. I would wish you therefore without contempt seek to observe
these orders set down, for there are now no more Counselors to protect you,
nor curb my endeavors. Therefore he that offends, let him assuredly expect
his due punishment.

He made also a Table, as a public memorial of every man's deserts, to
encourage the good, and with shame to spur on the rest to amendment. By this
many became very industrious, yet more by punishment performed their business,
for all were so tasked, that there was no excuse could prevail to deceive him:
yet the Dutch-mens consorts so closely convayed them powder, shot, swords, and
tools, that though we could find the defect, we could not find by whom, till
it was too late.

All this time the Dutch men remaining with Powhatan, The Dutch-mens plot to
murder Cap. Smith.
(who kindly entertained them to instruct the Salvages the use of our Arms)
and their consorts not following them as they expected; to know the cause, they
sent Francis their companion, a stout young fellow, disguised like a Salvage,
to the Glasse-house, a place in the woods near a mile from James Town; where
was their Rendezvous for all their unsuspected villainy. Forty men they
procured to lie in Ambuscado for Captain Smith, who no sooner heard of this
Dutchman, but he sent to apprehend him (but he was gone) yet to cross his
return to Powhatan, the Captain presently dispatched 20. shot after him,
himself returning from the Glasse-house alone. By the way he incountred the
King of Pasp^hegh, a most strong stout Salvage, whose persuasions not being
able to persuade him to his Ambush, seeing him only armed but with a fau^heon,
Smith takes the King of Paspahegh prisoner.
attempted to have shot him, but the President prevented his shoot by grapling
with him, and the Salvage as well prevented him for drawing his faucheon, and
perforce bore him into the River to have drowned him. Long they strugled in the
water, till the President got such hold on his throat, he had near strangled
the King; but having drawn his faucheon to cut off his head, seeing how
pitifully he begged his life, he led him prisoner to James Town, and put him
in chains.

The Dutchman ere long was also brought in, whose villainy though all this time
it was suspected, yet he feigned such a formal excuse, that for want of
language Captain Win understood him not rightly, and for their dealings with
Powhatan, that to save their lives they were constrained to accommodate his
arms, of whom he extremely complained to have detained them perforce, and
that he made this escape with the hazard of his life, and meant not to have
returned, but was only walking in the woods to gather Walnuts. Yet for all
this fair tale, there was so small appearance of truth, and the plain
confession of Paspahegh of his treachery, he went by the heels: Smith purposing
to regaine the Dutchmen, by the saving his life. The poor Salvage did his
best by his daily messengers to Powhatan, but all returned that the Dutchmen
would not return, neither did Powhatan stay them; and to bring them fifty
miles on his men's backs they were not able. Daily this Kings wives, children,
and people came to visit him with presents, which he liberally bestowed to make
his peace. Much trust they had in the Presidents promise: but the King finding
his guard negligent, though fettered yet escaped. Captain Win thinking to
pursue him found such troops of Salvages to hinder his passage, as they
exchanged many vollies of shot for flights of Arrows. Captain Smith hearing
of this in returning to the Fort, Cap. Smith takes two Salvages prisoners.
took two Salvages prisoners, called Kemps and Tussore, the two most exact
villains in all the Country. With these he sent Captain Win and fifty
choice men, and Lieutenant Percie, to have regained the King, and revenged this
injury, and so had done, if they had followed his directions, or been advised
with those two villains, that would have betrayed both King and kindred for a
piece of Copper, but he trifling away the night, the Salvages the next morning
by the rising of the Sun, braved him to come ashore to fight: a good time
both sides let fly at other, but we heard of no hurt, only they took two
Canowes, burnt the Kings house, and so returned to James town.

The Salvages desire Peace.
The President fearing those Bravado's would but encourage the Salvages, began
again himself to try his conclusions, whereby six or seven were slain, as
many made prisoners. He burnt their houses, took their Boats, with all their
fishing wires, and planted some of them at James town for his own use, and
now resolved not to cease till he had revenged himself of all them had injured
him. But in his journey passing by Paspahegh toward Chickahamania, the
Salvages did their best to draw him to their Ambuscadoes; but seeing him
regardlesly pass their Country, all showed themselves in their bravest manner.
To try their valors he could not but let fly, and ere he could land, they no
sooner knew him, but they threw down their arms and desired peace. Their
Orator was a lusty young fellow called Okaning, whose worthy discourse
deserves to be remembered. And thus it was:

Okaning his Oration.
Captain Smith, my Master is here present in the company, thinking it Capt.
Win, and not you, (of him he intended to have been revenged) having never
offended him. If he has offended you in escaping your imprisonment, the fishes
swim, the fowls fly, and the very beasts strive to escape the snare and live.
Then blame not him being a man. He would entreat you remember, you being a
prisoner, what pains he took to save your life. If since he has injured you
he was compelled to it: but howsoever, you have revenged it with our too great
loss. We perceive and well know you intend to destroy us, that are here to
entreat and desire your friendship, and to enjoy our houses and plant our
fields, of whose fruit you shall participate: otherwise you will have the worse
by our absence; for we can plant any where, though with more labor, and we
know you cannot live if you want our harvest, and that relief we bring you. If
you promise us peace, we will believe you; if you proceed in revenge we will
abandon the Country.

Upon these terms the President promised them peace, till they did us injury,
upon condition they should bring in provision. Thus all departed goods friends,
and so continued till Smith left the Country.

Arriving at James Town, complaint was made to the President, A Salvage
smoothered at James town, and recovered.
that the Chickahamanians, who all this while continued trade and seemed our
friends, by color thereof were the only thieves. And amongst other things a
Pistol being stolen and the thief fled, there was apprehended two proper
young fellows, that were brothers, known to be his confederates. Now to
regaine this Pistol, the one was imprisoned, the other was sent to return the
Pistol again within twelve hours, or his brother to be hanged. Yet the
President pitying the poor naked Salvage in the dungeon, sent him victual
and some Char-coale for a fire: ere midnight his brother returned with the
Pistol, but the poor Salvage in the dungeon was so smoothered with the smoke
he had made, and so pittiously burnt, that we found him dead. The other most
lamentably bewayed his death, and broke forth into such bitter agonies, that
the President to quiet him, told him that if hereafter they would not steal,
he would make him alive again: but he little thought he could be recovered.
Yet we doing our best with Aqua vitae and Vinegar, it pleased God to restore
him again to life, but so drunk and affrighted, that he seemed Lunaticke, the
which as much tormented and grieved the other, as before to see him dead. Of
which malady upon promise of their good behavior, the President promised to
recover him: and so caused him to be laid by a fire to sleep, who in the
morning having well slept, had recovered his perfect senses, and then being
dressed of his burning, and each a piece of Copper given them, they went away
so well contented, that this was spread among all the Salvages for a miracle,
that Captain Smith could make a man alive that was dead.

Another ingenuous Salvage of Powhatans, having gotten a great bag of Powder,
Two or three Salvages slain in drying Powder.
and the back of an Armor, at Werowocomoco amongst a many of his companions,
to show his extraordinary skill, he did dry it on the back as he had seen the
Soldiers at James Town. But he dried it so long, they peeping over it to see
his skill, it took fire, and blew him to death, and one or two more, and the
rest so scorched, they had little pleasure to meddle any more with powder.

These and many other such pretty Accidents, so amazed and affrighted both
Powhatan, and all his people, that from all parts with presents they desired
peace; returning many stolen things which we never demanded nor thought of; and
after that, those that were taken stealing, both Powhatan and his people have
sent them back to James town, to receive their punishment; and all the
Country became absolute as free for us, as for themselves.

CHAP. XI. What was done in three months having Victuals. The Store devoured
by Rats, how we lived three months of such natural fruits as the Country
affoorded.
NOw we so quietly followed our business, that in three months we made three
or four Last of Tar, Pitch, and Soap ashes; produced a trial of Glass;
made a Well in the Fort of excellent sweet water, which till then was wanting;
built some twenty houses; recovered our Church; provided Nets and Wires for
fishing; and to stop the disorders of our disorderly thieves, and the Salvages,
built a Blockhouse in the neck of our Isle, kept by a Garrison to entertain
the Saluages trade, and none to pass nor repasse Saluage nor Christian without
the presidents order. Thirty or forty Acres of ground we dug and planted.
Of three sowes in eighteen months, increased 60, and od Piggs. And near 500.
chickings brought up themselves without having any meat given them: but the
Hogs were transported to Hog^Isle: where also we built a block-house with a
garrison to give us notice of any shipping, and for their exercise they made
Clapbord and waynicot, and cut down trees. We built also a fort for a retreat
near a conuement River upon a high commanding hill, very hard to be assalted
and easy to be defended, but ere it was finished this defect caused a stay.

Great extremity by Rats.
In searching our casked corn, we found it half rotten, and the rest so
consumed with so many thousands of Rats that increased so fast, out there
original was from the ships, as we knew not how to keep that little we had.
This did drive us all to our wits end, for there was nothing in the country but
what nature afforded. Until this time Kemps and Tassore were fettered
prisoners, and did double task and taught us how to order and plant our
fields: whom now for want of victual we set at liberty, but so well they liked
our companies they did not desire to go from us. And to express their loves
for 16. days continuance, the Country people brought us (when least) 100. a
day, of Squirrils, Turkyes, Dear and other wild beasts: But this want of
corn occasioned the end of all our works, it being work sufficient to provide
victual. 60. or 80. with Ensign Laxon was sent down the river to live upon
Oysters, and 20. with liutenant Percy to try for fishing at Point Comfort ^ but
in six weeks they would not agree once to cast out the net, he being sick and
burnt fore with Gun-pouder. Master West with as many went up to the falls, but
nothing could be found but a few Acornes; of that in store every man had their
equal proportion. Till this present, by the hazard and endeavors of some
thirty or forty, this whole Colony had ever been fed. Bread made of dried
Sturgeon.
We had more Sturgeon, then could be devoured by Dog and Man, of which the
industrious by drying and pounding, mingled with Caviar^, Sorell and other
wholesome herbs would make bread and good meat: others would gather as much
Tockwhogh roots, in a day as would make them bread a week, so that of those
wild fruits, and what we caught, we lived very well in regard of such a diet,
But such was the strange condition of some 150, that had they not been forced
nolens, volens, perforce to gather and prepare their victual they would all
have starued or have eaten one another. Of those wild fruits the Salvages often
brought us, and for that, the President would not fulfill the unreasonable
desire, of those distracted Gluttonous Loyterers, to sell not only out kettles,
hows, Their desire to destroy themselves.
tools, and Iron, nay swords, pieces, and the very Ordnance and howses, might
they have prevayled to have been but Idle: for those Saluage fruits, they
would have had imparted all to the Saluages, especially for one basket of Corn
they heard of to be at Powhata^s, fifty miles from our Fort. Though he bought
near half of it to satisfy their humors, yet to have had the other half,
they would have sold their souls, though not sufficient to have kept them a
week. Thousands were there exclamations, suggestions and devises, to force him
to those base inventions to have made it an occasion to abandon the Country.
Want perforce constrained him to endure their exclaiming follies, till he found
out the author, one Dyer a most crafty fellow and his ancient Maligner, whom he
worthily punished, and with the rest he argued the case in this manner.

The Presidents order for the drones
Fellow soldiers, I did little think any so false to report, or so many to be
so simple to be persuaded, that I either intend to starve you, or that Powhatan
at this present has corn for himself, much less for you; or that I would
not have it, if I knew where it were to be had. Neither and I think any so
malicious as now I see a great many; yet it shall not so passionate me, but I
will do my best for my most maligner. But dream no longer of this vain hope
from Powhatan, not that I will longer forbear to force you, from your
Idleness, and punish you if you rail. But if I find any more runners for
Newfoundland with the Pinnace, let him assuredly look to ariue at the Gallows.
You cannot deny but that by the hazard of my life many a time I have saved
yours, when (might your own wills have prevailed) you would have starued; and
will do still whether I will or not; But I protest by that God that made me,
since necessity has not power to force you to gather for your selves those
fruits the earth does y^eld, you shall not only gather for your selves, but
those that are sick. As yet I never had more from the stor^ then the worst of
you: and all my English extraordinary provision that I have, you shall see me
divide it amongst the sick. And this Saluage trash you so scornfully repine at;
being put in your mouths your stomachs can digest, if you would have better
you should have brought it; and therefore I will take a course you shall
provide what is to be had. The sick shall not starve, but equally share of all
our labors; and he that gathers not every day as much as I do, the next day
shall be set beyond the river, and be banished from the Fort as a drove, till
he amend his conditions or starve. But some would say with Seneca.

I know those things thou say are true good Nurse,
But fury forces me to follow worse.
My man is burried headlong up and down:
Desiring better counsel, yet finds none.
This order many murmured was very cruel, But seven of 200 dyed in nine
moneth^.
but it caused the most part so well ^^^tirre themselves, that of 200. (^xcept
they were drowned) there died not past seven as: for Captain Win and Master
Leigh they were dead ere this want happened, and the rest dyed not so, want of
^uch as preserved the rest. Many were billetted amongst the Saluage, ^h^r^oy we
knew all their passages, fields and habitations, how t^ gather and use there
fruits as well as themselves; for they did know we had such a commanding power
at James town they durst not wrong us of a pin.

So well those poor Salvages used us that were thus billetted, The Salvages
return our fugitives.
that diverse of the S^uldiers ran away to search Kemps and Tassore our old
prisoners. Glad were these Salvages to have such an opportunity to testify
their love unto us, for in stead of entertaining them, and such things as they
had stolen, with all their great Offers, and promises they made them how to
revenge their iniuryes upon Captain Smith; Kemps first mad^ himself sport, in
showing his country men (^y them) how he was used, feeding ^e^ with this law,
who would not work must not eat, till they were near starued in ^^^de,
continually threatening to beat them to death: neither could they get from him,
till he and his consorts brought them perforce to our Captain, that so well
contented him and punished them, as many others that intended also to follow
them, were rather contented to labor at home, then adventure to live idl^ly
amongst the Salvages; (of whom there was more hope to make better Christians
(...) good subjects, then the one half of those that counterfeited themselves
both.) For so affraide was (...) those kings and the better sort of the people
to displease us, that some of the baser sort that we have extremely hurt and
punished for there villainies would hire us, we should not tell it to their
kings, or countrymen, who would also repunish them, and yet return them to
James town to content the President for a testimony of their loves.

Master Sicklemore well returned from Chawwonoke; Master Sicklemores Journey to
Chawwonoke
but found little hope and less certainty of them were left by Sir Walter
Raleigh. The river, he saw was not great, the people few, the country most
over grown with pynes, where there did grow here and there straglingly
Pemminaw, we call silk grass. But by the river the ground was good, and
exceeding furtill;

Master Powels journey to the Mangoags.
Master Nathanael powell and Anas Todkill were also by the Quiyoughquohanocks
conducted to the Mangoags to search them there: but nothing could they learn
but they were all dead. This honest proper good promise keeping king, of all
the rest did ever best affect us, and though to his false Gods he was very
zealous, yet he would confess our God as much exceeded his as our Gunns did
his Bow and Arrows, often sending our President may presents, to pray to his
God for rain or his corn would perish, for his Gods were angry. Three days
journey they conducted them through the wood^, into a high country toward the
S^^thwest: ^here they saw here and there a little c^rne fi^^d, by some little
spring or small brook, but no river they could see: the pe^^le in all re^pects
like the rest, except there language: they live most upon roots, fruits and
wild beast^; and trade with them toward the sea and the fatter countries for
dried fish and corn, for sk^ns.

The Dutch men's proiects.
All this time to recover the Dutchmen and one Bentley another fugitive, we
employed one Willi^m Volday, a Zwitzar by birth, with Pardons and promises to
regaine them. Little we then suspected this double villain of any villainy; who
plainly taught us, in the most trust was the greatest treason; for this wicked
hypocrite, by the seeming hate he bore to the lewd conditions of his cursed
country men, (having this opportunity by his employment to regaine them)
conuayed them every thing they desired to e^fect their proiects, to distroy the
Colony. With much devotion they expected the Spaniard, to whom they intended
good service, or any other, that would but carry them from us. But to begin
with the ^^rst opportunity; th^^ se^ing necessity thus enforced us to disperse
our selves, importuned Powhatan to lend them but his forces, and they would not
only distroy our Hoggs, fire our town, and betray our Pinnace; but bring to
his service and subjection the most of our company. With this plot they had
acquainted many Discontents, and many were agreed to their Deuilish practice.
But one Thomas Douse, and Thomas Mallard (whose christian hearts relented at
such an unchristian act) voluntarily revealed it to Captain Smith, who caused
them to conceal it, persuading ^ouse and Mallard to proceed in their
confedracie: only to bring the irreclamable Dutch men and the inconstant
Salvages in such a manner amongst such Ambuscado's as he had prepared* that not
many of the^ should return from our Peninsula. But this brute coming to the
^ares of the impatie^t multitude they so importuned the President to cut off
those Dutch men, as amongst many that offered to cut their throats before the
face of Powhata^, the first was Lieutena^t Percy, and Mr. John Cuderington, two
Gentlemen of as bold resolute spirits as could possibly be found. But the
President had occasion of other imploiment for them, and gave gave way to
Master Wyffin and Sarieant Ieffrey Abbot, to go and stab them or shoot them.
Two Gentlemen sent to the Germans.
But the Dutch men made such excuses, accusing Velday whom they supposed had
revealed their project, as Abbot would not, yet Wyffing would, perceiving it
but deceit. The King understanding of this their employment, sent presently his
messengers to Captain Smith to signify it was not his fault to detain them,
nor hinder his men from executing his command: nor did he nor would he mantaine
them, or any to occasion his disple^sure.

The first arrival of Captain Argall.
But whilst this business was in hand, Arrived one Captain Argall, and Master
Thomas Sedan, sent by Master Cornelius to truck with the Colony, and fish for
Sturgeon, with a ship well furnished, with wine and much other good provision.
Though it was not sent us, our necessities was such as enforced us to take it.
He brought us news of a great supply and preparation for the Lord La Woore,
with letters that much taxed our President for his heard dealing with the
Salvages, and not returning the ships fraughted. Notwithstanding we kept this
ship tell the fleere arrived. True it is Argall lost his voyage, but we
renictualled him, and sent him for England, with a true relation of the causes
of our defailments, and how imposible it was to return that wealth they
expected, or observe there instructions to endure the Salvages insolences, or
do any thing to any purpose, except they would send us men and means that
could produce that they so much desired: otherwises all they did was lost, and
could not but come to confusion. The villainy of Volday we still dissembled.
Adam upon his pardon came home but Samuel still stayed with Powhahan to hear
further of their estates by this supply. Now all their plots Simth so well
understood; they were his best advantages to secure us from any treachery, could
be done by them or the Salvages: which with facility he could revenge when he
would, because all those countries more feared him then Powhatan, and he had
such parties with all his bordering neighbors: and many of the rest for love
or fear would have done any thing he would have them, upon any commotion,
though these fugitives had done all they could to persuade Powhatan, King James
would kill Smith, for using him and his people so unkindly.

By this you may see for all those crosses, trecheries, and dissentions, Note
these inconveniences.
how he wrestled and overcame (without bloodshed) all that happened: also what
good was done; how few dyed; what food the Country naturally affoordeth; what
small cause there is men should starve, or be murdered by the Salvages, that
have discretion to manage them with courage and industry. The two first
years, though by his adventures, he had often brought the Salvages to a
tractable trade, yet you see how the envious authority ever crossed him, and
frustrated his best endeavors. But it wrought in him that experience and
estimation amongst the Salvages, as otherwise it had bin impossible, he had
ever effected that he did. Notwithstanding the many miserable, yet generous and
worthy adventures, he had often and long endured in the wide world, yet in this
case he was again to learn his Lecture by experience. Which with thus much
ado having obtained, it was his ill chance to end, when he had but only
learned how to begin. And though he left those unknown difficulties (made
easy and familiar) to his unlawful successors, (who only by living in James
Town, presumed to know more then all the world could direct them:) Now though
they had all his Soldiers, with a tripple power, and twice tripple better
means; by what they have done in his absence, the world may see what they
would have done in his presence, had he not prevented their indiscretions: it
does justly prove, what cause he had to send them for England, and that he was
neither factious, mutinous, nor dishonest. But they have made it more plain
since his return for England; having his absolute authority freely in their
power, with all the advantages and opportunity that his labors had effected.
As I am sorry their actions have made it so manifest, so I am unwilling to say
what reason does compel me, but only to make apparent the truth, least I
should seem partial, reasonlesse, and malicious.

CHAPTER XII. The Arrival of the third Supply.
TO redress those jarres and ill proceedings, the Treasurer, Council, The
alterat^on of the government.
and Company of Virginia, not finding that return, and profit they expected;
and them engaged there, not having means to subsist of themselves, made means
to his Majesty, to call in their Commission, and take a new in their own
names, as in their own publication, 1610. you may ^eade at large. Having thus
annihilated the old by virtue of a Commission made to the right Honorable, Sir
Thomas West, Lord de la War, to be General of Virginia; Sir Thomas Gates,
his Lieutenant; Sir George Summers, Admiral; Sir Thomas Dale, high Marshall;
Sir Fardinando Wainman, General of the Horse; and so all other offices to many
other worthy Gentlemen, for their lives: (though not any of them had ever been
in Virginia, except Captain Newport, who was also by Patent made
Vice Admiral:) those noble Gentlemen drew in such great sums of money, that
they sent Sir Thomas Gates, Sir George Summers, and Captain Newport with nine
ships, and five hundred people, who had each of them a Commission, who first
arrived to call in the old, without the knowledge or consent of them, that had
endured all those former dangers to beat the path, not any regard had at all of
them. All things being ready, because those three Captains could not agree for
place, it was concluded they should go all in one ship, so all their three
Commissions were in that Ship with them called the Sea-Venture. They set sail
from England in May 1609. Sir Thomas Smith Treasurer.
A small Catch perished at Sea in a Hericano: the Admiral with an hundred and
fifty men, with the two Knights, and their new Commission, their Bills of
Loading, with all manner of directions, and the most part of their provision
arrived not. With the other seven Ships as Captains arrived Ratliffe, The
loss of Virginia.
whose right name (as is said) was Sicklemore, Martin, and Archer, with
Captain Wood, Captain Web, Captain Moon, Captain King, Captain Davis,
and diverse Gentlemen of good means, and great parentage. But the first as they
had been troublesome at Sea, began again to mar all ashore: for though (as
is said) they were formerly sent for England, yet now returning again, graced
by the titles of Captains of the passengers, seeing the Admiral wanting, and
great probability of her loss, strengthened themselves with those new
companies, so exclaiming against Captain Smith, that they mortally hated him
ere ever they saw him. Who understanding by his Scouts the arrival of such a
Fleet, little dreaming of any such supply, supposed them Spaniards. The
Salvages offer to fight under our colors.
But he quickly so determined and ordered our affairs, as we little feared
their Arrival, nor the success of our encounter; nor were the Salvages any
way negligent for the most part, to aid and assist us with their best power.
Had it so been we had been happy; for we would not have trusted them but as
our foes, where receiving them as our Countrymen and friends, they did what
they could to murder our President, to surprise the Store, the Fort, and our
Iudgings, to usurp the government, and make us all their servants and slaves,
till they could consume us and our remembrance; and rather indeed to supplant
us then supply us, as master William Box an honest Gentleman in this voyage
thus relates.

In the tail of a Hericano we were separated from the Admiral, which
although it was but the remainder of that Storm, there is seldom any such in
England, or those Northern parts of Europe. Some lost their Masts, some their
Sails blown from their Yards; the Seas so over-raking our Ships, much of our
provision was spoiled, our Fleet separated, and our men sick, and many dyed,
and in this miserable estate we arrived in Virginia.

But in this Storm,

When rattling Thunder ran along the Clouds;
Did not the Sailors poor, and Masters proud
A terror feel as struck with fear of God?
Did not their trembling joints then dread his rod?
Least for foul deeds and black mouthed blasphemies,
The rufull time be come that vengeance cries.
Mutinies.
To a thousand mischiefs those lewd Captains led this lewd company, wherein
were many unruly Gallants, packed thither by their friends to escape ill
destinies, and those would dispose and determine of the government, sometimes
to one, the next day to another; to day the old Commission must rule, to morrow
the new, the next day neither, in fine they would rule all, or ruin all: yet
in charity we must endure them thus to destroy us, or by correcting their
follies, have brought the worlds censure upon us to be guilty of their bloods.
Happy had we been had they never arrived, and we for ever abandoned, and as
we were left to our fortunes: for on earth for the number was never more
confusion, or misery, then their factions occasioned.

The President seeing the desire those Braues had to rule; seeing how his
authority was so unexpectedly changed, would willingly have left all, and have
returned for England. But seeing there was small hope this new Commission would
arrive, longer he would not suffer those factious spirits to proceed. It would
be too tedious, too strange, and almost incredible; should I particularly
relate the infinite dangers, plots, and practices, he daily escaped amongst
this factious crew; the chief whereof he quickly laid by the heels, till his
leisure better served to do them justice: and to take away all occasions of
further mischief, Master Percie had his request granted to return for
England, being very sick; and Mr West with an hundred and twenty of the best
he could choose, The planting Nandsamund.
he sent to the F^lles; Martin with near as many to Nandsamund, with their due
proportions of all provisions according to their numbers.

Now the Presidents year being near expired, he made Captain Martin
President to follow the order for the election of a President every year: but
he knowing his own insufficiency, and the companies untowardness and little
regard of him, within three hours after resigned it again to Captain Smith,
and at Nandsamund thus proceeded. the people being contributers used him
kindly; The breach of peace with the Salvages.
yet such was his jealous fear, in the midst of their mirth, he did surprise
this poor naked King, with his Monuments, houses, and the Isle he inhabited,
and there fortified himself; but so apparently distracted with fear, as
imboldened the Salvages to assault him, kill his men, release their King,
gather and carry away a thousand bushels of Corn, he not once offering to
intercept them; but sent to the President then at the Falls for thirty good
shot; which from James Town immediately was sent him. But he so well employed
them they did just nothing, but returned complaining of his tenderness: yet he
came away with them to James Town, leaving his company to their fortunes.

Here I cannot omit the courage of George Forest, that had seauenteene Arrows
sticking in him, and one shot through him, yet lived six or seven days, as
if he had small hurt, then for want of Surgery dyed.

Master West having seated his men by the Falls, presently returned to reuisit
James Town: the President followed him to see that company seated; met him by
the way, wondering at his so quick return; and found his company planted so
inconsiderately, in a place not only subject to the rivers inundation, but
round environed with many intolerable inconveniences.

For remedy whereof he presently sent to Powhatan to sell him the place called
Powhatan, promising to defend him against the Monacans. Powhatan bought for
Copper.
And these should be his Conditions (with his people) to resign him the Fort
and houses, and all that Country for a proportion of Copper; that all stealing
offenders should be sent him, thereto receive their punishment; that every
house as a Custom should pay him a Bushel of Corn for an inch square of
Copper, and a proportion of Pocones, as a yearly tribute to King James for
their protection, as a duty; what else they could spare to barter at their
best discretions.

But both this excellent place and those good Conditions did those furies
refuse, Mutini^.
contemning both him, his kind care and authority. So much they depended on
the Lord Generals new Commission, as they regarded none: the worst they could
do to show their spights they did; supposing all the Monacans Country, gold;
and none should come there but whom they pleased. I do more then wonder to
think how only with five men, he either durst or would adventure as he did,
(knowing how greedy they were of his blood) to land amongst them, and commit
to imprisonment all the Chi^ftaines of those mutinies, Five suppress an
hundred and twenty.
till by their multitudes being an hundred and twenty they forced him to
retire: yet in that interim he surprised one of their Boats, wherewith he
returned to their ship; where in deed was their provision, which also he took,
and well it chanced he found the Mariners so tractable and constant, or there
had been small possibility he had ever escaped. There were diverse other of
better reason and experience, that from their first landing, hearing the
general good report of his old Soldiers, and seeing with their eyes his
actions so well managed with discretion, as Captain Wood, Captain Web,
Cap. Moon, Captain Fitz James, Master William Powell, Master Partridge,
Master White, and diverse others, when they perceived the malice of Ratliffe and
Archer, and their faction, left their companies, and ever rested his faithful
friends. But the worst was that the poor Salvages, that daily brought in their
contribution to the President, Breach of peace with the Salvage at the Fallen.
that disorderly company so tormented those poor souls, by stealing their
corn, robbing their gardens, beating them, breaking their houses and keeping
some prisoners; that they daily complained to Captain Smith, he had brought
them for Protectors, worse enemies then the Monacans themselves: which though
till then, for his love they had endured, they desired pardon if hereafter they
defended themselves; since he would not correct them, as they had long expected
he would. So much they importuned him to punish their misdemeanors, as they
offered (if he would lead them) to fight for him against them. But having
spent nine days in seeking to reclaim them; showing them how much they did
abuse themselves with these great gilded hopes of the South Sea Mines,
commodities, or victories, they so madly conceived; then seeing nothing would
prevail, he set sail for James Town.

Thus often we see from small green wounds, and from a little grief,
A greater sore and sickness grows, then will admit relief:
For thus themselves they did be guile, and with the rest played thief.
Now no sooner was the Ship under sail, but the Salvages assaulted those
hundred and twenty in their Fort, An assalt by the Salvages
finding some straggling abroad in the woods: they slew many, and so affrighted
the rest, as their prisoners escaped, and they safely retired, with the swords
and cloakes of those they had slain. But ere we had sailed half a league,
our ship grounding, gave us once more liberty to summon them to a parley;
where we found them all so strangely amazed with this poor silly assault of
twelve Saluages, that they submitted themselves upon any terms to the
Presidents mercy; who presently put by the heels six or seven of the chief
offenders: the rest he seated gallantly at Powhatan, in that Salvage Fort,
ready built, and prettily fortified with poles and barks of trees, sufficient
to have defended them from all the Salvages in Virginia, dry houses for
lodgings and near two hundred accres of ground ready to be planted, and no
place we knew so strong, so pleasant and delightful in Virginia for which we
called it Non-such. The planting of Non-such.
The Salvages also he presently appeased, redeliuering to either party their
former losses. Thus all were friends.

The Salvages appeased.
New officers appointed to command, and the President again ready to depart, at
that instant arrived Captain West, whose gentle nature (by the persuasions and
compassion of those mutinous prisoners, alleging they had only done this for
his honor) was so much abused, that to regaine their old hopes, new turboyles
did arise. For they ashore being possessed of all there victual, munition,
and every thing, grew to that height in their former factions, as the President
left them to their fortunes: they returned again to the open air at Wests
Fort, abandoning Non such, and he to James town with his best expedition, but
this happened him in that Journey.

Captain Smith blown up with powder.
Sleeping in his Boat, (for the ship was returned two days before)
accidentally, one fired his powder-bag, which tore the flesh from his body and
thighs, nine or ten inches square in a most pitiful manner; but to quench
the tormenting fire, frying him in his clothes he leaped over-boord into the
deep river, where ere they could recover him he was near drowned. In this
estate without either Chirurgian, or Surgery he was to go near an hundred
miles. Arriving at James town, causing all things to be prepared for peace or
wars to obtain provision, whilst those things were providing, Ratliffe,
Archer, and the rest of their Confederates, being to come to their trials;
their guilty consciences, fearing a just reward for their deserts, seeing the
President, unable to stand, and near berest of his senses by reason of his
torment, A bloody intent.
they had plotted to have murdered him in his bed. But his heart did fail him
that should have given fire to that merciless Pistol. So not finding that
course to be the best, they joined together to usurp the government, thereby
to escape their punishment. The President, had notice of their proiects, the
which to withstand, though his old soldiers importuned him but permit them to
take their heads that would resist his command, yet he would not suffer them,
but sent for the Masters of the ships, and took order with them for his
return for England. Seeing there was neither Chirurgian, nor Surgery in the
Fort to cur^ his hurt, and the ships to depart the next day, his Commission to
be suppressed he knew not why, himself and soldiers to be rewarded he knew
not how, and a new commission granted they knew not to whom (the which disabled
that authority he had, as made them presume so often to those mutinies as they
did:) besides so grievous were his wounds, and so cruel his torments (few
expecting he could live) nor was he able to follow his business to regaine what
they had lost, suppress those factions, and range the countries for provision
as he intended; and well he knew in those affairs his own actions and
presence was as requisite as his directions, which now could not be, he went
presently abroad, resolving there to appoint them governors, and to take order
for the mutiners, but he could find none he thought fit for it would accept
it. In the mean time, seeing him gone, they persuaded Master Percy to stay,
who was then to go for England, and be their President. Within less then an
hour was this mutation begun and concluded. For when the Company understood
Smith would leave them, and saw the rest in Arms called Presidents and
Counselors, diverse began to fawn on those new commanders, that now bent all
their wits to get him resign them his Commission: who after much ado and many
bitter repulses; that their confusion (which he ^ould them was at their
elbowes) should not be attributed to him, for leaving the Colony without a
Commission, he was not unwilling they should steal it, but never would he give
it to such as they.

And thus, Strange violent forces drew us on unwilling:
Reason persuading against our loves rebelling.
We saw and knew the better, ah curse accursed!
That notwithstanding we embrace the worst.
But had that unhappy blast not happened, he would quickly have qualified the
heat of those humors, and factions, The causes why Smith left the Country and
his Commission.
had the ships but once left them and us to our fortunes; and have made that
provision from among the Salvages, as we neither feared Spanyard, Salvage, nor
famine; nor would have left Virginia, nor our lawful authority, but at as
dear a price as we had bought it, and paid for it. What shall I say but thus,
we left him, that in all his proceedings, made Justice his first guide, and
experience his second, even hating baseness, sloth, pride, and indignity,
more then any dangers; that never allowed more for himself, then his soldiers
with him; that upon no danger would send them where he would not lead them
himself; that would never see us want, what he either had, or could by any
means get us; that would rather want then borrow, or starve then not pay; that
loved action more then words, and hated falsehood and covetousness worse then
death; whose adventures were our lives, and whose loss our deaths.

Leaving us thus with three ships, seven boats, commodities ready to trade,
the harvest newly gathered, ten weeks provision in the store, four hundred
nintie and od persons, twentie-foure Pieces of Ordnance, three hundred Muskets,
Snaphances, and Firelockes, Shot, Powder, and Match sufficient, Curats, Pikes,
Swords, and Morrios, more then men; the Salvages, their language, and
habitations well known to an hundred well trained and expert Soldiers; Nets
for fishing; Tools of all sorts to work; apparel to supply our wants; six
Mares and a Horse; five or six hundred Swine; as many Hens and Chickens;
some Goats; some sheep; what was brought or bred there remained. But they
regarding nothing but from hand to mouth, did consume that we had, took care
for nothing, but to perfect some colorable complaints against Captain Smith.
For effecting whereof three weeks longer they stayed the Ships, till they
could produce them. That time and charge might much better have been spent,
but it suited well with the rest of their discretions.

Besides James town that was strongly Pallizadoed, containing some fifty or
sixty houses, he left five or six other several Forts and Plantations:
though they were not so sumptuous as our successors expected, they were better
then they provided any for us. All this time we had but one Carpenter in the
Country, and three others that could do little, but desired to be learners:
two Blacksmiths; two sailors, and those we write laborers were for most part
footmen, and such as they that were Adventurers brought to attend them, or such
as they could persuade to go with them, that never did know what a days work
was, except the Dutchmen and Poles, and some dozen other. For all the rest
were poor Gentlemen, Tradsmen, Serving-men, libertines, and such like, ten
times more fit to spoil a Commonwealth, then either begin one, or but help
to maintain one. For when neither the fear of God, nor the law, nor shame,
nor displeasure of their friends could rule them here, there is small hope ever
to bring one in twenty of them ever to be good there. Notwithstanding, I
confess diverse amongst them, had better minds and grew much more industrious
then was expected: yet ten good workmen would have done more substantial
work in a day, then ten of them in a week. Therefore men may rather wonder
how we could do so much, then use us so badly, because we did no more, but
leave those examples to make others beware, and the fruits of all, we know not
for whom.

The ends of the Dutchmen.
But to see the justice of God upon these Dutchmen; Valdo before spoke of, made
a shift to get for England, where persuading the Merchants what rich Mines he
had found, and great service he would do them, was very well rewarded, and
returned with the Lord La War: but being found a mere Impostor, he dyed most
miserably. Adam and Francis his two consorts were fled again to Powhatan, to
whom they promised at the arrival of my Lord, what wonders they would do,
would he suffer them but to go to him. But the King seeing they would be gone,
replied; You that would have betrayed Captain Smith to me, will certainly
betray me to this great Lord for your peace: so caused his men to beat out
their brains.

To conclude, the greatest honor that ever belonged to the greatest Monarkes,
was the enlarging their Dominions, and erecting Commonweals. Yet howsoever
any of them have attributed to themselves, the Conquerors of the world: there
is more of the world never heard of them, then ever any of them all had in
subjection: for the Medes, Persians, and Assyrians, never Conquered all Asia,
nor the Grecians but part of Europe and Asia. The Romans indeed had a great
part of both, as well as Africa: but as for all the Northern parts of Europe
and Asia the interior Southern and Western parts of Africa, all America and
Terra incognita, they were all ignorant: nor is our knowledge yet but
superficial. That their beginnings, ending, and limitations were proportioned
by the Almighty is most evident: but to consider of what small means many of
them have begun is wonderful. For some write that even Rome her self, during
the Reign of Romulus, exceeded not the number of a thousand houses. And
Carthage grew so great a Potentate, that at first was but incirculed in the
thongs of a Bulls skin, as to fight with Rome for the Empire of the world.
Yea Venice at this time the admiration of the earth, was at first but a Marish,
inhabited by poor Fishermen. And likewise Ninivie, Thebes, Babylon, Delus,
Troy, Athens, Mycena and Sparta, grew from small beginnings to be most famous
States, though now they retain little more then a naked name. Now this our
young Commonwealth in Virginia, as you have read once consisted but of 38
persons, and in two years increased but to 200. yet by this small means so
highly was approved the Plantation in Virginia, as how many Lords, with worthy
Knights, and brave Gentlemen pretended to see it, and some did, and now after
the expense of fifteen years more, and such massy sums of men and money,
grow they disanimated? If we truly consider our Proceedings with the
Spaniards, and the rest, we have no reason to despair, for with so small
charge, they never had either greater Discoveries, with such certain trials of
more several Commodities, then in this short time has been returned from
Virginia, and by much less means. New England was brought out of obscurity,
and affoorded fraught for near 200 sail of ships, where there is now erected
a brave Plantation. For the happiness of Summer Isles, they are no less then
either, and yet those have had a far less, and a more difficult beginning,
then either Rome, Carthage, or Venice.

Written by Richard Pots, Clarke of the Council, William Tankard, and G.P.
New seeing there is thus much Paper here to spare, that you should not be
altogether clered with Prose; such Verses as my worthy Friends bestowed upon
New England, I here present you, because with honesty I can neither reject,
nor omit their courtesies.
In the deserved Honor of the Author, Captain John Smith, and his Work.
Damned Envy is a sp'rite, that ever haunts
Beasts, mis-nam'd Men; Cowards, or Ignorants.
But, only such she follows, whose dear WORTH
(Maugre her malice) sets their glory forth.
If this fair Overture, then, take not; It
Is Envie's spite (dear friend) in men of-wit;
Or Fear, lest morsels, which our mouths possess,
Might fall from thence; or else, it is Sottishness.
If either; (I hope neither) thee they raise;
Thy Hindere^^,
Letters are as Letters in thy praise;
Who, by their vice, improve (when they reprove)
Thy virtue; so, in hate, procure thee Love.
Then, On firm Worth: this Monument I frame;
Scorning for any Smith to forge such fame.
John Davies, Heref:

To his worthy Captain the Author.
THat which we call the subject of all Story,
Is Truth: which in this Work of thine gives glory
To all that thou have done. Then, scorn the spite
Of Envy; which does no man's Merits right.
My sword may help the rest: my Pen no more
Can do, but this; I'aue said enough before.
Your sometime Soldier, I. Codrinton, now Templer.

To my Worthy Friend and Cosen, Captain John Smith*
IT over-ioyes my heart, when as thy Words
Of these designs, with deeds I do compare.
Here is a Book, such worthy truth affords,
None should the due desert thereof impare:
Since thou, the man, deserving of these Ages,
Much pain have taken for this our Kingdoms good,
In Climes unknown, Amongst Turks and Salvages,
T'inlarge our bounds; though with thy loss of blood.
Hence damned Detraction: stand not in our way.
Envy, it self, will not the Truth gainesay.
N. Smith.

In the deserved Honor of my honest and worthy Captain, John Smith, and his
Work.
Captain and friend; when I pervse thy Book
(With Judgments eyes) into my heart I look:
And there I find (what sometimes Albion knew)
A Soldier, to his Countries-honour, true.
Some fight for wealth; and some for empty praise;
But thou alone thy Countries Fame to raise.
With due discretion, and undaunted heart,
I (often) so well have seen thee act thy Part
In deepest plunge of hard extreamitie,
As forced the troops of proudest foes to fly.
Though men of greater Rank and less desert
Would Pish-away thy Praise, it can not start
From the true Owner: for, all good men's tongues
Shall keep the same. To them that Part belongs.
If, then, Wit, Courage, and Success should get
Thee Fame; the Muse for that is in thy debt:
A part whereof (least able though I be)
Thus here I do disburse, to honor Thee.
Raleigh Crashaw.

Michael Phettiplace, Will: Phettiplace, and Richard Wiffing, Gentlemen, and
Soldiers under Captain Smiths command: In his deserved honor for his Work,
and Worth.
Why may not we in this Work have our Mite,
That had our share in each black day and night,
When thou Virginia foild'st, yet kept'st unstained;
And held'st the King of Paspeheh exchaind.
Thou all alone this Salvage stern did take.
Pamavnkees King we saw thee captive make
Among seven hundred of his stoutest men,
To murder thee and us resolved; when
Fast by the hair thou ledst this Salvage grins;
Thy Pistol at his breast to govern him:
Which did infuse such awe in all the rest
(Since their drad Sovereign thou had so distressed)
That thou and we (poor sixteen) safe retired
Unto our helpless Ships. Thou (thus admired)
Did make proud Powhatan, his subjects send
To James his Town, thy censure to attend:
And all Virginia's Lords, and petty Kings,
Awed by thy virtue, crouch, and Presents brings
To gain thy grace; so dreaded thou have been:
And yet a heart more mild is seldom seen;
So, making Valor Virtue, really;
Who have naught in thee counterfeit, or sly;
If in the slight be not the truest Art,
That make's men famoused for fair desert.
Who says of thee, this sauors of vain glory,
Mistakes both thee and us, and this true Story.
If it be ill in Thee, so well to do;
Then, is ill in Us, to praise thee too.
But, if the first be well done; it is well,
To say it does (if so it does) excel.
Praise is the guerdon of each dear desert
Making the praised act the praised part
With more alacrity: Honors Spur is Praise;
Without which, it (regardlesse) soon decaies.
And for this pains of thine we praise thee rather*
That future Times may know who was the father
Of that rare Work ( New England) which may bring,
Praise to thy God, and profit to thy King.
The Summer Ils.
The tribes ar signified by these Figurs 1. Sands 2. Southampton 3. Warwick 4.
Padget 5. Pembrok 6. Cauendish 7. Smith 8. Hambleton.

St Catherins forte F

Pembroks forte K

Kings Castle M

Southampton forte L

Devonshire Redute O

A Scale of 8 Miles 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

St George Town D

Warwicks forte E

The 3 Bridges A.B.C.

P Riches Mount

State house

The Letters A.B.C. show the sittuation of the 3 bridges P the Mount.
D.E.F.G.H.I.K.L.M.N.O. ye forts how and by whom they were made the history will
show you. The description of ye land by Mr Norwood. All contracted into this
order by Captain John Smith.

Smiths forte I

Pagets forte H

Penistons Redoute G

Charles forte N

Printed by James Reeve



THE FOVRTH BOOK.
TO MAKE PLAIN THE TRVE PROCEEdings of the History for 1609. we must follow
the examinations of Doctor Simons, and two learned Orations published by the
Company; with the relation of the Right Honorable the Lord De la Ware.

What happened in the first government after the alteration in the time of
Captain George Piercie their Governor.
THE day before Captain Smith returned for England with the ships, Captain
Dauis arrived in a small Pinace, The planting Point Comfort.
with some sixteen proper men more: James town, under the command of Captain
John Sickelmore alias Ratliffe, to inhabit Point Comfort. Captain Martin and
Captain West, having lost their boats and near half their men among the
Saluages, were returned to James town; for the Saluages no sooner understood
Smith was gone, but they all revolted, and did spoil and murder all they
incountered. Now we were all constrained to live only on that Smith had only
for his own Company, for the rest had consumed their proportions, and now
they had twenty Presidents with all their appurtenances: Master Piercie our
new President, was so sick he could neither go nor stand. But ere all was
consumed, Captain West and Captain Sickelmore, each with a small ship and
thirty or forty men well appointed, sought abroad to trade. Sickelmore upon
the confidence of Powhatan, with about thirty others as careless as himself,
were all slain, only Ieffrey Shortridge escaped, and Pokahontas the Kings
daughter saved a boy called Henry Spilman, that lived many years after, by her
means, amongst the Patawomekes. Powhatan still as he found means, cut off
their Boats, denied them trade, so that Captain West set sail for England.
Now we all found the loss of Captain Smith, yea his greatest maligners could
now curse his loss: as for corn, provision and contribution from the
Saluages, we had nothing but mortal wounds, with clubs and arrows; as for our
Hogs, Hens, Goats, Sheep, Horse, or what lived, our commanders, officers and
Saluages daily consumed them, some small proportions sometimes we tasted, till
all was devoured; then swords, arms, pieces, or any thing, we traded with the
Saluages, whose cruel fingers were so often imbrewed in our bloods, that what by
their cruelty, our Governors indiscretion, and the loss of our ships, of
five hundred within six months after Captain Smiths departure, there remained
not past sixty men, women and children, most miserable and poor creatures;
and those were preserved for the most part, by roots, herbs, acornes, walnuts,
berries, now and then a little fish: they that had startch in these
extremities, made no small use of it; yea, even the very skins of our horses.
Nay, so great was our famine, that a Saluage we slew, and buried, the poorer
sort took him up again and eat him, and so did diverse one another boiled and
stewed with roots and herbs: And one amongst the rest did kill his wife,
powdered her, and had eaten part of her before it was known, for which he was
executed, as he well deserved; now whether she was better roasted, boiled or
carbonado'd, I know not, but of such a dish as powdered wise I never heard of.
This was that time, which still to this day we called the staruing time; it
were too vile to say, and scarce to be believed, what we endured: but the
occasion was our own, for want of providence, industry and government, and
not the barrenness and defect of the Country, as is generally supposed; for
till then in three years, for the numbers were landed us, we had never from
England provision sufficient for six months, though it seemed by the bills of
loading sufficient was sent us, such a glutton is the Sea, and such good
fellows the Mariners; we as little tasted of the great proportion sent us, as
they of our want and miseries, yet notwithstanding they ever ouer-swayed and
ruled the business, though we endured all that is said, and chiefly lived on
what this good Country naturally afforded; yet had we been even in Paradise
it self with these Governors, it would not have been much better with us;
yet there was amongst us, who had they had the government as Captain Smith
appointed, but that they could not maintain it, would surely have kept us from
those extremities of miseries. This in ten days more, would have supplanted us
all with death.

The arrival of Sir Thomas Gates.
But God that would not this Country should be unplanted, sent Sir Thomas
Gates, and Sir George Summers with one hundred and fifty people most happily
preserved by the Bermudas to preserve us: strange it is to say how miraculously
they were preserved in a leaking ship, as at large you may read in the ensuing
History of those Islands.

The government resigned to Sir Thomas Gates, 1610.
James town abandoned.
and abandoning James town, set sail for England, whereby you may see the
event of the government of the former Commanders left to themselves; although
they had lived there many years as formerly has been spoken (who hindered now
their proceedings, Captain Smith being gone.)

At noone they fell to the I Will of Hogs, and the next morning to Mulbery point,
at what time they descried the Longboat of the Lord la Ware, for God would not
have it so abandoned. For this honorable Lord, then Governor of the Country,
met them with three ships exceedingly well furnished with all necessaries
fitting, who again returned them to the abandoned James town. Out of the
observations of William Simmons Doctor of Divinity.

The government deuolued to the Lord la Ware.
The arrival of the Lord la Ware.
HIs Lordship arrived the ninth of June 1610. accompanied with Sir Ferdinando
Warnman, Captain Houl^roft, Captain Lawson, and diverse other Gentlemen of
sort; the tenth he came up with his fleet, went on shore, heard a Sermon, read
his Commission, and entered into consultation for the good of the Colonie, in
which secret counsel we will a little leave them, that we may duly observe the
revealed counsel of God. He that shall but turn up his eye, and behold the
spangled canopie of heaven, or shall but cast down his eye, and consider the
embroydered carpet of the earth, and withal shall mark how the heavens hear
the earth, and the earth the Corn and Oil, and they relieve the necessities
of man, that man will acknowledge Gods infinite Providence: But he that shall
further observe, how God inclines all casual events to work the necessary
help of his Saints, must needs adore the Lords infinite goodness; never had
any people more just cause, to cast themselves at the very foot-^toole of God,
and to reverence his mercy, than this distressed Colonie; for if God had not
sent Sir Thomas Gates from the Bermudas, within four days they had almost
been famished; if God had not directed the heart of that noble Knight to save
the Fort from fiering at their shipping, for many were very importunate to have
burnt it, they had been destitute of a present harbor and succor; if they
had abandoned the Fort any longer time, and had not so soon returned,
questionless the Indians would have destroyed the Fort, which had been the
means of our safeties amongst them and a terror. If they had set sail sooner,
and had lanched into the vast Ocean, who would have promised they should have
incountered the Fleet of the Lord la Ware, especially when they made for New
found land, as they intended, a course contrary to our Navy approaching. If
the Lord la Ware had not brought with him a years provision, what comfort
would those poor souls have received, to have been relanded to a second
destruction? This was the arm of the Lord of Hosts, who would have his people
pass the red Sea and Wilderness, and then to possess the land of Canaan: It
was divinely sp^ken of Heathen Socrates, If God for man be careful, why should
man be ouer-distrustfull? for he has so tempered the contrary qualities of
the Elements,

That neither cold things want heat, nor moist things dry,
Nor sad things spirits, to quicken them thereby,
Yet make they musical content of contrariety,
Which conquered, knits them in such links together,
They do produce even all this whatsoever.
The Lord Governor, after mature deliberation, delivered some few words to the
Company, laying just blame upon them, for their haughty vanities and sluggish
idleness, earnestly entreating them to amend those desperate follies, lest he
should be compelled to draw the sword of Justice, and to cut off such
delinquents, which he had rather draw, to the shedding of his vital blood, to
protect them from injuries; heartning them with relation of that store he had
brought with him, constituting officers of all conditions, to rule over them,
allotting every man his particular place, to watch vigilantly, and work
painfully: This Oration and direction being received with a general applause,
you might shortly behold the idle and restie diseases of a divided multitude,
by the unity and authority of this government to be substantially cured.
Those that knew not the way to goodness before, but cherished singularity and
faction, can now chalk out the path of all respective duty and service: every
man endeavors to outstrip other in diligence: the French preparing to plant
the Vines, the English laboring in the Woods and grounds; every man knows
his charge, and discharges the same with alacrity. Neither let any man be
discouraged, by the relation of their daily labor (as though the sap of their
bodies should be spent for other men's profit) the settled times of working, to
effect all themselves, or as the Adventurers need desire, required no more
pains than from six of the clock in the morning, until ten, and from two in
the afternoon, till four, at both which times they are provided of spiritual
and corporal relief. First, they enter into the Church, and make their
prayers unto God, next they return to their houses and receive their
proportion of food. Nor should it be conceived that this business excludes
Gentlemen, whose breeding never knew what a days labor meant, for though they
cannot dig, use the Spade, nor practice the Axe, yet may the stayed spirits
of any condition, find how to employ the force of knowledge, the exercise of
counsel, the operation and power of their best breeding and qualities. The
houses which are built, are as warm and defensive against wind and weather, as
if they were tiled and slated, being covered above with strong boards, and some
matted round with Indian mats. Our forces are now such as are able to tame the
fury and treachery of the Saluages: Our Forts assure the Inhabitants, and
frustrate all assaylants. And to leave no discouragement in the heart of any,
who personally shall enter into this great action, I will communicate a double
comfort; first, Sir George Summers return to the Bermudas.
Sir George Summers, that worthy Admiral has undertaken a dangerous adventure
for the good of the Colonie.

Upon the 15. of June, accompanied with Captain Samuel Argall, he returned in
two Pinaces unto the Bermudas, promising (if by any means God will open a way
to that Island of Rocks) that he would soon return with six months provision
of flesh; with much cross weather at last he there safely arrived, but
Captain Argall was forced back again to James town, whom the Lord De la
Ware not long after sent to the River of Patawomeke, to trade for Corn; where
finding an English boy, one Henry Spilman, a young Gentleman well descended, by
those people preserved from the fury of Powhatan, by his acquaintance had such
good usage of those kind Saluages, that they fraughted his ship with Corn,
wherewith he returned to James town.

The building Fort Henry and Fort Charles.
The other comfort is, that the Lord la Ware has built two new Forts, the one
called Fort Henry, the other Fort Charles, in honor of our most noble Prince,
and his hopeful brother, upon a pleasant plain, and near a little Riuilet
they call Southampton River; they stand in a wholesome air, having plenty of
Springs of sweet water, they command a great circuit of ground, containing
Wood, Pasture and Marsh, with apt places for Vines, Corn and Gardens; in which
Forts it is resolved, that all those that come out of England, shall be at
their first landing quartered, that the wearisomnesse of the Sea, may be
refreshed in this pleasing part of the Country, and Sir Thomas Gates he sent
for England. But to correct some injuries of the Paspahegs, he sent Captain
Pearcie, Master Stacy, and fifty or threescore shot, where the Saluages
flying, they burnt their houses, took the Queen and her children prisoners,
whom not long after they slew.

The fertility of the soil, the temperature of the climate, the form of
government, the condition of our people, their daily inuocating of the Name of
God being thus expressed; why should the success, by the rules of mortal
judgment, be disparaged? why should not the rich harvest of our hopes be
seasonably expected? I dare say, that the resolution of Caesar in France, the
designs of Alexander, the discoueries of Hernando Cortes in the West, and of
Emanuel King of Portugal in the East, were not encouraged upon so firm grounds
of state and possibility.

But his Lordship being at the fales, the Saluages assaulted his troops and
slew three or four of his men. Not long after, his Honor growing very sick,
he returned for England the 28. of March; in the ship were about five and
fifty men, but ere we arrived at Fyall, forty of us were near sick to
death, of the Scuruie, Callenture, and other diseases: the Governor being an
Englishman, kindly used us, but small relief we could get, but Oranges, of
which we had plenty, whereby within eight days we recovered, and all were
well and strong by that they came into England. Written by William Box.

The Counsel of Virginia finding the smalnesse of that return which they
hoped should have defrayed the charge of a new supply, entered into a deep
consultation, whether it were fit to enter into a new Contribution, or in time
to send for them home, and give over the action, and therefore they adjured Sir
Thomas Gates to deal plainly with them, who with a solemn and a sacred oath
replied, That all things before reported were true, and that all men know that
we stand at the devotion of politic Princes and States, who for their proper
utility, devise all courses to grind our Merchants, and by all pretenses to
confiscate their goods, and to draw from us all manner of gain by their
inquisitiue inventions, when in Virginia, a few years labor by planting and
husbandry, will furnish all our de^^cts with honor and security. Out of a
Declaration published by the Counsel, 1610.

The government left again to Captain George Piercie, and the return of the
Lord la Ware, with his Relation to the Council.
Virginia, Sir Thomas Smith Treasurer.
contrary either to my own desire, or other men's expectations, who spare not
to censure me, in point of duty, and to discourse and question the reason,
though they apprehend not the true cause of my return, The Relation of the
Lord la Ware.
I am forced out of a willingness to satisfy every man, to deliver unto your
Lordships and the rest of this assembly, in what state I have lived ever since
my arrival to the Colonie, what has been the just cause of my sudden
departure, and on what terms I have left the same, the rather because I
perceive, that since my coming into England, such a coldness and irresolution
is bred in many of the Adventurers, that some of them seek to withdraw their
payments, by which the action must be supported, making this my return color
of their needless backwardness and unjust protraction: which that you may the
better understand, I was welcomed to James town by a violent ague; being cured
of it, within thre^ weeks after I began to be distempered with other grievous
sicknesses which successively and severally assailed me, for besides a relapse
into the former disease, which with much more violence held me more than a
month, and brought me to greater weakness; the flux surprised me, and kept
me many days, then the crampe assaulted my weak body with strong pains, and
after, the gout; all those drew me to that weakness, being unable to stir,
brought upon me the scuruie, which though in others it be a sickness of
slothfulness, yet was it in mean effect of weakness, which never left me,
till I was ready to leave the world.

In these extremities I resolved to consult with my friends, who finding nature
spent in me, and my body almost consumed, my pains likewise daily increasing,
gave me advice to prefer a hopeful recovery, before an assured ruin, which
must necessarily have ensued, had I lived but twenty days longer in Virginia,
wanting at that instant both food and Physic, fit to remedy such
extraordinary diseases; wherefore I shipped my self with Doctor Bohun and
Captain Argall, for Meuis in the West Indies, but being crossed with Southerly
winds, I was forced to shape my course for the Western Isles, where I found
help for my health, and my sickness assuaged, by the means of fresh diet,
especially Oranges and Limons, and undoubted remedy for that disease: then I
intended to have returned back again to Virginia, but I was advised not to
hazard my self, before I had perfectly recovered my strength: so I came for
England; in which accident, I doubt not but men of judgment will imagine,
there would more prejudice have happened by my death there, than I hope can do
by my return.

For the Colony I left it to the charge of Captain George Piercie, a Gentleman
of honor and resolution, until the coming of Sir Thomas Dale, whose
Commission was likewise to be determined upon the arrival of Sir Thomas
Gates, according to the order your Lordships appointed: the number I left were
about two hundred, the most in health, and provided of at least ten months
victual, and the Country people tractable and friendly. What other defects
they had, I found by Sir Thomas Gates at the Cowes; his Fleet was sufficiently
furnished with supplies, but when it shall please God that Sir Thomas Dale,
100. Kine and 200. Swine sent to Virginia.
and Sir Thomas Gates shall arrive in Virginia with the extraordinary supply
of 100. Kine, and 200. Swine, besides store of other provision, for the
maintenance of the Colonie, there will appear that success in the action, as
shall give no man cause of distrust, that has already adventured, but
encourage every good mind to further so good a work, as will redound both to
the glory of God, to the credit of our nation, and the comfort of all those
that have been instruments in the furthering of it. Out of the Lord la Wares
discourse, published by Authority, 1611.

The government surrendered to Sir Thomas Dale, who arrived in Virginia the
tenth of May, 1611. out of Master Hamors Book.
la Ware arrived in England, Sir Thomas Smith Treasurer. The arrival of Sir
Thomas Dale.
the Council and Company had dispatched away Sir Thomas Dale with three
ships, men and cattle, and all other provisions necessary for a year; all
which arrived well the tenth of May 1611. where he found them growing again to
their former estate of penury, being so improuident as not to put Corn in the
ground for their bread, but trusted to the store, then furnished but with three
months provision; his first care therefore was to employ all hands about
setting of Corn, at the two Forts at Kecoughtan, Henry and Charles, whereby,
the season then not fully past, though about the end of May, we had an
indifferent crop of good Corn.

This business taken order for, and the care and trust of it committed to his
Under-officers, His preparation to build a new town.
to James town he hastened, where most of the company were ^t their daily and
usual works, bowling in the streets; these he employed about necessary
works, as felling of Timber, repayring their houses ready to fall on their
heads, and providing pales, posts and railes, to impale his purposed new town,
which by reason of his ignorance, being but newly arrived, he had not resolved
where to seat; therefore to better his knowledge, with one hundred men he spent
some time in viewing the River of Nausamund, in despite of the Indians then
our enemies; then our own River to the Fales, where upon a high land,
environed with the maine River, some twelve miles from the Fales, by
Arsahattock, he resolved to plant his new town.

It was no small trouble to reduce his people so timely to good order, being of
so ill a condition, as may well witness his severity and strict imprinted
book of Articles, then needful with all extremity to be executed; now much
mitigated; so as if his Laws had not been so strictly executed, I see not how
the utter subversion of the Colonie should have been prevented, witness
Webbes and Prices design the first year, since that of Abbots, and others,
more dangerous than the former. Here I entreat your patience for an Apology,
though not a pardon. This Ieffrey Abbots, how ever this Author censures him,
and the Governor executes him, I know he had long served both in Ireland and
Netherlands, here he was a Sargeant of my Company, and I never saw in
Virginia a more sufficient Soldier, less turbulent, a better wit, more hardy
or industrious, nor any more forward to cut off them that sought to abandon the
Country, or wrong the Colonie; how ingratefully those deserts might be
rewarded, envied or neglected, or his far inferiors preferred to ouer-top
him, I know not, but such occasions might move a Saint, much more a man, to an
unadvised passionate impatience, but how ever, it seems he has been punished
for his offenses, that was never rewarded for his deserts. And even this Summer
Cole and Kitchins plot with three more, Diverse mutiny suppressed.
bending their course to Ocanahowan, five days journey from us, where they
report are Spaniards inhabiting. These were cut off by the Saluages, hired by
us to hunt them home to receive their deserts: So as Sir Thomas Dale has not
been so tyrannous nor severe by the half, as there was occasion, and just
cause for it, and though the manner was not usual, we were rather to have
regard to those, whom we would have terrified and made fearful to commit the
like offenses, than to the offenders justly condemned, for amongst them so
hardened in evil, the fear of a cruel, painful and unusual death more
restraines them, than death it self. Thus much I have proceeded of his
endeavors, until the coming of Sir Thomas Gates, in preparing himself to
proceed as he intended.

Now in England again to second this noble Knight, the Counsel and Company
with all possible expedition prepared for Sir Thomas Gates six tall ships, with
three hundred men, and one hundred Kine and other Cattle, with munition and
all other manner of provision that could be thought needful; and about the
first or second of August, 1611. arrived safely at James town.

The government returned again to Sir Thomas Gates, 1611.
THese worthy Knights being met, after their welcoming salutations, The second
arrival of Sir Thomas Gates.
Sir Thomas Dale acquainted him what he had done, and what he intended, which
design Sir Thomas Gates well approving, furnished him with three hundred and
fifty men, such as himself made choice of. In the beginning of September,
1611. he set fail, and arrived where he intended to build his new town:
within ten or twelve days he had environed it with a pale, and in honor of
our noble Prince Henry, called it Henrico. The next work he did, was building
at each corner of the Town, a high commanding Watchhouse, a Church, and
Storehouses; which finished, he began to (...) convenient houses for himself
and men, which with all possible speed he could he effected, to the great
content of his company, and all the Colonie.

This town is situated upon a neck of a plain rising land, The building of
Henrico.
three parts environed with the maine River, the neck of land well impaled,
makes it like an I Will; it has three streets of well fram^d houses, a handsome
Church, and the foundation of a better laid, to be built of Brick, besides
Storehouses, Watch-houses, and such like: Upon the verge of the River there
are five houses, wherein live the honester sort of people, as Farmers in
England, and they keep continual centinell for the towns security. About
two miles from the town, into the Maine, is another pal^, near two miles in
length, from River to River, guarded with several Commanders, with a good
quantity of Corne-ground impailed, sufficiently secured to maintain more than
I suppose will come this three years.

On the other side of the River, for the security of the town, is intended to
be impaled for the security of our Hogs, about two miles and a half, by the
name of Hope in Faith, and Coxendale, secured by five of our manner of Forts,
which are but Palisadoes, called Charity Fort, Mount Malado, a guest house for
sick people, a high ^eat and wholesome air, Elisabeth Fort, and Fort Patience:
And here has Master Whitaker chosen his Parsonage, impaled a fair framed
Parsonage, and one hundred acres called Rock hall, but these are not half
finished.

About Christmas following, in this same year 1611. in regard of the injury
done us by them of Apamatuck* Sir Thomas Dale, without the loss of any, except
some few Saluages, took it and their Corn, being but five miles by land from
Henrico, and considering how commodious it might be for us, resolved to
possess and plant it, and at the instant called it the new Bermudas, The
building the Bermudas.
whereunto he has laid out and annexed to the belonging freedom and
corporation for ever, many miles of Champian and Woodland ground in several
hundreds, as the upper and nether hundreds, Rochdale hundred, West Sherly
hundred, and Digs his hundred. In the nether hundred he first began to plant,
for there is the most Corne-ground, and with a pale of two miles, cut over from
River to River, whereby we have secured eight English miles in compass; upon
which circuit, within half a mile of each other, are many fair houses already
built, besides particular men's houses near to the number of fifty. Rochdale,
by a cross pale welnigh four miles long, is also planted with houses along
the pale, in which hundred our Hogs and C^ttell have twenty miles circuit to
graze in securely. The building of the City is referred till our harvest be
in, which he intends to make a retreat against any foreign enemy.

About fifty miles from these is James town, upon a fertile peninsula, which
although fomerly scandaled for an vnhealthful air, we find it as healthful
as any other part of the Country; it has two rows of houses of framed
timber, and some of them two stories, and a garret higher, three large
Storehouses joined together in length, and he has newly strongly impaled the
town. This I Will, and much ground about it, is much in habited: To Kecoughtan we
accounted it forty miles, where they live well with half that allowance the
rest have from the store, because of the extraordinary quantity of Fish,
Foul and Dear; as you may read at large in the Discoueries of Captain
Smith. And thus I have truly related unto you the present estate of that small
part of Virginia we frequent and possess.

Sir Thomas Smith Treasurer. Captain Argals arrival.
Since there was a ship fraughted with provision, and forty men; and another
since then with the like number and provision, to stay twelve months in the
Country, with Captain Argall, which was sent not long after. After he had
recreated and refreshed his Company, he was sent to the River Patawomeake, to
trade for Corn, the Saluages about us having small quarter, but friends and
foes as they found advantage and opportunity: But to conclude our peace, thus
it happened. Captain Argall, having entered into a great acquaintance with
Iapazaws, an (...) of Captain Smiths, and so to all our Nation, ever since ^ee
d^scouered the Country:
hard by him there was Pocahontas, whom Captain Smiths Relations intituleth
the Numparell of Virginia, and though she had been many times a preserver of
him and the whole Colonie, yet till this accident she was never seen at James
town since his departure, being at Patawom^ke, as it seems, thinking her
self unknown, was easily by her friend Iapazaws persuaded to go abroad with
him and his wife to see the ship, for Captain Argall had promised him a Copper
Kettle to bring her but to him, promising no way to hurt her, How Pocahontas
was taken prisoner.
but keep her till they could conclude a peace with her father; the Saluage
for this Copper Kettle would have done any thing, it seem^d by the Relation;
for though she had seen and been in many ships, yet he caused his wife to
feign how desirous she was to see one, and that he offered to beat her for her
importunity,
till she wept. But at last he told her, if Pocahontas would go with her, he
was content: and thus they betrayed the poor innocent Pocahontas aboard, where
they were all kindly feasted in the Cabin. Iapazaws treading often on the
Captains foot, to remember he had done his part, the Captain when he saw his
time, persuaded Pocahontas to the Gun-roome, faining to have some conference
with Iapazaws, which was only that she should not perceive he was any way
guilty of her captivity: so sending for her again, he told her before her
friends, she must go with him, and compound peace betwixt her Country and us,
before she ever should see Powhatan, whereat the old Jew and his wife began to
howl and cry as fast as Pocahontas, that upon the Captains fair
persuasions, by degrees pacifying her self, and Iapazaws and his wife, with
the Kettle and other toies, went merrily on shore, and she to James town. A
messenger forthwith was sent to her father, that his daughter Pocahontas he
loved so dearly, he must ransom with our men, swords, pieces, tools, etc.
he trecherously had stolen.

This unwelcome news much troubled Powhatan, because he loved both his
daughter and our commodities well, yet it was three months after ere he
returned us any answer: then by the persuasion of the Council, he returned
seven of our men, Seven English returned from Powhatan prisoners.
with each of them an unserviceable Musket, and sent us word, that when we
would deliver his daughter, he would make us satisfaction for all injuries
done us, and give us five hundred bushels of Corn, and for ever be friends
with us. That he sent, we received in part of payment, and returned him this
answer: That his daughter should be well used, but we could not believe the
rest of our arms were either lost or stolen from him, and therefore till he
sent them, we would keep his daughter.

This answer, it seemed, much displeased him, for we heard no more from him a
long time after, when with Captain Argals ship, Sir Thomas Dale his voyage to
Pamavuke.
and some other vessels belonging to the Colonie, Sir Thomas Dale, with a
hundred and fifty men well appointed, went up into his own River, to his
chief habitation, with his daughter; with many scornful brauado's they
affronted us, proudly demanding why we came thither; our reply was, We had
brought his daughter, and to receive the ransom for her that was promised, or
to have it perforce. They nothing dismayed thereat, told us, We were welcome if
we came to fight, for they were provided for us, but advised us, if we loved
our lives to retire; else they would use us as they had done Captain
Ratcliffe: We told them, we would presently have a better answer; but we were
no sooner within shot of the shore than they let fly their Arrows among us in
the ship.

Being thus justly provoked, we presently manned our Boats, went on shore, A
man shot in the forehead.
burned all their houses, and spoiled all they had we could find; and so the
next day proceeded higher up the River, where they demanded ^hy we burnt their
houses, and we, why they shot at us: They replied, it was some s^ragling
Saluage, with many other excuses, they in^ended no hurt, but were our friends:
We told them, we came not to hurt them, but v^sit them as friends also. Upon
this we concluded a peace, and forthwith they dispatched messengers to
Powhatan, whose answer, they told us, we must expect four and twenty hours
ere the messengers could return: Then they told us, our men were run away
for fear we would hang them, yet Powhatans men were run after them; as for
our Swords and Pieces, they should be brought us the next day, which was only
but to delay time; for the next day they came not. Then we went higher, to a
house of Powhatans, called Matchot, where we saw about four hundred men well
appointed; here they dar^d us to come on shore, which we did; no show of fear
they made at all, nor offered to resist our landing, but walking boldly up and
down amongst us, demanded to confer with our Captain, of his coming in
that manner, and to have truce till they could but once more send to their King
to know his pleasure, which if it were not agreeable to their expectation, then
they would fight with us, and defend their own as they could, which was but
only to defer the time, to carry away their provision; yet we promised
them truce ti^l the next day at noone, and then if they would fight with us,
they should know when we would begin by our Drums and Trumpets.

Upon this promise, two of Powhatans sons came unto us to see their sister,
Two of Powhatans sons come to see Pocahontas.
at whose sight, seeing her well, though they heard to the contrary, they much
reioiced, promising they would persuade her father to redeem her, and for ever
be friends with us. And upon this, the two brethren went aboard with us, and we
sent M^ster John Rolfe and Master Sparks to Powhatan, to acquaint him with the
business; kindly they were entertained, but not admitted the presence of
Powhatan, but they spoke with Opechaucanough, his brother and successor; he
promised to do the best he could to Powhatan, all might be well. So it being
April, and time to prepare our ground and set our Corn, we returned to James
Town, promising the forbearance of their performing their promise, till the
next harvest.

Long before this, Master John Rolfe, an honest Gentleman,
and of good behavior, The marriage of Pocahontas to Master John Rolfe.
had been in love with Pocahontas, and she with him, which thing at that
instant I made known to Sir Thomas Dale by a letter from him, wherein he
entreated his advice, and she acquainted her brother with it, Sir Thomas Smith
Treasurer.
which resolution Sir Thomas Dale well approved: the brute of this marriage came
soon to the knowledge of Powhatan, a thing acceptable to him, as appeared by
his sudden consent, for within ten days he sent Opachisco, an old Uncle of
hers, and two of his sons, to see the manner of the marriage, and to do in that
behalf what they were requested, for the confirmation thereof, as his deputy;
which was accordingly done about the first of April: And ever since we have
had friendly trade and commerce, as well with Powhatan himself, as all his
subjects.

The Chicahamanias desire friendship.
Besides this, by the means of Powhatan, we became in league with our next
neighbors, the Chicahamanias, a lusty and a daring people, free of
themselves. These people, so soon as they heard of our peace with Powhatan,
sent two messengers with presents to Sir Thomas Dale, and offered him their
service, excusing all former injuries, hereafter they would ever be King James
his subjects, and relinquish the name of Chickahamania, to be called
Tassautessus, as they call us, and Sir Thomas Dale there Governor, as the
Kings Deputy; only they desired to be governed by their own Laws, which is
eight of their Elders as his substitutes. This offer he kindly accepted, and
appointed the day he would come to visit them.

When the appointed day came, Sir Thomas Dale and Captain Argall with fifty
men well appointed, went to Chickahamania, where we found the people expecting
our coming, they used us kindly, and the next morning sat in counsel, to
conclude their peace upon these conditions:

Articles of Peace
First, they should for ever be called Englishmen, and be true subjects to
King James and his Deputies.

Secondly, neither to kill nor detain any of our men, nor cattle, but bring
them home.

Thirdly, to be alw^ies ready to furnish us with three hundred men, against
the Spaniards or any.

Fourthly, they shall not enter ^ur towns, but send word they are new
Englishmen.

Fifthly, that every fighting man, at the beginning of harvest, shall bring to
our store two bushels of Corn, for tribute, for which they shall rec^iue so
many Hatchets.

Lastly, the eight chief men should see all this performed, or receive the
punishment themselves: for their diligence they should have a red coat, a
copper chain, and King James his picture, and be accounted his Noblemen.

All this they concluded with a general assent, and a great shout to confirm
it: then one of the old men began an Oration, bending his speech first to the
old men, then to the young, and then to the women and children, to make them
understand how strictly they were to observe these conditions, and we would
defend them from the fury of Powhatan, or any enemy whatsoever, and furnish
them with Copper, Beads, and Hatchets; but all this was rather for fear
Powhatan and we, being so linked together, would bring them again to his
subjection; the which to prevent, they did rather choose to be protected by us,
than tormented by him, whom they held a Tyrant. And thus we returned again to
James town.

The benefit of liberty in the planters.
When our people were fed out of the common store, and labored jointly
together, glad was he could slip from his labor, or slumber over his task he
cared not how, nay, the most honest among them would hardly take so much true
pains in a week, as now for themselves they will do in a day, neither cared
they for the increase, presuming that howsoever the harvest prospered, the
general store must maintain them, so that we reaped not so much Corn from
the labors of thirty, as now three or four do provide for themselves. To
prevent which, Sir Thomas Dale has allotted every man three Acres of clear
ground, in the nature of Farms, except the Bermudas, who are exempted, but for
one months service in the year, which must neither be in feed-time, nor
harvest; for which doing, no other duty they pay yearly to the store, but two
barrels and a half of Corn (from all those Farmers, whereof the first was
William Spence, an honest, William Spence the first Farmer in Virginia.
valiant, and an industrious man, and has continued from 1607. to this
present) from those is expected such a contribution to the store, as we shall
neither want for our selves, nor to entertain our supplies; for the rest, they
are to work eleven months for the store, and has one month only allowed
them to get provision to keep them for twelve, except two bushels of Corn
they have out of the store; if those can live so, why should any fear
staruing, and it were much better to deny them passage, that would not ere
they come, be content to engage themselves to those conditions: for only from
the slothful and idle drones, and none else, has sprung the manifold
imputations, Virginia innocen^ly has undergone; and therefore I would deter
such from coming here, that cannot well brook labor, except they will
undergo much punishment and penury, if they escape the skuruie: but for the
industrious, there is reward sufficient, and if any think there is nothing but
bread, I refer you to his relations that discovered the Country first.

The government left to Sir Thomas Dale upon Sir Thomas Gates return for
England.
SIr Thomas Dale understanding there was a plantation of Frenchmen in the north
part of Virginia, about the degrees of 45. Captain Argall voyage to Port
Royal.
sent Captain Argall to Port Royal and Sancta Crux, where finding the
Frenchmen abroad dispersed in the Woods, surprised their Ship and Pinnace,
which was but newly come from France, wherein was much good apparel, and other
provision, which he brought to James town, but the men escaped, and lived
among the Saluages of those Countries.

Thomas Dale, before my return to England, Sir Thomas Smith Treasurer.
because I would be able to speak somewhat of my own knowledge, to give me
leave to visit Powhatan and his Court: being provided, I had Thomas Saluage
with me, for my Interpreter, with him and two Saluages for guides, I went from
the Bermuda in the morning, and came to Match^t the next night, where the King
lay upon the River of Pamavuke; his entertainment was strange to me, the boy he
knew well, and told him; My child, I gave you leave, being my boy, to go see
your friends, and these four years I have not seen you, nor heard of my own
man Namoutack I sent to England, though many ships since have been returned
thence: Having done with him, he began with me, and demanded for the chain
of pearl he sent his brother Sir Thomas Dale at his first arrival, which was
a token betwixt them, when ever he should send a messenger from himself to
him, he should wear that chain about his neck, since the peace was
concluded, otherways he was to bind him and send him home.

It is true Sir Thomas Dale had sent him such word, and gave his Page order to
give it me, but he forgot it, and till this present I never heard of it, Master
Hamars journey to Powhatan.
yet I replied I did know there was such an order, but that was when upon a
sudden he should have occasion to send an Englishman without an Indian Guide;
but if his own people should conduct his messenger, as two of his did me who
knew my message, it was sufficient; with which answer he was contented, and so
conducted us to his house, where was a guard of two hundred Bow-men, that
always attend his person. The first thing he did, he offered me a pipe of
Tobacco, then asked me how his brother Sir Thomas Dale did, and his daughter,
and unknown son, and how they lived, loved and liked; I told him his brother
was well, and his daughter so contented, she would not live again with him;
whereat he laughed, and demanded the cause of my coming: I told him my message
was private, and I was to deliver it only to himself and Papaschicher, one of
my guides that was acquainted with it; instantly he commanded all out of the
house, but only his two Queens, that always sit by him, and bade me speak
on.

I told him, by my Interpreter, Sir Thomas Dale has sent you two pieces of
Copper, five strings of white and blue Beads, five wooden Combs, His message
to Powhatan.
ten Fishhookes, a pair of Knives, and that when you would send for it, he
would give you a Grind-stone; all this pleased him: but then I told him his
brother Dale, hearing of the same of his youngest daughter, desiring in any
case he would send her by me unto him, in testimony of his love, as well for
that he intended to marry her, as the desire her sister had to see her, because
being now one people, and he desirous for ever to dwell in his Country, he
conceived there could not be a truer assurance of peace and friendship, than in
such a natural band of an united union.

I needed not entreat his answer by his often interrupting me in my speech, and
presently with much gravity he thus replied.

Powhatans answer.
I gladly accept your salute of love and peace, which while I live, I shall
exactly keep, his pledges thereof I receive with no less thanks, although
they a^e not so ample as formerly he had received; but for my daughter, I have
sold her within this few days to a great Werowance, for two bushels of
Rawrenoke, three days journey from me. I replied, I knew his greatness in
restoring the Rawrenoke, might call her again to gratify his brother, and the
rather, because she was but twelve years old, assuring him, besides the band
of peace, he should have for her, three times the worth of the Rawrenoke, in
Beads, Copper, Hatchets, etc. His answer was, he loved his daughter as his
life, and though he had many children, he delighted in none so much as she,
whom if he should not often behold, he could not possibly live, which she
living with us he could not do, having resolved upon no terms to put himself
into our hands, or come amongst us; therefore desired me to urge him no
further, but return his brother this answer: That I desire no former assurance
of his friendship, than the promise he has made, from me he has a pledge,
one of my daughters, which so long as she lives shall be sufficient, when she
dies, he shall have another: I hold it not a brotherly part to desire to
bereave me of my two children at once. Farther, tell him though he had no
pledge at all, he need not distrust any injury from me or my people; there
have been too many of his men and mine slain, and by my occasion there shall
never be more, (I which have power to perform it, have said it) although I
should have just cause, for I am now old, and would gladly end my days in
peace; if you offer me injury, my country is large enough to go from you:
Thus much I hope will satisfy my brother. Now because you are weary, and I
sleepie, we will thus end. So commanding us victual and lodging, we rested
that night, and the next morning he came to visit us, and kindly conducted us
to the best cheer he had. William Parker.

William Parker recovered.
While I here remained, by chance came an Englishman, whom there had been
surprised three years ago at Fort Henry, grown so like, both in complexion
and habit like a Saluage, I knew him not, but by his tongue: he desired me to
procure his liberty, which I intended, and so far urged Powhatan, that he
grew discontented, and told me, You have one of my daughters, and I am
content, but you cannot see one of your men with me, but you must have him
away, or break friendship; if you must needs have him, you shall go home
without guides, and if any evil befall you, thank your selves: I told him I
would, but if I returned not well, he must expect a revenge, and his brother
might have just cause to suspect him. So in passion he le^t me till supper, and
then gave me such as he had with a cheerful countenance: About midnight he
awaked us, and promised in the morning my return with Parker; but I must
remember his brother to send him ten great pieces of Copper, a Shauing-knife, a
Frowe, a Grindstone, a Net, Fish-hookes, and such toies; which lest I should
forget, he caused me write in a table-booke he had; how ever he got it, it was
a fair one, I desired he would give it me; he told me, no, it did him much
good in showing to strangers, yet in the morning when we departed, having
furnished us well with provision, he gave each of us a Bucks skin as well
dressed as could be, and sent two more to his son and daughter: And so we
returned to James town. Written by Master Ralph Hamor and John Rolph.

From a letter of Sir Thomas Dale and Master W^itakers.
I have read the substance of this relation, in a Letter written by Sir Thomas
Dale, another by Master Whitaker, and a third by Master John Rolse; how
careful they were to instruct her in Christianity, and how capable and
desirous she was thereof, after she had been some time thus tutored, she
never had desire to go to her father, nor could well endure the society of her
own nation: the true affection she constantly bare her husband was much, and
the strange apparitions and violent passions he endured for her love, as he
deeply protested, was wonderful, and she openly renounced her countries
idolatry, confessed the faith of Christ, and was baptized, but either the
coldness of the adventurers, or the bad usage of that was collected, or both,
caused this worthy Knight to write thus. Oh why should so many Princes and
Noblemen engage themselves, and thereby intermedling herein, have caused a
number of souls transport themselves, and be transported hither? Why should
they, I say, relinquish this so glorious an action: for if their ends be to
build God a Church, they ought to persevere; if otherwise, yet their honor
ingageth them to be constan^; howsoever they stand affected, here is enough to
content them. These are the things have animated me to stay a little season
from them, I am bound in conscience to return unto; leaving all contenting
pleasures and mundall delights, to reside here with much turmoile, which I will
rather do than see Gods glory diminished, my King and Count^y dishonored, and
these poor souls I have in charge revived, which would quickly happen if I
should leave them; so few I have with me fit to command or manage the
business: Master Whitaker their Preacher complains, and much museth, that so
few of our English Ministers, that were so hot against the surplice and
subscription come hither, where neither is spoken of. Do they not wilfully
hide their talents, or keep themselves at home, for fear of losing a few
pleasures: be there not any among them of Moses his mind, and of the Apostles,
that forsook all to follow Christ, but I refer them to the Judge of all
hearts, and to the King that shall reward every one according to his talent.
From Virginia. June: 18. 1614.

The business being brought to this perfection, Captain Arga^l returned for
England, in the latter end of June, 1614. ariuing in England, and bringing this
good tidings to the Council and company by the assistances of Sir Thomas
Gates, that also had returned from Virginia but the March before; it was
presently concluded, that to supply this good success with all expedition, the
standing Lottery should be drawn with all diligent conueniency, and that
posterity may remember upon occasion to use the like according to the
declaration, I think it not amiss to remember thus much.

The Contents of the declaration of the Lottery published by the Counsel.
Sir Thomas Smith Treasurer.
which not falling out as we desired, and others expected, whose moneys are
adventured ther^in, we thought good therefore for the avoiding all unjust and
sinister constructions, to resolve the doubts of all indifferent minded, in
three special points for their better satisfaction.

But ere I go any farther, let us remember there was a running Lottery, used a
long time in Saint Paul's Churchyard, where this stood, that brought into the
Treasury good sums of money daily, though the Lot was but small.

Now for the points, the first is, for as much as the Adventurers came in so
slackly for the year past, without prejudice to the generality, in losing the
blankes and prises, we were forced to petition to the honorable Lords, who out
of their noble care to further this Plantation, have recommended their Letters
to the Countries, Cities, and good towns in England, which we hope by sending
in their voluntary Adventurers, will sufficiently supply us.

The second for satisfaction to all honest well affected minds, is, that though
this expectation answer not our hopes, yet we have not failed in our Christian
care, the good of that Colony, to whom we have lately sent two sundry supplies,
and were they but now supplied with more hands, we should soon resolve the
division of the Country by Lot, and so lessen the general charge.

The third is our constant resolution, that seeing our credits are so far
engaged to the honorable Lords and the whole State, for the drawing this great
Lottery, which we intend shall be without delay, the 26. of June next, desiring
all such as have undertaken with books to solicit their friends, that they
will not withold their moneys till the last month be expired, lest we be
unwillingly forced to proportion a less value and number of our Blankes and
Prises which hereafter follows.

Welcomes.
TO him that first shall be drawn out with a blanke, 100 Crowns. To the
second, 50 Crowns. To the third, 25 Crowns. To him that every day during the
drawing of this Lottery, shall be first drawn out with a blanke, 10 Crowns.
Prizes.
1 Great Prize of 4500 Crowns. 2 Great Prizes, each of 2000 Crowns. 4 Great
Prizes, each of 1000 Crowns. 6 Great Prizes, each of 500 Crowns. 10 Prizes,
each of 300 Crowns. 20 Prizes, each of 200 Crowns. 100 Prizes, each of 100
Crowns. 200 Prizes, each of 50 Crowns. 400 Prizes, each of 20 Crowns. 1000
Prizes, each of 10 Crowns. 1000 Prizes, each of 8 Crowns. 1000 Prizes, each
of 6 Crowns. 4000 Prizes, each of 4 Crowns. 1000 Prizes, each of 3 Crowns.
1000 Prizes, each of 2 Crowns.
Rewards.
TO him that shall be last drawn out with a blanke, 25 Crowns. To him that
puts in the greatest Lot, under one name, 400 Crowns. To him that puts
in the second greatest number, 300 Crowns. To him that puts in the third
greatest number, 200 Crowns. To him that puts in the fourth greatest
number, 100 Crowns.
If diverse be of equal number, their rewards are to be divided proportionally.

Addition of new Rewards.
THe blanke that shall be drawn out next before the great Prize shall have 25
Crowns. The blanke that shall be drawn out next after the said great Prize 25
Crowns. The blancks that shall be drawn out immediately before the two next
great Prizes, shall have each of them 20 Crowns. The several blankes next
after them, each shall have 20 Crowns. The several blankes next before the
four great Prizes, each shall have 15 Crowns. The several blankes next after
them, each shall have 15 Crowns. The several blankes next before the six
great Prizes, each shall have 10 Crowns. The several blankes next after them,
each shall have 10 Crowns.
The prizes, welcomes, and rewards, shall be paid in ready Money, Plate, or
other goods reasonably rated; if any dislike of the plate or goods, he shall
have money, abating only the tenth part, except in small prizes of ten Crowns
or under.

The money for the Adventurers is to be paid to Sir Thomas Smith, Knight, and
Treasurer for Virginia, or such Offic^rs as he shall appoint in City or
Country, under the common seal of the company for the rece^t thereof.

All prizes, welcomes and rewards drawn where ever they dwell, shall of the
Treasurer have present pay, and whosoever under one name or po^sie pays three
pound in ready money, shall receive six shillings and eight pence, or a silver
spoone of that value at his choice.

About this time it chanced a Spanish ship, beat too and again before point
Comfort, and at last sent a shore their boat, as desirous of a Pilot. A Spanish
Ship in Virginia.
Captain James Dauis the governor, immediately gave them one, but he was no
sooner in the boat, but away they went with him, leaving three of their
companions behind them; this sudden accident occasioned some distrust, and a
strict examination of those three thus left, yet with as good usage as our
estate could afford them. They only confessed having lost their Admiral,
accident had forced them into those parts, and two of them were Captains, and
in chi^fe authority in the fleet: thus they lived till one of them was found to
be an Englishman, and had been the Spaniards Pilot for England in 88. and
having here induced some malcontents, to believe his proiects, to run away
with a small bark, which was apprehended, some executed, and he expecting but
the Hangmans courtesy, directly confessed that two or three Spanish ships was
at Sea, purposely to discover the estate of the Colony, but their Commission
was not to be opened till they arrived in the Bay, so that of any thing more he
was utterly ignorant. One of the Spaniards at last dyed, the other was sent for
England, but this reprieued, till Sir Thomas Dale hanged him at Sea in his
voyage homeward; the E^glish Pilot they carried for Spain, whom after a long
time imprisonment, with much ^^te was returned for England.

Thomas Dal^, having settled to his thinking all things in good order, made
choice of one Master George Yearly, Sir Thomas Smith Treasurer.
to be Depu^y-Gouernour in his absence, and so returned for England,
accompanied with Po^ahontas the Kings Daughter, and Master R^lfe her husband,
and arrived at Plimmoth the 12. of June. 1616.

The government left to Captain Yearly.
NOw a little to commentary upon all these proceedings, A digression.
let me leave but this as a caveat by the way; if the alteration of government
has subverted great Empires, how dangerous is it then in the infancy of a
commonweal? The multiplicity of Governors is a great damage to any State, but
uncertain daily changes are burdensome, because their entertainments are
chargeable, and many will make hay whilst the sun does shine, how ever it
shall fare with the generality.

This dear bought Land with so much blood and cost, has only made some few
rich, and all the rest losers. But it was intended at the first, the first
undertakers should be first preferred and rewarded, and the first adventurers
satisfied, and they of all the rest are the most neglected; and those that
never adventured a groat, never see the Country, nor ever did any service for
it, employed in their places, adorned with their deferrs, and enriched with
their ruins; and when they a^e led fat, then in comes others so lean as
they were, who through their omnipotency do as much. Thus what one Officer
does, another vndoth, only aiming at their own ends, thinking all the world
derides his dignity, cannot (...) is Coffe^s being in authority with any thing.
Every man has his mind free, but he can never be a true member to that
estate, that to enrich himself beggars all the Country. Which bad course,
there are many yet in this noble plantation, whose true honor and worth as
much scorns it, as the others loves it; for the Nobility and Gentry, there
is scarce any of them expects any thing bu^ the prosperity of the action: and
there are some Merchants and others, I am confidently persuaded, do take more
care and pains, nay, and at their continual^ great charge, than they could be
hired to for the love of money, so honestly regarding the general good of this
great work, they would hold it worse than sacrilege, to wrong it but a
shilling, or extort upon the common soldier a penny. But to the purpose, and
to follow the History.

The government of Captain Yea^ley.
Mr. George Yearly now invested Deputy Governor by Sr. Thomas Dale, applied
himself for the most part in planting Tobacco, as the most present commodity
they could devise for a present gain, so that every man betook himself to
the best place he could for the purpose: now though Sir Thomas Dale had caused
such an abundance of corn to be planted, that every man had sufficient, yet
the supplies were sent us, came so unfurnished, as quickly eased us of our
superfluity. To relieve their necessities, he sent to the Chickahamanias for
the tribute Corn Sir Thom^s Dale and Captain Argall had conditioned for with
them: But such a bad answer they returned him, that he drew together one
hundred of his best shot, with whom he went to Chick^hamania; the people in
some places used him indifferently, but in most places with much scorn and
contempt, telling him he was but Sir Thomas D^les man, and they had paid his
Master according to condition, but to give any to him they had no such order,
neither would they obey him as they had done his Master; after he had told them
his authority, and that he had the same power to enforce them that Dale had,
they dared him to come on shore to fight, presuming more of his not daring,
than their own valors. Yearly seeing their insolences, made no great
difficulty to go on shore at Ozinies, and they as little to encounter him:
but marching from thence toward Mamanahunt, they put themselves in the same
order they see us, lead by their Captain Kissanacomen, Governor of Ozinies,
and so marched close along by us, each as threatening other who should first
begin. But that night we quartered against Mamanahunt, and they passed the
River. The next day we followed them; there are few places in Virginia had then
more plain ground together, nor more plenty of Corn, which although it was
but newly gathered, yet they had hid it in the woods where we could not find
it: a good time we spent thus in arguing the cause, the Saluages without fear
standing in troops amongst us, seeming as if their countenances had been
sufficient to dant us: what other practices they had I know not; but to prevent
the worst, our Captain caused us all to make ready, and upon the word, to let
fly among them, where he appointed: others also he commanded to seize on them
they could for prisoners; all which being done according to our direction, the
Captain gave the word, and we presently discharged, where twelve lay, Twelve
Saluages slain, twelve prisoners taken, and peace concluded.
some dead, the rest for life sprawling on the ground, twelve more we ^^oke
prisoners, two whereof were brothers, two of their eight Elders, the one took
by Sergeant Boothe, the other by Robert a Polonian; Near one hundred bushels
of Corn we had for their ransomes, which was promised the Soldiers for a
reward, but it was not performed: now Opechankanough had agreed with our
Captain for the subiecting of those people, that neither he nor Powhatan
could ever bring to their obedience, and that he should make no peace with them
without his advice: in our return by Ozinies with our prisoners we met
Opechankanough, who with much ado, fained with what pains he had p^ocured
their peace, the which to requite, they called him the King of Ozin^s, and
brought him from all parts many presents of Beads, Copper, and such trash as
they had; here as at many other times we were beholding to Captain Henry
Spilman our Interpreter, (...) 108
a Gentleman had lived long time in this Country, and sometimes a prisoner
among the Saluages, and done much good service, though but badly rewarded. From
hence we marched toward James town, we had three Boats loaded with Corn and
other luggage, Eleven men cast away.
the one of them being more willing to be at James town with the news than
the other, was ouerset, and eleven men cast away with the Boat, Corn and all
their provision; notwithstanding this put all the rest of the Saluages in that
fear, especially in regard of the great league we had with Opechankanough,
that we followed our labors quietly, and in such security, that diverse
saluages of other Nations, daily frequented us with what provisions they could
get, and would guide our men on hunting, and often hunt for us themselves.
Captain Yearly had a Saluage or two so well trained up to their pieces, they
were as expert as any of the English, A bad-presiders.
and one he kept purposely to kill him foul. There were diverse others had
Saluages in like manner for their men. Thus we lived together, as if we had
been one people, all the time Captain Yearley stayed with us, but such
grudges and discontents daily increased among our selves, that upon the
arrival of Captain Argall, sent by the Council and Company to be our
Governor, Captain Yearley returned for England in the year 1617. From the
writings of Captain Nathaniel Powell, William Cantrill, Sergeant Boothe,
Edward Gurganey.

During this time, the Lady Rebecca, alias Pocahontas, daughter to Powhatan,
Pocahontas instructions.
by the diligent care of Master John Rolfe her husband and his friends, was
taught to speak such English as might well be understood, well instructed in
Christianity, and was become very formal and civil after our English manner;
she had also by him a child which she loved most dearly, and the Treasurer
and Company took order both for the maintenance of her and it, besides there
were diverse persons of great rank and quality had been very kind to her;
and before she arrived at London, Captain Smith to deserve her former
courtesies, made her qualities known to the Queens most excellent Majesty
and her Court, and writ a little book to this effect to the Queen: An
abstract whereof follows.

To the most high and virtuous Princess Queen Anne of Great Brittanie.
Most admired Queen,
THe love I bear my God, my King and Country, has so often emboldened me in
the worst of extreme dangers, that now honesty does constrain me presume
thus far beyond my self, to present your Majesty this short discourse: if
ingratitude be a deadly poison to all honest virtues, I must be guilty of
that crime if I should omit any means to be thankful. So it is,

That some ten years ago being in Virginia, A relation to Queen Anne, of
Pocahontas.
and taken prisoner by the power of Powhatan their chief King, I received from
this great Saluage exceeding great courtesy, especially from his son
Nantaquaus, the most manliest, comeliest, boldest spirit, I ever saw in a
Saluage, and his sister Pocahontas, the Kings most dear and wel-beloued
daughter, being but a child of twelve or thirteen years of age, whose
compassionate pitiful heart, of my desperate estate, gave me much cause to
respect her: I being the first Christian this proud King and his grim
attendants ever saw: and thus inthralled in their barbarous power, I cannot say
I felt the least occasion of want that was in the power of those my mortal
foes to prevent, notwithstanding al their threats. After some six weeks fatting
amongst those Saluage Courtiers, at the minute of my execution, she hazarded
the beating out of her own brains to save mine, and not only that, but so
prevailed with her father, that I was safely conducted to James town, where I
found about eight and thirty miserable poor and sick creatures, to keep
possession of all those large territories of ^irginia, such was the weakness
of this poor Commonwealth, as had the Saluages not fed us, we directly had
starued,

And this relief, most gracious Queen, was commonly brought us by this Lady
Pocahontas, notwithstanding all these passages when inconstant Fortune turned
our peace to war, this tender Virgin would still not spare to dare to visit
us, and by her our iarres have been often appeased, and our wants still
supplied; were it the policy of her father thus to employ her, or the
ordinance of God thus to make her his instrument, or her extraordinary
affection to our Nation, I know not: but of this I am sure; when her father
with the utmost of his policy and power, sought to surprise me, having but
eighteen with me, the dark night could not affright her from coming through
the irksome woods, and with watered eyes gave me intelligence, with her best
advice to escape his fury; which had he known, he had surely slain her.
James town with her wild train she as freely frequented, as her fathers
habitation; and during the time of two or three years, she next under God, was
still the instrument to preserve this Colonie from death, famine and utter
confusion, which if in those times had once be^ne dissolved, Virginia might
have line as it was at our first arrival to this day. Since then, this
business having been turned and varied by many accidents from that I left it
at: it is most certain, after a long and troublesome war after my departure,
betwixt her father and our Colonie, all which time she was not heard of, about
two years after she her self was taken prisoner, being so detained near two
years longer, the Colonie by that means was relie^ed, peace concluded, and at
last rejecting her barbarous condition, was ma^ied to an E^gl^s^ Ge^^leman,
with whom at this present she i^ in England; ^he first Christi^n ^uer of that
Nation, the first Virgi^i^n ever sp^ke En^l^^^ ^r (...) marriage by an
E^gl^shman, a matter surely, if my meaning be truly ^^^^^dered and well
understood, worthy a Princes understanding.

Thus most gracious Lady, I have related to your Ma^estie, what at your best
leisure our approved H^stories will account you at large, and done in the time
of your Majesty's life, and howeuer this might be presented you from a more
worthy pen, i^ cannot from a more honest heart, as yet I never begged any thing
of the state, or any, and it is my want of ability and her exceeding desert,
your birth, means and author^tie, her birth, virtue, want and simplicity,
does make me thus bold, humbly to beseech your M^iestie to take this knowledge
of her, though it be from one so unworthy to be the reporter, as my self, her
husbands estate not being able to make her fit to attend your Majesty: the
most and least I can do, is to tell you this, because none so often has tried
it as my self, and the rather being of so great a spirit, how ever her
stature: if she should not be well received, seeing this Kingdom may rightly
have a Kingdom by her means; her present love to us and Christianity, might
turn to such scorn and fury, as to divert all this good to the worst of
evil, where finding so great a Queen should do her some honor more than she
can imagine, for being so kind to your servants and subjects, would so ravish
her with content, as endeare her dearest blood to effect that, your Majesty
and all the Kings honest subjects most earnestly desire: And so I humbly kiss
your gracious hands.

Being about this time preparing to set sail for New England, I could not stay
to do her that service I desired, Pocahontas meeting in England with Captain
Smith.
and she well deserved; but hearing she was at Branford with diverse of my
friends, I went to see her: After a modest salutation, without any word, she
turned about, obscured her face, as not seeming well contented; and in that
humor her husband, with diverse others, we all left her two or three hours,
repenting my self to have writ she could speak English. But not long after,
she began to talk, and remembered me well what courtesies she had done:
saying, You did promise Powhatan what was yours should be his, and he the like
to you; you called him father being in his land a stranger, and by the same
reason so must I do you: which though I would have excused, I durst not allow
of that title, because she was a Kings daughter; with a well set countenance
she said, Were you not afraid to come into my fathers Country, and caused
fear in him and all his people (but me) and fear you here I should call you
father; I tell you then I will, and you shall call me child, and so I will
be for ever and ever your Countrieman. They did tell us always you were dead,
and I knew no other till I came to Plimoth; yet Powhatan did command
Vitamatomakkin to seek you, and know the truth, because your Countriemen will
lie much.

This Saluage, one of Powhatans Council, Vitamatomack, observations of his
usage.
being amongst them held an understanding fellow; the King purposely sent him,
as they say, to number the people here, and inform him well what we were and
our state. Arriving at Plim^th, according to his directions, he got a long
stick, whereon by notches he did think to have kept the number of all the
men he could see, but he was quickly weary of that task: Coming to London,
where by chance I met him, having ren^wed our acquaintance, where many were
desirous to hear and see his behavior, he told me Powhatan did bid him to
find me out, to show him our God, the King, Queen, and Prince, I so much had
told them of: Concerning God, I told him the best I could, the King I heard he
had seen, and the rest he should see when he would; he denied ever to have
seen the King, till by circumst^nces he was satisfied he had: Then he replied
very sadly, You gave Powhatan a white Dog, which Powhatan fed as himself, but
your King gave me nothing, and I am better than your white Dog.

The small time I staid in London, diverse Courtiers and others, my
acquaintances, Pocahontas her entertainment with the Queen.
has gone with me to see her, that generally concluded, they did think God
had a great hand in her conversion, and they have seen many English Ladies
worse favored, proportioned and behauioured, and as since I have heard, it
pleased both the King and Queens Majesty honorably to esteem her,
accompanied with that honorable Lady the Lady De la Ware, and that honorable
Lord her husband, and diverse other persons of good qualities, both publicly at
the maskes and otherwise, to her great satisfaction and content, which
doubtless she would have deserved, had she lived to arrive in Virginia.

The government deuolued to Captain Samuel Argall, 1617.
Sir Thomas Smith Treasurer.
having well furnished Captain Samuel Argall, the Lady Pocahontas alias
Rebecca, with her husband and others, in the good ship called the George, it
pleased God at Graues-end to take this young Lady to his mercy, where she
made not more sorrow for her unexpected death, than joy to the beholders, to
hear and see her m^ke so religious and godly an end. Her little child Thomas
Rolfe therefore was left at Plim^th with Sir Lewis Stukly, that desired the
keeping of it. The death of Pocahontas.
Captain Hamar his Vice Admiral was gone before, but he found him at
Plimoth. In March they set sail 1617. and in May he arrived at James town,
where he was kindly entertained by Captain Yearley and his Company in a
martial order, whose right hand file was led by an Indian. In James town he
found but five or six houses, the Church down, the Palizado's broken, the
Bridge in pieces, the Well of fresh water spoiled; the Storehouse they used
for the Church, the marketplace, and streets, and all other spare places
planted with Tobacco, the Saluages as frequent in their houses as themselves,
whereby they were become expert in our arms, and had a great many in their
custody and possession, the Colonie dispersed all about, planting Tobacco.
Captain Argall not liking those proceedings, altered them agreeable to his
own mind, taking the best order he could for repairing those defects which
did exceedingly trouble us; we were constrained every year to build and
repair our old Cottages, which were always a decaying in all places of the
Country, yea, the very Courts of Guard built by Sir Thomas Dale, was ready to
fall, and the Palizado's not sufficient to keep out Hogs. Their number of
people were about 400. but not past 200. fit for husbandry and tillage: we
found there in all one hundred twenty eight cattle, and fourscore and eight
Goats, besides innumerable numbers of Swine, and good plenty of Corn in some
places, 1000. bushels of Corn from the Saluages.
yet the next year the Captain sent out a Frigate and a Pinnace, that brought
us near six hundred bushels more, which did greatly relieve the whole Colonie:
For from the tenants we seldom had above four hundred bushels of rent Corn
to the store, and there was not remaining of the Companies company, past four
and fifty men, women and Children.

Sir Thomas Smith Treasurer.
This year having planted our fields, came a great drought, and such a cruel
storm of hail, which did such spoil both to the Corn and Tobacco, that we
reaped but small profit, the Magazine that came in the George, being five
months in her passage, proved very badly conditioned, but ere she arrived, we
had gathered and made up our Tobacco, the best at three shillings the pound,
the rest at eighteen pence.

To supply us, the Council and Company with all possible care and diligence,
furnished a good ship of some two hundred and fifty tun, with two hundred
people and the Lord la Ware. They set sail in April, and took their course
by the western Isles, where the Governor of the I Will of Saint Michael received
the Lord la Ware, and honorably feasted him, with all the content he could
give him. Going from thence, they were long troubled with contrary winds, in
which time many of them fell very sick, The death of the Lord la Ware.
thirty died, one of which number was that most honorable Lord Governor the
Lord la Ware, whose most noble and generous disposition, is well known to his
great cost, had been most forward in this business for his Countries good:
Yet this tender state of Virginia was not grown to that maturitie, to
maintain such state and pleasure as was fit for such a personage, with so
brave and great attendance: for some small number of aduentrous Gentlemen to
make discoueries, and lie in Garrison, ready upon any occasion to keep in
fear the inconstant Saluages, nothing were more requisite, but to have more to
wait and play than work, or more commanders and officers than industrious
laborers was not so necessary: for in Virginia, a plain Soldier that can
use a Pick-axe and spade, is better than five Knights, although they were
Knights that could break a Lance; for men of great place, not inured to those
incounters; when they find things not suitable, grow many times so
discontented, they forget themselves, and often become so careless, that a
discontented melancholy brings them to much sorrow, and to others much misery.
At last they stood in for the coast of New England, where they met a small
Frenchman, rich of Beuers and other Furs. Though we had here but small
knowledge of the coast nor country, They are relieved in New England.
yet they took such an abundance of Fish and Foul, and so well refreshed
themselves there with wood and water, as by the help of God thereby, having
been at Sea sixteen weeks, got to Virginia, who without this relief had
been in great danger to perish. The Frenchmen made them such a feast, with
such an abundance of variety of Fish, Foul and Fruits, as they all admired,
and little expected that wild wilderness could afford such wonderful
abundance of plenty. In this ship came about two hundred men, but very little
provision, and the ship called the Treasurer came in again not long after with
forty passengers; the Lord la Wares ship lying in Virginia three months, we
victualled her with threescore bushels of Corn, and eight Hogsheads of flesh,
besides other victual she spent whilst they tarried there: this ship brought
us advice that great multitudes were a preparing in England to be sent, and
relied much upon that victual they should find here: whereupon our Captain
called a Council, and writ to the Council here in England the estate of the
Colonie, and what a great misery would ensue, if they sent not provision as
well as people; and what they did suffer for want of skillful husbandmen, and
means to set their Ploughs on work, having as good ground as any man can
desire, and about forty Bulls and Oxen, but they wanted men to bring them to
labor, and Irons for the Ploughs, and harness for the Cattle. Some thirty
or forty acres we had sown with one Plough, but it stood so long on the
ground before it was reaped, it was most shaken, and the rest spoiled with the
Cattle and Rats in the Barn, but no better Corn could be for the quantity.

Richard Killingbeck being with the Captain at Kekoughtan, Richard Killingbeck
and four other murdered by the Saluages.
desired leave to return to his wife at Charles hundred, he went to James
town by water, there he got four more to go with him by land, but it proved
that he intended to go trade with the Indies of Chickahamania, where making
show of the great quantity of trucke they had, which the Saluages perceiving,
partly for their trucke, partly for revenge of some friends they pretended
should have been slain by Captain Yearley, one of them with an English piece
shot Killingbeck dead, the other Saluages assaulted the rest and slew them,
stripped them, and took what they had: But fearing this murder would come to
light, and might cause them to suffer for it, would now proceed to the
perfection of villainy; for presently they robbed their Machacomocko house of
the town, Their Church and Storehouse.
stole all the Indian treasure thereout, and fled into the woods, as other
Indians related. On Sunday following, one Farfax that dwelt a mile from the
town, going to Church, Farfax, three children and two boys also murdered.
left his wife and three small children safe at home, as he thought, and a
young youth: she supposing prayer to be done, left the children, and went to
meet her husband; presently after came three or four of those fugitive
Saluages, entered the house, and slew a boy and three children, and also another
youth that stole out of the Church in prayer time, meeting them, was likewise
murdered. Of this disaster the Captain sent to Opechankanough for
satisfaction, but he excused the matter, as altogether ignorant of it, at the
same time the Saluages that were robbed were complaining to Opechankanough, and
much feared the English would be revenged on them, so that Opechankanough sent
to Captain Argall, to assure him the peace should never be broken by him,
desiring that he would not revenge the injury of those fugitives upon the
innocent people of that town, which town he should have, and sent him a
basket of earth, as possession given of it, and promised, so soon as possibly
they could catch these robbers, to send him their heads for satisfaction, but
he never performed it. Samuel Argall, John Rolfe.

A relation from Master John Rolfe, June 15. 1618.
COncerning the state of our new Commonwealth, it is somewhat bettered, for we
have sufficient to content our selves, though not in such abundance as is
vainly reported in England. Powhatan died this last April, Powhatans death.
yet the Indians continue in peace. Itopatin his second brother succeeds him,
and both he and Opechankanough have confirmed our former league. On the
eleventh of May, about ten of the clock in the night, Haile-stones eight
inches about.
happened a most fearful tempest, but it continued not past half an hour,
which powered down hailestones eight or nine inches about, that none durst go
out of their doors, and though it tore the bark and leaves of the trees, yet
we find not they hurt either man or beast; it fell only about James town,
for but a mile to the East, and twenty to the West there was no hail at all.
Thus in peace every man followed his building and planting without any
accidents worthy of note. Sir Edwin Sands Treasurer. Master John Fare^ Deputy.
Some private differences happened betwixt Captain Bruster and Captain
Argall, and Captain Argall and the Company here in England; but of them I am
not fully informed, neither are they here for any use, and therefore unfit to
be remembered. In December one Captain Stallings, an old planter in those
parts, being employed by them of the West country for a fishing voyage, in
New England, fell foul of a Frenchman whom he took, leaving his own ship to
return for England, himself with a small company remained in the French
bark, some small time after upon the coast, and thence returned to winter in
Virginia.

The government surrendered to Sir George Yearley.
FOr to begin with the year of our Lord, 1619. there arrived a little Pinnace
privately from England about Easter for Captain Argall, who taking order for
his affairs, within four or five days returned in her, and left for his
Deputy, Captain Nathaniel Powell. On the e^ighteenth of April, which was but
ten or twelve days after, arrived Sir George Yearley, by whom we understood
Sir Edwin Sands was chosen Treasurer, and Master John Farrar his Deputy, and
what great supplies was a preparing to be sent us, which did ravish us so much
with joy and content, we thought our selves now fully satisfied, for our long
toil and labors, and as happy men as any in the world. Notwithstanding, such
an accident happened Captain Stallings, the next day his ship was cast away, and
he not long after slain in a private quarrel. Sir George Yearly to begin
his government, added to be of his council, Captain Francis West, Captain
Nathaniel Powell* Master John Pory, Master John Rolfe, and Master William
Wickam, and Master Samuel Macocke, and propounded to have a general assembly
with all expedition. Upon the twelfth of this Month, came in a Pinnace of
Captain Bargraues, and on the seventeenth Captain Lownes, and one Master
Euans, who intended to plant themselves at Waraskoyack, Waraskoyack planted.
but now Ophechankanough will not come at us, that causes us suspect his former
promises.

In May came in the Margaret of Bristoll, with four and thirty men, all well
and in health, and also many devout gifts, and we were much troubled in
examining some scandalous letters sent into England, to disgrace this Country
with barrenness, to discourage the adventurers, and so bring it and us to
ruin and confusion; notwithstanding, we find by them of best experience, an
industrious man not other ways employed, may well tend four akers of Corn,
and 1000. plants of Tobacco, and where they say an aker will yield but three or
four barrels, we have ordinarily four or five, but of new ground six, seven,
and eight, and a barrel of Pease and Beans, which we esteem as good as two
of Corn, which is after thirty or forty bushels an aker, A barrel they
account four bushels.
so that one man may provide Corn for five, and apparel for two by the profit
of his Tobacco; they say also English Wheat will yield but sixteen bushels an
aker, and we have reaped thirty: besides to manure the Land, no place has more
white and blew Marble than here, had we but Carpenters to build and make Carts
and Ploughs, and skillful men that know how to use them, and train up our
cattle to draw them, which though we endeavor to effect, yet our want of
experience brings but little to perfection but planting Tobaco, and yet of that
many are so covetous to have much, they make little good; besides there are so
many sofisticating Tobaco-mungers in England* were it never so bad, they would
sell it for Verinas, and the trash that remains should be Virginia, such
deuilish bad minds we know some of our own Countrymen do bear, not only
to the business, but also to our mother England her self; could they or durst
they as freely defame her.

The 25. of June came in the Trial with Corn and Cattle all in safety, which
took from us clearly all fear of famine; then our governor and council
caused Burgesses to be chosen in all places, Their time of Parliament.
and met at a general Assembly, where all matters were debated thought
expedient for the good of the Colony, and Captain Ward was sent to Monahigan
in new England, to fish in May, and returned the latter end of May, but to
small purpose, for they wanted Salt: the George also was sent to New Foundland
with the Cape Merchant, there she bought fish, that defraied her charges, and
made a good voyage in seven weeks. About the last of August came in a dutch
man of war that sold us twenty Negars, and Iapazous King of Patawomeck, came
to James town, to desire two ships to come trade in his River, for a more
plentiful year of Corn had not been in a long time, yet very contagious,
and by the treachery of one Poule, in a manner turned heathen, we were very
jealous the Saluages would surprise us. The Governors have bounded four
Corporations; which is the Companies, the University, Four corporations named.
the Governors and Gleabe land: Ensign Will. Spencer, and Thomas Barret a
Sergeant, with some others of the ancient Planters being set free, we are the
first farmers that went forth, and have chosen places to their content, so that
now knowing their own land, they strive who should exceed in building and
planting. The fourth of November the Bona noua came in with all her people
lusty and well; not long after one Master Dirmer sent out by some of Plimoth
for New England, arrived in a Bark of five tons, and returned the next
Spring; notwithstanding the ^il rumors of the vnwholsomnesse of James town,
the new comers that were planted at old P^spaheghe, little more then a mile
from it, had their healths better then any in the Country. Captain Wards
exploit.
In December Captain Ward returned from Pat^womeck, the people there dealt
falsely with him, so that he took 800. bushels of Corn from them perforce.
Captain Woddiffe of Bristol came in not long after, with all his people lusty
and in health, and we had two particular ^ouernors sent us, under the titles of
Deputies to the Company, the one to have charg^ of the College Land, the other
of the Companies: Now you are to vnderst^nd, that because there have been many
compl^ints against the G^uernors, C^p^aines, and Officers in Virginia, for
buy^ng and selli^g ^en and b^^es, or to b^^ set over from one to another for a
yearly rent, was ^eld in (...) a ^^^ng most intolerable, o^ that ^he tenants
or lawful seruan^s should b^ put ^^om ^^^ir p^^ces, or abridged their
Covenants, ^as ^o ^di^us, (...) the ^ery (...) ^h^re^^ b^^ught a great scandal
to the general action. T^^ (...) good and wor^h^ (...) and ^p^ointed a hundred
men sho^^ (...) provided to serve and attend the Gouer^^^^ (...) gouernm^nt,
which number he was to make good at his departure, and (...) to his Successor
in like manner, fifty to the Deputy-Gouernour of the College land, and fifty to
the D^puty of the Companies land, fifty to the Treasurer, to the Secretary five
and twenty, and more to the Marshall and C^pe merchant; which they are also to
leave to their successors, and likewise to every particular Officer such a
compe^ency, as he might live well in his Office, without oppressing any under
their charge, which good law I pray God it be well observed, and then we may
truly say in Virginia, we are the most happy people in the world. By me John
Rolfe.

There went this year by the Companies records, 11. ships, and 1216. The
number of Ships and men.
persons to be thus disposed on: Tenants for the Governors land fourscore,
besides fifty sent the former spring; for the Companies land a hundred and
thirty, for the College a hundred, for the Glebe land fifty, young women to
make wives ninety, servants for public service fifty, and fifty more whose
labors were to bring up thirty of the infidels children, the rest were sent to
private Plantations. Gifts given.


Two persons unknown have given fair Plate and Ornaments for two Communion
Tables, the one at the College, the other at the Church of Mistress Mary
Robinson, who toward the foundation gave two hundred pound. And another
unknown person sent to the Treasurer five hundred and fifty pounds, for the
bringing up of the saluage children in Christianity. Master Nicholas Farrar
deceased, has by his Will given three hundred pounds to the College, to be
paid when there shall be ten young Saluages placed in it, in the mean time
four and twenty pound yearly to be distributed unto three discreet and godly
young men in the Colony, to bring up three wild young infidels in some good
course of life, also there were granted eleven Pattents, But few perform them.
upon condition to transport people and cattle to increase the Plantations.

A desperate Sea Fight betwixt two Spanish men of war, and a small English
ship, at the I Will of Dominica going to Virginia, by Captain Anthony Chester.
The Earl of Southampton Treasurer, and M. John Ferrar Deputy.
Having taken our journey toward Virginia in the beginning of February, a ship
called the Margaret and John, of one hundred and sixty tuns, eight Iron Pieces
and a Falcon, with eighty Passengers besides Sailers; After many tempests and
foul weather, about the foureteenth of March we were in thirteen degrees and
an half of Northerly latitude, where we descried a ship at hull; it being but
a fair gale of wind, we edged toward her to see what she was, but she
presently set sail, and ran us quickly out of sight: This made us keep our
course for Mettalina, and the next day passing Dominica, we came to an anchor
at Guardalupo, A Frenchman cast away at Guardalupo.
to take in fresh water. Six Frenchmen there cast away sixteen months ago
came aboard us; they told us a Spanish man of War but seven days before was
seeking his consort, and this was she we descried at hull. At M^uis we intended
to refresh our selves, having been eleven weeks pestered in this unwholesome
ship; but there we found two tall ships with the Hollanders colors, but
necessity forcing us on shore, we anchored fair by them, The Spaniards begin.
and in friendly manner sent to hale them: but seeing they were Spaniards,
retiring to our ship, they sent such a volley of shot after us, that shot the
Boat, split the Oars, and some through the clothes, yet not a man hurt; and
then followed with their great Ordnance, that many times ouer-racked our ship,
which being so cumbred with the Passengers provisions, our Ordnance was not
well fitted, nor any thing as it should have been. But perceiving what they
were, we fitted our selves the best we could to prevent a mischief, seeing
them warp themselves to windward, we thought it not good to be boorded on both
sides at an anchor, we intended to set sail, but that the Vice Admiral
battered so hard our star-boord side, The Vice Admiral shot between wind and
water.
that we fell to our business, and answered their unkindness with such fair
shot from a Demiculuering, that shot her between wind and water, whereby she
was glad to leave us and her Admiral together. Coming fair by our quarter,
he took in his Holland flag, and put forth his Spanish colors, and so haled
us.

We quietly and quickly answered him, both what we were, and whither bound,
relating the effect of our Commission, and the cause of our coming thither for
water, and not to annoy any of the King of Spaines Subjects, nor any. She
commanded us amain for the King of Spain, we replied with enlarging the
particulars what friends both the Kings our Masters were, and as we would do
no wrong, we would take none. They commanded us aboard to show our Commission,
which we refused, but if they would send their Boat to us willingly they should
see it. The manner of their fight.
But for answer they made two great shot at us, with a volley of small shot,
which caused us to leave the decks; then with many ill words they laid us
aboard, which caused us to raise our maine sail, and give the word to our
small shot which lay close and ready, that paid them in such sort, they quickly
retired. The fight continued half an hour, as if we had been environed with
fire and smoke, until they discovered the waste of our ship naked, where they
bravely boorded us loofe for loofe, hasting with pikes and swords to enter, but
it pleased God so to direct our Captain, and encourage our men with valor,
that our pikes being formerly placed under our half deck, and certain shot
lying close for that purpose under the Port holes, encountered them so rudely,
that their fury was not only rebated, but their hastiness intercepted, and
their whole company beaten back, many of our men were hurt, but I am sure they
had two for one.

In the end they were violently repulsed, until they were reinforced to charge
ag^in^ by their comm^^ds, wh^ standing upon their honors, thought it a great
indig^ity to be so aff^onted, which caused a second charge, and that answered
with a second beating back: whereat the Captain grew iuraged, and constrained
them to come on again afresh, which they did so effectually, that
questionless it had wrought an alteration, if the God that tosseth Monarchies,
and reareth M^untaines, had not taught us to toss our P^kes with prosperous
events, and powered out a volley of small shot amongst them, whereby that
valiant Commander was slain, and many of his Soldiers dropped down likewise
on the top of the hatches. This we saw with our eyes, and rejoiced with it at
our hearts, The Captain slain.
so that we might perceive good success coming on, our Captain presently
took advantage of their discomfiture; though with much comiseration of that
resolute Captain, and not only plied them again with our Ordnance, but had
more shot under the Pikes, which was bestowed to good purpose, and amazed our
enemies with the suddenness.

Amongst the rest, one Lucas, our Carpenters Mate, must not be forgotten, A
worthy exploit of Lucas.
who perceiving away how to annoy them; As they were thus puzl^d and in a
confusion, drew out a Minion under the half deck, and there bent it upon them
in such a manner, that when it was fired, the cases of stones and pieces of
Iron fell upon them so thick, as cleared the deck, and slew many, and in short
time we saw few assailants, but such as crept from place to place covertly from
the fury of our shot, which now was thicker than theirs: for although has far
as we may commend our enemies, they had done something worthy of commendations;
yet either wanting men, or being overtaken with the unlooked for valor of our
men, they now began to shrink, and give us leave to be wanton with our
advantage. Yet we could only use but four piece of Ordnances, but they served
the turn as well as all the rest: for she was shot so often between wind and
water, we saw they were willing to leave us, but by reason she was fast in the
latch of our cable, which in haste of weighing our anchor hung aloof, she
could not clear her self as she wrought to do, till one cut the Cable with
an axe, and was slain by freeing us. Having been a board us two hours and an
half, seeing her self clear, all the shot we had played on both sides,
which lasted till we were out of shot, then we discovered the Vice Admiral
coming to her assistance, who began a far off to ply us with their
Ordnances, and put us in mind we had another work in hand. Whereupon we
separated the dead and hurt bodies, and manned the ship with the rest, and were
so well encouraged we waifed them amain. The Admiral stood aloof off, and
the other would not come within Falcon shot, where she lay battering us till
she received another payment from a Demiculuering, which made her bear with
the shore for smooth water to mend her leakes. The next morning they both came
up again with us, as if they had determined to devour us at once, but it
seemed it was but a brauado, though they forsook not our quarter for a time
within Musket shot; yet all the night only they kept us company, but made not
a shot. During which time we had leisure to provide us better than before: but
God bethanked they made only but a show of another a^sault, ere suddenly the
Vice Admiral fell a starne, and the other lay shaking in the wind, and so they
both left us. The fight continued six hours, and was the more unwelcome,
because we were so ill provided, and had no intent to sight, nor give occasion
to disturb them. The event of the fight.
As for the loss of men, if Religion had not taught us what by the providence
of God is brought to pass, yet daily experience might inform us, of the
dangers of wars, and perils at sea, by storms tempests, shipwracks, encounters
with Pirates, meeting with enemies, cross winds, long vo^ages, unknown shores,
barbarous Nations, and an hundred inconveniences, of which humane policies are
not capable, nor men's conjectures apprehensiue. We lost Doctor Bohun, a worthy
valian^ Gentleman, (a long time brought up amongst the most learned Surgeons,
and Physicians in Netherlands, and this his second journey to Virginia:) and
seven slain out right, two died shortly of their wounds; sixte^n^ was shot,
whose limbs God be thanked was recovered without maime, and now settled in
Virginia: how many they lost we know not, but we saw a great many lie on the
decks, and their skuppers run with blood, they were about three hundred
tons a piece, each sixteen or twenty Brass pieces. Captain Chester, who
in this fight had behaved himself like a most vigilant, resolute, and a
courageous soldier, as also our honest and valiant master, did still so
comfort and encourage us by all the means they could, at last to all our great
contents we arrived in Virginia, and from thence returned safely to England.

The Names of the Adventurers for Virginia, Alphabetically set down, according
to a printed Book, set out by the Treasurer and Council in this present
year, 1620.
A
SIr William Aliffe. Sir Roger Aston. Sir Anthony Ashley. Sir John Akland. Sir
Anthony Aucher. Sir Robert Askwith. Doctor Francis Anthony. Charles Anthony.
Edward Allen. Edmund Allen Esquire. John Allen. Thomas Allen. William Atkinson,
Esquire. Richard Ashcroft. Nicholas Andrews. John Andrews the elder. John
Andrews the younge^. James Ascough. Giles Allington. Morris Abbot. Ambrose
Asten. James Askew. Anthony Abdey. John Arundell, Esquire.
B
Edward, Earl of Bedford James, Lord Bishop of Bathe and Wells. Sir Francis
Barrington. Sir Morice Barkley. Sir John Benet. Sir Thomas Beamont. Sir Amias
Bamfield. Sir John Bourcher. Sir Edmund Bowyer. Sir Thomas Bludder. Sir George
Bolles. Sir John Bingley. Sir Thomas Button. Sir Henry Beddingfield. Company
of Barbers-Surgeons. Company of Bakers. Richard Banister. John Bancks. Miles
Bancks. Thomas Barber. William Bonham. James Bryerley. William Barners. Anthony
Barners, Esquire* William Brewster. Richard Brook. Hugh Brooker, Esquire.
Ambrose Brewsey. John Brook. Matthew Bromridge. Christopher Brook, Esquire.
Martin Bond. Gabriel Beadle. John Beadle. David Borne. Edward Barnes. John
Badger. Edmund Branduell. Robert Bowyer, Esquire. Bobert Bateman. Thomas
Britton. Nicholas Benson. Edward Bishop. Peter Burgoney. Thomas Burgoney.
Robert Burgoney. Christopher Baron. Peter Benson. John Baker. John Bustoridge.
Francis Burl^y. William Brown. Robert Barker. Samuel Burnham. Edward Barkley.
William Bennet. Captain Edward Brewster. Thomas Brocket. John Bullock. George
Bache. Thomas Bailey. William Barkley. George Butler. Timothy Bathurst. George
Burton. Thomas Bret. Captain John Brough. Thomas Baker. John Blunt. Thomas
Bailey. Richard and Edward Blunt. Mineon Burrell. Richard Blackmore. William
B^ck. Benjamin Brand. John Busbridge. William Burrell. William Barret. Francis
Baldwin. Edward B^rber. Humphrey Basse. Robert Bell. Matthew Bromrick. John
Beaumont. George Barkley. Peter Bartle. Thomas Bretton. John Blount. Arthur
Bromfeld Esquire. William B^rbloke. Charles Beck.
C
George, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. William Lord Cranborne, now Earl of
Salisburie. William, Lord Compton, now Earl of North-hampton. William Lord
Cauendish, now Earl of Devonshire. Richard, Earl of Clanricard. Sir William
Cauendish now Lord Cauendish. Gray, Lord Chandos. Sir Henry Carry. Sir George
Caluert. Sir Lionell Cranfield. Sir Edward Cecill. Sir Robert Cotton. Sir
Oliver Cromwell. Sir Anthony Cope. Sir Walter Cope. Sir Edward Carr. Sir Thomas
Conisbie. Sir George Carry. Sir Edward Conwey. Sir Walter Chute. Sir Edward
Culpeper. Sir Henry Carry, Captain. Sir William Crauen. Sir Walter Covert. Sir
George Coppin. Sir George Chute. Sir Thomas Couentry. Sir John Cutts. Lady
Carry. Company of Cloth-workers. City of Chichester. Robert Chamberlain.
Richard Chamberlain. Francis Couill. William Coyse, Esquire. Abraham
Chamberlain. Thomas Carpenter. Anthony Crew. Richard Cox. William Crosley.
James Chatfeild. Richard Caswell. John Cornelis. Randall Carter. Execut^rs of
Randall Carter. William Canning. Edward Carue, Esquire. Thomas Cannon, Esquire.
Richard Champion. Rawley Crashaw. Henry Collins. Henry Cromwell. John Cooper.
Richard Cooper. Io^n Casson. Thomas Colth^rst. All^n Cotton. Edward Cage.
Abraham Carthwright. Robert Coppin. Thomas Conock. Io^n Clapham. Thomas Church.
William Carpenter. Laurence Camp. James Cambell. Christopher Cl^theroe.
Matthew Cooper. Georg^ Chamber. Captain John Cook. C^ptaine Thomas Conwey,
Esquire. Edward Culpeper, Esquire. Master William Crashaw. Abraham Colm^r. John
Culpeper. Edmund Colbey. Richard Cooper. Robert Creswell. John Cage, Esquire,
Matthew Cave, William Crow. Abraham Carpenter. John Crow. Thomas Cordell.
Richard Connock, Esquire. William Compton. William Chester. Th^mas Couel.
Richard Carmarden, Esquire. William and Paul Canning. H^nry Cromwell, Esquire.
Simon Codrington. Clement Chichley. James Cullemore. William Cantrell.
D
Richard Earl of Dorset. Edward Lord D^nny. Sir John Digbie, now Lord Digbie.
Sir John Doderidge. Sir Drew Drewry the elder. Sir Thomas Dennis. Sir Robert
Drewry. Sir John Dauers. Sir Dudley Digs. Sir Marmaduke Dorrel. Sir Thomas
Dale. Sir Thomas Denton, Company of Drapers. Thomas Bond, Esquire. David Bent,
Esquire. Comanie of Dyers. Town of Dover. Master Richard Dea^e, Alderman,
Henry Dawkes. Edward Dichfield. William Dunne. John Dauis. Matthew D^qu^st^r.
Philip Durdent. Abraham Dawes. John Dike. Thomas Draper. Lancelot Dauis. Rowley
Dawsey. William Dobson Esquire. Anthony Dyot, Esquire, Auery Dranfield. Roger
Dye. John Downs. John Drake. John Delbridge. Benjamin Decro^ Thomas Dyke.
Ieffery Duppa. Daniel Darnelly. Sara Draper. Clement and Henry Dawkne^.
E
Thomas, Earl of Exeter. Sir Thomas Euerfield. Sir Francis Egiock. Sir Robert
Edolph. John Eldred, Esquire. William Euans. Richard Euans. Hugh Euans. Raph
Ewens, Esquire. John Elkin. Robert Euelin. Nicholas Exton. John Exton. George
Etheridge.
F
Sir Moyle Finch. Sir Henry Fanshaw. Sir Thomas Freake. Sir Peter Fretchuile.
Sir William Fl^^twood. Sir Henry Fane. Company of Fishmongers. John Fletcher.
John Farmer. Martin Fre^man, Esquire. Ralph Freeman. William and Ralph Fr^^man.
Michael Fetiplace. William Fettiplace. Thomas Forest. Edward Fl^etwood,
Esquire. William F^lgate. William Field. Nichol^s F^rrar. John Farrar. Giles
Francis. Edward Fawcet. Richard Farrington. John Francklin. Richard Frith. John
Fern. George Farmer. Thomas Francis. John Fenner. Nicholas Fuller, Esquire.
Thomas F^xall. William Fl^et. Peter Franck, Esquire. Richard Fishborne.
William Faldoe. John Fletcher, and Company. William Ferrars.
G
Lady Elizabeth Gray. Sir John Gray. Sir William Godolfine. Sir Thomas Gates.
Sir William Gee. Sir Ri^hard Grobham. Sir William Garaway. Sir Francis
Goodwin. Sir George Goring. Sir Thomas Grantham. Company of Grocers. Company of
Goldsmiths. Company of Girdlers. John Geering. John Gardener. Richard Gardener.
John Gilbert. Thomas Grave. John Gray. Nicholas Griece. Richard Goddard. Thomas
Gipps. Peter Gates. Thomas Gibbs Esquire. Laurence Green. William Greenwell.
Robert Garset. Robert Gore. Thomas Gouge. Francis Glanuile, Esquire.
G
Henry, Earl of Huntington. Lord Theophilus Haward, L. Walden. Sir John
Harrington, L. Harington. Sir John Hollis, now Lord Hautein. Sir Thomas
Holecroft. Sir William Harris. Sir Thomas Harefleet. Sir George Haiward. Sir
Warwick Heal. Sir Baptist Hicks. Sir John Hanham. Sir Thomas Horwell. Sir
Thomas Hewit. Sir William Herrick. Sir Eustace Heart. Sir Pory Huntley. Sir
Arthur Harris. Sir Edward Heron. Sir Perseuall Heart. Sir Ferdinando Heiborne.
Sir Lawrence Hide. Master Hugh Hamersley, Alderman. Master Richard Heron,
Alderman. Richard Humble, Esquire. Master Richard Hackleuit. Edward Harrison.
George Holeman. Robert Hill. Griffin Hinton. John Hawkins. William Hancocke.
John Harper. George Hawger. John Holt. John Huntley. Jeremy Heiden. Ralph
Hamer. Ralph Hamer, Junior. John Hodgeson. John Hanford. Thomas Harris. Richard
Howell. Thomas Henshaw. Leonard Harwood Tristram Hill. Francis Haselridge.
Tobias Hinson. Peter Heightley. George Hawkenson. Thomas Hackshaw. Charles
Hawkens, John Hodgis. William Holland. Robert Hartley. Gregory Herst. Thomas
Hodgis. William Hodgis. Roger Harris. John Harris. M. John Haiward, James
Haiward. Nicholas Hide, Esquire. John Hare, Esquire. William Hackwell, Esquire,
Gressam Hoogan. Humfrey Hanford. William Haselden. Nicholas Hooker. Doctor
Anthony Hunten, John Hodsale. George Hooker, Anthony Hinton. John Hogsell.
Thomas Hampton. William Hicks. William Holiland, Ralph Harison. Harman Harison.
I
Sir Thomas Iermyn. Sir Robert Johnson. Sir Arthur Ingram. Sir Francis Jones.
Company of Ironmongers. Company of Inholders. Company of Imbroyderers.
Bailiffes of Ipswich. Henry Iackson. Richard Ironside. M. Robert Johnson
Alderman. Thomas Jones. William Iobson. Thomas Johnson. Thomas Iadwine. John
Joshua. George Isam. Philip Iacobson. Peter Iacobson. Thomas Iuxson Senior.
James Jewel. Gabriel Jacques. Walter Iobson. Edward James. Zachary Jones,
Esquire. Anthony Irbye, Esquire. William I-anson. Humfrey Iobson.
K
Sir Valentine Knightley. Sir Robert Killegrew. Sir Charles Kelke. Sir John
Kaile. Richard Kirrill. John Kirrill. Raph King. Henry Kent. Town of
Kingslynne. John Kettleby, Esquire. Walter Kirkham, Esquire.
L
Henry Earl of Lincoln. Robert, L. Lisle, now Earl of Leicester. Thomas,
Lord Laware. Sir Francis Leigh. Sir Richard Lowlace. Sir William Litton. Sir
John Lewson. Sir William Lower. Sir Samuel Leonard. Sir Samson Leonard. Company
of Lethersellers. Thomas Laughton. William Lewson. Peter Latham. Peter Van
Lore. Henry Leigh. Thomas Leuar. Christofer Landman. Morris Lewellin. Edward
Lewis. Edward Lewkin. Peter Lodge. Thomas Layer Thomas Lawson. Francis Lodge.
John Langl^y. David Loide. John Leuit^. Thomas Fox and Luke Lodge. Captain
Richard Linley. Arnold Lulls. William Lawrence. John Landman. Nicholas
Lichfield. Nicholas Leate. Ged^on de Laune.
M
Phil^p Earl of Montgomerie. Doctor George Mountain, now Lord Bishop of
Lincoln. William Lord Mounteagle, now Lord Morley. Sir Thomas Mansell. Sir
Thomas Mildmay. Sir William Maynard. Sir Humfrey May. Sir Peter Manhood. Sir
John Merrick. Sir George More. Sir Robert Mansell. Sir Arthur Mannering. Sir
David Murrey. Sir Edward Michelborn. Sir Thomas Middleton. Sir Robert Miller.
Sir Caualiero Maicott. Doctor James Meddas. Richard Martin, Esquire. Company of
Mercers. Company of Merchant Tailors. Otho Mowdite. Captain John Martin.
Arthur Mouse. Adrian More. Thomas Mountford. Thomas Morris. Ralph Moorton.
Francis Mapes. Richard Maplesden. James Monger. Peter Monsell. Robert
Middleton. Thomas Maile. John Martin. Josias Maude. Richard Morton. George
Mason. Thomas Maddock. Richard Moore. Nicholas Moon. Alfonsus van Medkerk.
Captain Henry Meoles. Philip Mutes. Thomas Mayall. Humfrey Marret. Iaruis
Munaz. Robert Mildmay. William Millet. Richard Morer. John Miller. Thomas
Martin. John Middleton. Francis Middleton.
N
Dudly, Lord North. Francis, Lord Norris. Sir Henry Neuill of Barkshire. Thomas
Nicols. Christopher Nicols. William Nicols. George Newce. Joseph Newberow.
Christopher Newgate. Thomas Norincott. Jonathan Nuttall. Thomas Norton.
O
William Oxenbridge, Esquire, Robert Ossley. Francis Oliver.
P
William, Earl of Pembroke. William, Lord Paget. John, Lord Petre. George
Percy, Esquire. Sir Christofer Parkins. Sir Amias Preston. Sir Nicholas Parker.
Sir William Poole. Sir Stephen Powell. Sir Henry Peyton. Sir James Perrot. Sir
John Pettus. Sir Robert Pain. William Pain. John Pain. Edward Parkins.
Edward Parkins his widow. Aden Perkins. Thomas Perkin. Richard Partridge.
William Palmer. Miles Palmer. Robert Parkhurst. Richard Perciuall, Esquire.
Richard Poyntell. George Pretty. George Pit. Allen Percy. Abraham Pierce.
Edmund Pierce. Phenice Pet. Thomas Philips. Henry Philpot. Master George
Procter. Robert Penington. Peter Peate. John Prat. William Powell. Edmund
Peashall. Captain William Proud. Henry Price. Nicholas Pewriffe. Thomas
Pelham. Richard Piggot. John Pawlet, Esquire. Robert Pory. Richard Paulson.
Q
William Quick.
R
Sir Robert Rich, now Earl of Warwick. Sir Thomas Row. Sir Henry Rainsford.
Sir William Romney. Sir John Ratcliffe. Sir Steven Ridlesdon. Sir William
Russell. Master Edward Rotheram, Alderman. Robert Rich. Tedder Roberts. Henry
Robinson. John Russell. Richard Rogers. Arthur Robinson. Robert Robinson.
Millicent Ramsden. John Robinson. George Robins. Nichalas Rainton. Henry
Rolffe. John Reignolds. Elias Roberts. Henry Reignolds, Esquire. William
Roscarrocke, Esquire. Humfrey Raymell. Richard Robins.
S
Henry, Earl of Southampton. Thomas Earl of Suffolk. Edward Semer, Earl of
Hartford. Robert, Earl of Salisbury. Mary, Countess of Shrew^bury. Edmund,
Lord Sheffeld. Robert, Lord Spencer. John, Lord Stanhope. Sir John Saint-Iohn.
Sir Thomas Smith. Sir John Samms. Sir John Smith. Sir Edwin Sandys. Sir Samuel
Sandys. Sir Steven Some. Sir Raph Shelton. Sir Thomas Stewkley. Sir William
Saint-Iohn. Sir William Smith. Sir Richard Smith. Sir Martin Sinteuill. Sir
Nicolas Salter. Doctor Matthew Sutcliffe of Exeter. Captain John Smith. Thomas
Sandys, Esquire. Henry Sandys, Esquire. George Sandys, Esquire. Company of
Skinners. Company of Salters. Company of Stationers. John Stokley. Richard
Staper. Robert Singleton. Thomas Shipton. Cleophas Smith. Richard Strongthar^.
Hildebrand Spruson. Matthew Scriuener. Othowell Smith. George Scot. Hewet
Staper^. James Swift. Richard Stratford. Edmund Smith. Robert Smith. Matthias
Springham. Richard Smith. Edward Smith. Jonathan Smith. Humfrey Smith. John
Smith. George Swinhow. Joseph Some. William Sheckley. John Southick. Henry
Shelley. Walter Shelley. Richard Snarsborow. George Stone. Hugh Shepley.
William Strachey. Vrion Spencer. John Scarpe. Thomas Scott. William Sharp.
Steven Sparrow. Thomas Stokes. Richard Shepard. Henry Spranger. William
Stonnard. Steven Sad. John Stockley. Thomas Steuens. Matthew Shepard. Thomas
Sherwell. William Seabright, Esquire. Nicholas Sherwell. Augustine Steward.
Thomas Style. Abraham Speckhard. Edmund Scot. Francis Smalman. Gregory Sprint,
Esquire. Thomas Stacey. William Sandbatch. Augustine Stuard, Esquire.
T
Sir William Twisden. Sir William Throckmorton. Sir Nicholas Tufton. Sir John
Treuer. Sir Thomas Tracy. George Thorpe, Esquire. Doctor William Turner. The
Trinity house. Richard Turner. John Tauerner. Daniel Tucker. Charles Towler.
William Tailor. Leonard Townson. Richard Tomlins. Francis Tate, Esquire. Andrew
Troughton. George Tucker. Henry Timberlake. William Tucker. Lewis Tite. Robert
Thornton.
V
Sir Horatio Vere. Sir Walter Vaughan. Henry Vincent. Richard Venne.
Christopher Virtue. John Vassell. Arthur Venne.
W
Henry Bishop of Worcester. Francis West, Esquire. Sir Ralph Winwood. Sir John
Wentworth. Sir William Waad. Sir Robert Wroth. Sir Perciual Willoby. Sir
Charles Wilmott. Sir John Wats. Sir Hugh Worrell. Sir Edward Waterhouse. Sir
Thomas Wilsford. Sir Richard Williamson. Sir John Wolstenholm. Sir Thomas
Walsingham. Sir Thomas Watson. Sir Thomas Wilson. Sir John Weld. Mistress Kath.
West, now Lady Conway. John Wroth, Esquire. Captain Maria Winckfield, Esquire,
Thomas Webb. Rice Webb. Edward Webb. Sands Webb. Felix Wilson. Thomas White.
Richard Wiffen. William Williamson. Humfrey Westwood. Hugh Willeston. Thomas
Wheatley. William Wattey. William Webster. James White. Edmund Win. John
West. John Wright. Edward Wooller. Thomas Walker. John Wooller. John Westrow.
Edward Welsh. Nathaniel Waad. Richard Widows. David Waterhouse, Esquire.
Captain Owen Win. Randall Wetwood. George Wilmer, Esquire. Edward Wilkes.
Leonard White. Andrew Willmer. Clement Willmer. George Walker. William Welbie.
Francis Whistler. Thomas Wells. Captain Thomas Win. John Whittingham. Thomas
Wheeler. William Willet. Deuereux Woogam. John Walker. Thomas Wood. John
Willet. Nicholas Wheeler. Thomas Wale. William Wilston. John Waller. William
Ward. William Willeston. John Water. Thomas War, Esquire. David Wiffen. Garret
Weston.
Y
Sir George Yeardley, now Governor of Virginia. William Young. Simon Yeomans.
Z
Edward, Lord Zouch. John Zouch, Esquire.
THat most generous and most honorable Lord, the Earl of South-hampton, being
pleased to take upon him the title of Treasurer, and Master John Farrar his
Deputy, with such instructions as were necessary, and admonitions to all
Officers to take heed of extortion, ingrosing commodities, forestalling of
markets, especially to have a vigilant care, the familiarity of the Saluages
living amongst them made them not way to betray or surprise them, for the
building of Guest-houses to relieve the weak in, and that they did wonder in
all this time they had made no discoueries, nor knew no more then the very
place whereon they did inhabit, nor yet could ever see any return for all this
continual charge and trouble, therefore they sent to be added to the Council
seven Gentlemen, namely Mr. Thorp, Captain Nuce, Mr. Tracy, Captain
Middleton, Captain Blount, Mr. John Pountas, and Mr. Harwood, with men,
munition, and all things thought fitting, but they write from Virginia, many of
the Ships were so pestred with diseased people, and thronged together in their
passage, there was much sickness and a great mortality, wherefore they desired
rather a few able sufficient men well provided, then great multitudes, and
because there were few accidents of note, but private aduertisements by
letters, we will conclude this year, and proceed to the next. Collected out of
the Councels letters for Virginia.

The Ea^le of South-hampton Treasurer. Master John Farrar Deputy.
The instructions and aduertisements for this year were both from England and
Virginia, much like the last: only whereas before they had ever a suspicion of
Opechankanough, and all the rest of the Saluages, they had an eye over him more
then any, but now they all write so confidently of their assured peace with the
Saluages, there is now no more fear nor danger either of their power or
treachery, so that every man planteth himself where he pleases, and follows
his business securely. But the time of Sir George Yearley being near expired,
the Council here made choice of a worthy young Gentleman Sir Francis Wyat to
succeed him, The election of Sir Francis Wyat Governor for Virginia.
whom they forth with furnished and provided, as they had done his
Predecessors, with all the necessary instructions all these times had
acquainted them for the conversion of the Saluages, the suppressing of planting
Tobacco, and planting of Corn, not depending continually to be supplied by the
Saluages, but in case of necessity to trade with them, whom long ere this, it
has been promised and expected should have been fed and relieved by the
English, not the English by them; and carefully to redress all the complaints
of the needless mortality of their people, and by all diligence seek to send
something home to satisfy the Adventurers, that all this time had only lived
upon hopes, grew so weary and discouraged, that it must now be substance that
must maintain their proceedings, and not letters, excuses and promises; seeing
they could get so much and such great estates for themselves, as to spend after
the rate of 100. pounds, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, Notes worthy observation.
10. nay some 2000. or 3000. pounds yearly, that were not worth so many pence
when they went to Virginia, can scarce contain themselves either in diet,
apparel, gaming, and all manner of such superfluity, within a less compass
than our curious, costly, and consuming Gallants here in England, which cannot
possibly be there supported, but either by oppressing the Comminalty there, or
deceiving the generality here (or both.) Extracted out of the Councels Letters
for Virginia.

From Virginia, by the relations of the Chieftains there, A degression.
and many I have conferred with, that came from thence hither, I have much
admired to hear of the incredible pleasure, profit and plenty this Plantation
does abound in, and yet could never hear of any return but Tobacco, but it
has often amazed me to understand how strangely the Saluages has been taught
the use of our arms, and employed in hunting and fowling with our fowling
pieces, and our men rooting in the ground about Tobacco like Swine; besides
that, the Saluages that do little but continually exercise their bow and
arrows, should dwell and lie so familiarly amongst our men that practiced
little but the Spade, being so far asunder, and in such small parties
dispersed, and neither Fort, exercise of arms used, Ordnances mounted, Courts
of guard, nor any preparation nor provision to prevent a foreign enemy, much
more the Saluages howsoever; for the Saluages uncertain conformity I do not
wonder, but for their constancy and conversion, I am and ever have been of the
opinion of Master Jonas Stockam a Minister in Virginia, who even at this time,
when all things were so prosperous, and the Saluages at the point of
conversion, against all their Governors and Councels opinions, writ to the
Council and Company in England to this effect.

May 28.
WE that have left our native country to soiourne in a strange land, Master
Stockams relation.
some idle spectators, who either cowardly dare not, or couetously will not
adventure either their purses or persons in so commendable a work; others
supporting Atlas of this ilmost unsupportable burdens as your selves, without
whose assistance this Virginia Firmament (in which some) and I hope in short
time will shine many more glorious Stars, though there be many Italiannated
and Spaniolized Englishmen enuies our prosperities, and by all their
ignominious scandals they can devise seeks to dishearten what they can, those
that are willing to further this glorious enterprise, to such I wish according
to the decree of Darius, that whosoever is an enemy to our peace, and seeks
either by getting monipolicall patens, or by forging unjust tales to hinder our
welfare, that his house were pulled down, and a pair of gallows made of the
wood, and he hanged on them in the place.

As for those lasie servants, who had rather stand all day idle, than work,
though but an hour in this Vineyard, and spend their substance riotously, than
cast the superfluity of their wealth into your Treasury, I leave them as they
are to the eternal Judge of the world. But you right worthy, that has
adventured so freely, I will not examine, if it were for the glory of God, or
your desire of gain, which it may be you expect should flow unto you with a
full tide, for the conversion of the Saluages: I wonder you use not the means,
I confess you say well to have them converted by fair means, but they scorn
to acknowledge it, as for the gifts bestowed on them they devour them, and so
they would the giuers if they could, and though many have endeavored by all the
means they could by kindness to convert them, they find nothing from them
but derision and ridiculous answers. We have sent boys amongst them to learn
their Language, but they return worse than they went; but I am no Statesman,
nor love I to meddle with any thing but my Books, but I can find no
probability by this course to draw them to goodness; I and am persuaded if
Mars and Minerua go hand in hand, they will effect more good in an hour, then
those verbal Mercurians in their lives, and till their Priests and Ancients
have their throats cut, there is no hope to bring them to conversion.

The government of Sir Francis Wyat.
The arrival of Sir Francis Wyat.
ABout October arrived Sir Francis Wyat, with Master George Sands, appointed
Treasurer, Master Dauison Secretary, Doctor Pot the Physician, and Master
Cloyburne the Surgian, but much provision was very badly conditioned, nay the
Hogs would not eat that Corn they brought, which was a great cause of their
sickness and mortality, and whatsoever is said against the Virginia Corn,
they find it does better nourish than any provision is sent thither; the
Sailers still they complain are much to blame for imbes^ing the provisions
sent to private men, killing of Swine, and disorderly trucking; for which some
order would be taken.

In them nine Ships that went with Sir Francis Wyatt not one Passenger died, at
his arrival he sent Master Thorpe to Opechancanough, whom he found much
satisfied with his coming, to confirm their leagues as he had done his
Predecessors, and so contented his people should coinhabit amongst them, and
he found more motions of Religion in him than could be imagined: every man
betaking himself to his quarter, it was ordered, that for every head they
should plant but 1000. Plants of Tobacco, and upon each plant nine leaves,
which will be about 100. weight, the Corn being appointed but at two shillings
and six pence the bushel, required such labor, it caused most men neglect it,
and depend upon trade; where were it rated at ten shillings the bushel, every
man would endeavor to have plenty to sell to the new comers, or any that
wanted, and seldom any is transported from England, but it stands in as
much, besides the hazard and other necessaries, Master Gookins Plantation.
the Ships might transport of that burden. The 22. of November arrived Master
Gookin out of Ireland, with fifty men of his own, and thirty Passengers,
exceedingly well furnished with all sorts of provision and cattle, and planted
himself at Nupors-newes: the Cotton trees in a year grew so thick as ones
arm, and so high as a man: here any thing that is planted does prosper so well
as in no place better. For the mortality of the people accuse not the place,
for of the old Planters and the families scarce one of twenty miscarries, only
the want of necessaries are the occasions of those diseases. And so we will
conclude this year with the shipping and numbers sent. Out of the Councels
Letters from Virginia.

The number of Ships and men
This year was sent one and twenty sail of Ships that employed more than 400.
sailers and 1300. men, women and children of diverse faculties, with foure-score
cattle; the Tiger fell in the Turks hands, yet safely escaped, and by the
return of their letters from thence, the company is assured there can be no
fitter places of Mines, Wood and Water for Iron than there; and the French men
affirm no Country is more proper for Vines, Olives, Sike, Rice and Salt, etc.
of which the next year they promise a good quantity.

GIFTS.
THe Gentlemen and Mariners that came in the Royal James from the East Indies,
gave toward the building of a free School 70 pound, eight shillings, Gifts
given.
and six pence; and an unknown person to further it, sent thirty pounds; and
another in like manner five and twenty pounds; another refusing to be made
known, gave forty shillings yearly for a Sermon before the Virginia
company: also another that would not be known, sent for the College at
Henrico, many excellent good religious books, worth ten pound, and a most
curious Map of all that coast of America, Master Thomas Bargaue their Preacher
there deceased, gave a Library valued at one hundred Marks: and the
Inhabitants has made a contribution of one thousand and five hundred pounds,
to build a house for the entertaining of strangers. This year also there was
much suing for Patents for Plantations, Patents granted,
who promised to transport such great multitudes of people: there was much
disputing concerning those divisions, as though the whole land had been too
little for them: six and twenty obtained their desires, but as yet not past
six has sent thither a man; notwithstanding many of them would have more, and
are not well contented; whom I would entreat, and all other wranglers, to
peruse this saying of honest Claudius.

See not the world of Natures work, the fairest well, I wot,
How it, it self tog^t^er ties, as in a true-loues knot.
Nor see how The Elements air combined, maintain one constant plea,
H^w midst of heaven contents the Sun, and shore contains the sea;
And how the air both compasses, and carries still earths frame,
Yet neither pressing burden^ it, nor parting leaves the same.
The observations of Master John Pory Secretary of Virginia, in his travels.
Having but ten men meanly provided to plant the Secretaries land on the
Eastern shore nee^e d^^mack. Captain Wilcocks plantation, My journey to the
Eastern shore.
the better to secure and ass^^t each other. Sir George Yearley intending to
visit Smiths Isles, fell so sick that he could not, so that he sent me with
Estinien M^ll a Frenchman, to find^ a convenient place to make salt in. Not
long after Namenacus the King of Pawtuxunt, came to us to seek for Thomas
Saluage our Interpreter. Thus insinuating himself, he led us into a thicket,
where all sitting down, he shew^d us his n^ked breast; asking if we saw any
deformity upon it, we told him, No; No more, said he, is the inside, but as
sincere and pure; therefore come freely to my Country and welcome: which we
promised we would within six weeks after. Having taken a muster of the
companies tenants, A good place to make salt in
I went to Smiths Isles, where was our Salt horse: not far off we found a
more convenient plac^, and ^o retu^ned to James town.

Being furnished the second ^ime, we arrived at Aquo hanock, and conferred
with Kiptopeke their King, P^ssing Russels I Will and Onaucoke, we arrived at
Pawtuxunt: the description of those places, you may read in Captain Smiths
discoue^ies, therefore needless to be writ again. But here arriving at
A^toughcomoco the habi^ation of Namenacu^ and W^manato, his brother, The King
of Pawtxunts entertainment.
long we stayed not ere they came aboard us with a brass Kettle, as bright
without as within, full of boiled O^sters Strict order was given none should
offend us, so that the next day I went with the ^wo Kings a hunting, to
discover what I could in their confines. Wam^nato brought me first to his
house, where he showed once his wife and children, and man. Corne-fields; and
being two miles within the woods a hunting, as the younger conducted me forth,
so the elder brought me home, and used me as kindly as he could, after their
manner. The next day he presented me twelve Beuer skins and a Canow, which I
requited with such things to his content, that he promised to keept them whilst
he lived, and bury them with him being dead. He much wondered at our Bible,
but much more to hear it was the Law of our God, and the first Chapter of
Genesis expounded of Adam and Eve, and simple marriage; to which he replied, he
was like Adam in one thing, for he never had but one wife at once; but he, as
all the rest, seemed more willing of other discourses they better understood.
The next day the two Kings with their people, came aboard us, but brought
nothing according to promise; so that Ensign Saluage challenged Namenacus the
breach of three promises, viz. not in giving him a Boy, not Corn, though they
had plenty, nor Moutapass a fugitive, called Robert Marcum, that had lived 5*
years amongst those northerly nations, which he cunningly answered by
excuses. Womanato it seems, was guiltless of this falsehood, because he
stayed alone when the rest were gone. I asked him if he desired to be great
and rich; he answered, They were things all men aspired unto: which I told him
he should be, if he would follow my counsel, so he gave me two tokens, which
being returned by a messenger, should suffice to make him confident the
messenger could not abuse us.

Some things being stolen from us, he took such order that they were presently
restored, then we interchanged presents: in all things he much admired out
discretions, and gave us a guide that he called brother, to conduct us up the
River: by the way we met with diverse that still told us of Marcum: and though
it was in October, we found the Country very hot, and their Corn gathered
before ours at James town. The treachery of Namanicus.
The next day we went to Paccamaganant, and they directed us to Assacomoco,
where their King Cassatowap had an old quarrel with Ensign Saluage, but now
seeming reconciled, went with us, with another Werowance toward Mattapanient,
where they persuaded us ashore upon the point of a thicket; but supposing it
some treachery, we returned to our boat: far we had not gone from the shore,
but a multitude of Saluages fallied out of the wood, with all the ill words and
signs of hostility they could. When we saw plainly their bad intent, we set
the two Werowances at liberty, that all this while had line in the Cabin, as
not taking any notice of their villainy, because we would convert them by
courtesy. Leaving them as we found them, very civil and subtle, we returned
the same way we came, to the laughing Kings on the Eastern shore, who told us
plainly, Namanicus would also have allured him into his Country, under color
of trade to cut his throat. He told us also Opechancanough had employed
Onianimo to kill Saluage, because he brought the trade from him to the Eastern
shore, and some disgrace he had done his son, and some thirteen of his
people before one hundred of those Easterlings in reseuing Thomas Graves whom
they would have slain, where he and three more did challenge the thirteeene
Pamavukes to fight, but they durst not, so that all those Easterlings so
derided them, that they came there no more.

Thomas Saluages good service.
This Thomas Saluage, it is sixteen years since he went to Virginia, being a
boy, he was left with Powhatan, for Namontacke to learn the language, and as
this Author affirms, with much honesty and good success has served the
public without any public recompense, yet had an arrow shot through his body
in their service. This laughing King at Accomack, tells us the land is not two
days iourny over in the broadest place, but in some places a man may go in
half a day, betwixt the Bay and the maine Ocean, where inhabit many people, so
that by the narrowness of the Land there is not many Decre, but most abundance
of Fish and Foul. Kiptope his brother rules ^ his Lieutenant, who seeing his
younger brother more affected by the people than himself, freely resigned him
the moitie of his Country, applying himself only to husbandry and hunting,
yet nothing neglected in his degree, nor is he careless of any thing
concerns the state, but as a vigilant and faithful Counceller, as he is an
affectionated Brother, bearing the greater burden in government, though the
lesser honor, where clean contrary they on the Western shore, the younger
bears the charge, and the elder the dignity. Those are the best husbands of
any Saluages we know: for they provide Corn to serve them all the year, yet
spare; and the other not for half the year, yet want. They are the most
civil and tractable people we have met with, and by little sticks will keep
as just an account of their promises, as by a tally. In their marriages they
observe a large distance, as well in affinity as consanguinitie; nor do they
use that deuillish custom in making black Boys. There may be on this shore
about two thousand people: they on the West would invade them, but that they
want Boats to cross the Bay, and so would diverse other Nations, were they not
protected by us. A few of the Westerly Runnagados had conspired against the
laughing King, but fearing their treason was discovered, fled to Smiths Isles,
where they made a massacre of Dear and Hogs; and thence to Rickahake,
betwixt Cissapeack and Nansamund, where they now are seated under the command
of Itoyatin, and so I returned to James Town, where I found the government
rendered to Sir Francis Wyat. In February also he traveled to the South River
Chawonock, some sixty miles over land, which he found to be a very fruitful
and pleasant Country, yielding two haruests in a year, and found much of the
Silk grass formerly spoken of, was kindly used by the people, and so returned.

Captain Each sent to build a Fort to secure the Country.
The Earl of South^mpton Treasure., and Nicolas Farrar Deputy.
which was thought sufficient to have made a Plantation of themselves: and
again to second them, was sent Captain Each in the Abigale, a ship of three
or four hundred tons, who has undertaken to make a Block-house amongst the
Oyster banks, that shall secure the River. The furnishing him with Instruments,
cost three hundred pounds; but the whole charge and the ships return, will be
near two thousand pounds. In her went Captain Barwicke with five and twenty
men for the building ships and Boats, Five and twenty sent only to build Barks
and Boats.
and not other ways to be employed: and also a selected number to build the
E^st Indie School, but as yet from Virginia little returns but private men's
Tobacco, and fair promises of plenty of Iron, Silk, Wine, and many other
good and rich commodities, besides the speedy conversion of the Saluages, that
at first were much discouraged from living amongst them, when they were
debarred the use of their pieces; therefore it was disputed as a matter of
State, whether such as would live amongst them should use them or not, as a
bait to allure them; or at least such as should be called to the knowledge of
Christ. But because it was a great trouble for all causes to be brought to
James Town for a trial, Courts were appointed in convenient places to relieve
them: but as they can make no Laws in Virginia till they be ratified here; so
the^ think it but reason, none should be inacted here without their consents,
because they only feel them, and must live under them. Still they complain
for want of Corn, but what must be had by Trade, and how unwilling any Officer
when he leaves his place, is to make good his number of men to his Successor,
but many of them during their times to help themselves, undoes the Company: for
the servants you allow them, or such as they hire, they plant on their private
Lands, not upon that belongs to their office, which crop always exceeds
yours, besides those which are your tenants to halfes, are forced to row them
up and down, whereby both you and they lose more then half. Nor are those
officers the ablest or best deserving, but make their experience upon the
companies cost, and your land lies unmanured to any purpose, and will yield as
little profit to your next new officers.

The massacre upon the two and twentieth of March.
The death of Nemattanow, writ by M. Wimp.
THe Prologue to this Tragedy, is supposed was occasioned by Nemattanow,
otherwise called Jack of the Feather, because he commonly was most strangely
adorned with them; and for his courage and policy, was accounted amongst the
Saluages their chief Captain, and immortal from any hurt could be done him
by the English. This Captain coming to one Morgans house, knowing he had many
commodities that he desired, persuaded Morgan to go with him to Pamauke to
trucke, but the Saluage murdered him by the way; and after two or three days
returned again to Morgans house, where he found two youths his Servants, who
asked for their Master: Jack replied directly he was dead; the Boys suspecting
as it was, by seeing him wear his Cap, would have had him to Master Thorp: But
Jack so moved their patience, they shot him, so he fell to the ground, put him
in a Boat to have him before the Governor, then seven or eight miles from them.
But by the way Jack finding the pangs of death upon him, desired of the Boys
two things; the one was, that they would not make it known he was slain with
a bullet; the other, to bury him amongst the English. At the loss of this
Saluage Opechankanough much grieved and repined, with great threats of revenge;
but the English returned him such terrible answers, that he cunningly
dissembled his intent, with the greatest signs he could of love and peace, yet
within fourteen days after he acted what follows.

Security a bad guard*
Sir Francis Wyat at his arrival was advertised, he found the Country settled
in such a firm peace, as most men there thought sure and unviolable, not only
in regard of their promises, but of a necessity. The poor weak Saluages
being every way bettered by us, and safely sheltred and defended, whereby we
might freely follow our business: and such was the conceit of this conceited
peace, as that there was seldom or never a sword, and seldomer a piece, except
for a Dear or Foul, by which assurances the most plantations were placed
straglingly and scatteringly, as a choice vein of rich ground invited them,
and further from neighbors the better. Their houses generally open to the
Saluages, who were always friendly fed at their tables, and lodged in their
bed-chambers, which made the way plain to effect their intents, and the
conversion of the Saluages as they supposed.

Having occasion to send to Opechankanough about the middle of March, he used
the Messenger well, and told him he held the peace so firm, the sky should
fall or he dissolved it; yet such was the treachery of those people, when they
had contrived our destruction, even but two days before the massacre, they
guided our men with much kindness through the woods, and one Brown that lived
among them to learn the language, they sent home to his Master; yea, they
borrowed our Boats to transport themselves over the River, to consult on the
deuillish murder that insued, and of our utter extirpation, which God of his
mercy (by the means of one of themselves converted to Christianity)
prevented, and as well on the Friday morning that fatal day, being the two and
twentieth of March, The manner of the massacre.
as also in the evening before, as at other times they came unarmed into our
houses, with Dear, Turkies, Fish, Fruits, and other provisions to sell us, yea
in some places sat down at breakfast with our people, whom immediately with
their own tools they slew most barbarously, not sparing either age or sex,
man woman or child, so sudden in their execution, that few or none discerned
the weapon or blow that brought them to destruction: In which manner also they
slew many of our people at several works in the fields, well knowing in what
places and quarters each of our men were, in regard of their familiarity with
us, for the effecting that great masterpiece of work their conversion; and by
this means fell that fatal morning under the bloody and barbarous hands of
that perfidious and inhumane people, three hundred forty seven men, women and
children, most by their own weapons, and not being content with their lives,
they fell again upon the dead bodies, making as well as they could a fresh
murder, defacing, dragging, and mangling their dead carkases into many pieces,
and carrying some parts away in derision, with base and brutish triumph.

Neither yet did these beasts spare those amongst the rest well known unto
them, from whom they had daily received many benefits, Their cruelty.
but spightfully also massacred them without any remorse or pity; being in
this more fell then Lions and Dragons, as Histories record, which have
preserved their Benefactors; such is the force of good deeds, though done to
cruel beasts, to take humanity upon them, but these miscreants put on a more
unnatural brutishness then beasts, as by those instances may appear.

That worthy religions Gentleman M. George Thorp, The murder of Master Thorp.
Deputy to the College lands, sometimes one of his Majesty's Pensioners, and
in command one of the principal in Virginia; did so truly affect their
conversion, that whosoever under him did them the least displeasure, were
punished severely. He thought nothing too dear for them, he never denied them
any thing, in so much that when they complained that our Mastiues did fear
them, he to content them in all things, caused some of them to be killed in
their presence, to the great displeasure of the owners, and would have had all
the rest guelt to make them the milder, might he have had his will. The King
dwelling but in a Cottage, he built him a fair house after the English
fashion, in which he took such pleasure, especially in the lock and key,
which he so admired, as locking and vnlocking his door a hundred times a day,
he thought no device in the world comparable to it.

Thus insinuating himself into this Kings favor for his religious purpose, he
conferred often with him about Religion, as many other in this former Discourse
had done, and this Pagan confessed to him as he did to them, our God was better
then theirs, and seemed to be much pleased with that Discourse, and of his
company, and to requite all those courtesies; yet this viperous brood did, as
the sequel showed, not only murder him, but with such spite and scorn
abused his dead corpse as is unfitting to be heard with civil ears. One thing
I cannot omit, that when this good Gentleman upon his fatal hour, was warned
by his man, who perceiving some treachery intended by those hell hounds, to
look to himself, and withal ran away for fear he should be apprehended, and
so saved his own life; yet his Master out of his good meaning was so void of
suspicion and full of confidence* they had slain him, or he could or would
believe they would hurt him. Captain Nathaniel Powell one of the first
Planters, a valiant Soldier, and not any in the Country better known amongst
them; The slau^hter of Captain Powell.
yet such was the error of an ouer-conceited power and prosperity, and their
simplicities, they not only slew him and his family, but butcher-like hagled
their bodies, and cut off his head, to express their uttermost height of
cruelty. Another of the old company of Captain Smith, called Nathaniel Causie,
A Saluage slain.
being cruelly wounded, and the Saluages about him, with an axe did cleave one
of their heads, whereby the rest fled and he escaped: for they hurt not any
that did either fight or stand upon their guard. In one place where there was
but two men that had warning of it, they defended the house against 60. or more
that assaulted it. M. Baldwines escape.
M. Baldwin at Warraskoyack, his wife being so wounded, she lay for dead, yet
by his often discharging of his piece, save ^^er, his house, himself, and diverse
others. M. Thomas Hamer with 22 escapes.
At the same time they came to one Mast^r Harisons house, near half a mile
from Baldwines, where was Master Thomas Hamer with six men, and eighteen or
nineteen women and children. Here the Saluages with many presents and fair
persuasions, fained they came for Capt. Ralfe Hamer to go to their King, then
hunting in the woods, presently they sent to him, but he not coming as they
expected, set fire of a Tobacco-house, and then came to tell them in the
dwelling house of it to quench it; all the men ran toward it, but Master Hamer
not suspecting any thing, whom the Saluages pursued, shot them full of arrows,
then beat out their brains. Hamer having finished a letter he was a writing,
followed after to see what was the matter, but quickly they shot an arrow in
his back, which caused him return and barricado up the doors, whereupon the
Saluages set fire on the house. Harisons Boy finding his Masters piece loaded,
discharged it at random, at which bare report the Saluages all fled, Baldwin
still discharging his piece, and Mr Hamer with two and twenty persons thereby
got to his house, leaving their own burning. In like manner, they had fired
Lieutenant Basse his house, with all the rest there about, slain the people,
and so left that Plantation.

Captain Ralfe Hamer with forty escapes.
Captain Hamer all this while not knowing any thing, coming to his Brother
that had sent for him to go hunt with the King, meeting the Saluages chasing
some, yet escaped, retired to his new house then a building, from whence he
came; there only with spades, axes, and brick bats, he defended himself and
his Company till the Saluages departed. Not long after, the Master from the
ship had sent six Musketeers, with which he recovered their Merchants
storehouse, where he armed ten more, and so with thirty more unarmed workmen,
found his Brother and the rest at B^ldwins: Now seeing all they had was burnt
and consumed, they repaired to James Town with their best expedition; yet not
far from Martins hundred, where seventy three were slain, was a little house
and a small family, that heard not of any of this till two days after.

All those, and many others whom they have as maliciously murdered, sought the
good of those poor brutes, that thus despising Gods mercies, must needs now as
miscreants be corrected by Justice: to which leaving them, I will knit together
the thread of this discourse. The Saluages attempt to surprise a ship.
At the time of the massacre, there were three or four ships in James River,
and one in the next, and daily more to come in, as there did within fourteen
days after, one of which they endeavored to have surprised: yet were the
hearts of the English ever stupid, and auerted from believing any thing might
weaken their hopes, to win them by kind usage to Christianity. But diverse
write from thence, that Almighty God has his great work in this Tragedy, and
will thereout draw honor and glory to his name, and a more flourishing estate
and safety to themselves, and with more speed to convert the Saluage children
to himself, since he so miraculously has preserved the English; there being
yet, God be praised, eleven parts of twelve remaining, whose careless neglect
of their own safeties, seems to have been the greatest cause of their
destructions: yet you see, God by a converted Saluage that disclosed the plot,
saved the rest, and the Pinnace then in Pamavukes River, whereof (say they)
though our sins made us unworthy of so glorious a conversion, yet his
infinite wisdom can nevertheless bring it to pass, and in good time, by such
means as we think most unlikely: for in the delivery of them that survive, no
man's particular carfulness saved one person, but the mere goodness of God
himself, freely and miraculously preserving whom he pleased.

The Letters of Master George Sands, a worthy Gentleman, and many others
besides them returned, brought us this unwelcome news, that has been heard
at large in public Court, that the Indians and they lived as one Nation, yet
by a general combination in one day plotted to subvert the whole Colony, and
at one instant, though our several Plantations were one hundred and forty
miles up on River on both sides.

But for the better understanding of all things, you must remember these wild
naked natives live not in great numbers together, ^^t dispersed, commonly in
thirty, forty, fifty, or sixty in a company. Some places have two hundred,
few places more, but many less; yet they had all warning given them one from
another in all their habitations, though far asunder, to meet at the day and
hour appointed for our destruction at al our several Plantations; some
directed to one place, some to another, all to be done at the time appointed,
which they did accordingly: Some entering their houses under color of trading,
so took their advantage; others drawing us abroad under fair pretenses, and
the rest suddenly falling upon those that were at their labors.

Six of the counsel suffered under this treason, Six of the Council slain.
and the slaughter had been universal, if God had not put it into the heart
of an Indian, who lying in the house of one Pace, was urged by another Indian
his Brother, that lay with him the night before to kill Pace, as he should do
Perry which was his friend, being so commanded from their King; telling him
also how the next day the execution should be finished: Perrys Indian presently
arose and reueales it to Pace, that used him as his son; and thus them that
escaped was saved by this one converted Infidel. And though three hundred
forty seven were slain, yet thousands of ours were by the means of this
alone thus preserved, for which Gods name be praised for ever and ever.

Pace upon this, securing his house, before day rowed to Iam^s Town, How it
was revealed.
and told the Governor of it, whereby they were prevented, and at such other
Plantations as possibly intelligence could be given: and where they saw us upon
our guard, at the sight of a piece they ran away; but the rest were most
slain, their houses burnt, such Arms and Munition as they found they took
away, and some cattle also they destroyed. Since we find Opechankanough the
last year had practiced with a King on the Eastern shore, to furnish him with
a kind of poison, which only grows in his Country to poison us. But of this
bloody act never grief and shame poss^ssed any people more then themselves,
to be thus butchered by so naked and cowardly a people, who dare not stand the
presenting of a staff in manner of a piece, nor an vncharged peec^ in the
hands of a woman. (But I must tell those Authors, though some might be thus
cowardly, there were many of them had better spirits.)

Thus have you heard the particulars of this massacre, Memorandums.
which in those respects some say will be good for the Plantation, because now
we have just cause to destroy them by all means possible: but I think it had
been much better it had never happened, for they have given us an hundred
times as just occasions long ago to subject them, (and I wonder I can hear of
none but Master ^^ockam and Master Whitaker of my opinion.) Moreover, where
before we were troubled in clearing the ground of great Timber, which was to
them of small use: now we may take their own plain fields and Habitations,
which are the p^easantest places in the Country. Besides, the Dear, Turkies,
and other Beasts and Fowls will exceedingly increase if we beat the Saluages
out of the Country, for at all times of the year they never spare Male nor
Female, old nor young, eggs nor birds, fat nor lean, in season or out of
season with them, all is one. The like they did in our Swine and Goats, for
they have used to kill eight in ten more then we, or else the wood would most
plentifully abound with victual; besides it is more easy to ciuilize them by
conquest then fair means: for the one may be made at once, but their
ciuilizing will require a long time and much industry. The manner how to
suppress them is so often related and approved, I omit it here: And you have
twenty examples of the Spaniards how they got the West Indies, and forced the
treacherous and rebellious Infidels to do all manner of drudgery work and
slavery for them, themselves living like Soldiers upon the fruits of their
labors. This will make us more circumspect, and be an example to posterity:
(But I say, Captain Smith.
this might as well have been put in practice sixteen years ago as now.)

Thus upon this Anuill shall we now beat our selves an Armor of proof
hereafter to defend us against such incu^sions, His Majesty's g^t.
and ever hereafter make us more circumspect: but to help to repair this
loss, besides his Majesty's bounty in Arms, he gave the Company out of the
Tower, and diverse other Honorable persons have renewed their adventures, we
must not omit the Honorable City of London, to whose endless praise we may
speak it, are now setting forward one hundred persons, and diverse others at
their own costs are a repairing, London sets out 100 persons.
and all good men do think never the worse of the business for all these
dis^sters.

What growing state was there ever in the world which had not the like? Rome
grew by oppression, and rose upon the back of her enemies: and the Spaniards
have had many of those counterbuffes, more than we. Columbus, upon his return
from the West Indies into Spain, having left his people with the Indies, in
peace and promise of good usage amongst them, at his return back found not
one of them living, but all treacherously slain by the Saluages. After this
again, when the Spanish Colonies were increased to great numbers, the Indians
from whom the Spaniards for trucking stuff used to have all their corn,
generally conspired together to plant no more at all, intending thereby to
famish them; A lamentable example, t^o often app^oued.
themselves living in the mean time upon Cassaua, a root to make bread, only
then known to themselves. This plot of theirs by the Spaniards oversight, that
foolishly depended upon strangers for their bread, took such effect, and
brought them to such misery by the rage of famine, that they spared no unclean
nor loathsome beast, no not the poisonous and hideous Serpents, but eat them up
also, devouring one death to save them from another; and by this means their
whole Colony well-neere surfeted, sickned and died miserably, and when they had
again recovered this loss, by their incontinency an infinite number of them
died on the Indian disease, we call the French Pox, which at first being a
strange and an unknown malady, was deadly upon whomsoever it lighted: then had
they a little flea called Nigua, which got between the skin and the flesh
before they were aware, and there bred and multiplied, making swellings and
putrifactions, to the decay and loss of many of their bodily members.

Again, diverse times they were near undone by their ambition, faction, and
malice of the Commanders. Columbus, to whom they were also much beholden, was
sent with his Brother in chains into Spain; and some other great Commanders
killed and murdered one another. Pizzaro was killed by Almagros son, and him
Vasco beheaded, which Vasco was taken by Blasco, and Blasco was likewise taken
by Pizzaros Brother: And thus by their covetous and spightfull quarrels, they
were ever shaking the maine pillars of their Commonweal. These and many more
mischiefs and calamities happened them, more then ever did to us, and at one
time being even at the last gasp, had two ships not arrived with supplies as
they did, they were so disheartened, they were a leaving the Country: yet we
see for all those miseries they have attained to their ends at last, as is
manifest to all the world, both with honor, power, and wealth: and whereas
before few could be hired to go to inhabit there, now with great suit they
must obtain it; Note this conclusion.
but where there was no honesty, nor equity, nor sanctity, nor verity, nor
pie^ie, nor good civility in such a Country, certainly there can be no
stabilitie.

Therefore let us not be discouraged, but rather animated by those conclusions,
seeing we are so well assured of the goodness and commodities may be had in
Virginia, nor is it to be much doubted there is any want of Mines of most
sorts, no not of the richest, as is well known to some yet living that can
make it manifest when time shall serve: and yet to think that gold and silver
Mines are in a country otherwise most rich and fruitful, or the greatest
wealth in a Plantation, is but a popular error, as is that opinion likewise,
that the gold and silver is now the greatest wealth of the West Indies at this
present. How the Spania^ds raise their wealth in the West Indies.
True it is indeed, that in the first conquest the Spaniards got great and
mighty store of treasure from the Natives, which they in long space had heaped
together, and in those times the Indians showed them entire and rich Mines,
which now by the relations of them that have been there, are exceedingly
wasted, so that now the charge of getting those Metals is grown excessive,
besides the consuming the lives of many by their pestilent smoke and vapors in
digging and refining them, so that all things considered, the clear gains of
those metals, the Kings part defraied, to the Adventurers is but small, and
nothing near so much as vulgarly is imagined; and were it not for other rich
Commodities there that enrich them, those of the Contraction house were never
able to subsist by the Mines only; for the greatest part of their Commodities
are partly natural, and partly transported from other parts of the world, and
planted in the West Indies, as in their mighty wealth of Sugarcanes, being
first transported from the Canaries; and in Ginger and other things brought out
of the East Indies, in their Cochanele, Indicos, Cotton, and their infinite
store of Hides, Quicksilver, Alum, Woad, Brasill woods, Dies, Paints,
Tobacco, Gums, Balmes, Oiles, Medicinals and Perfumes, Sassaparilla, and many
other physical drugs: These are the means whereby they raise that mighty
charge of drawing out their gold and silver to the great and clear revenue of
their King. Now seeing the most of those commodities, or as useful, may be had
in Virginia by the same means, as I have formerly said; let us with all speed
take the priority of time, where also may be had the priority of place, in
choosing the best seats of the Country, which now by vanquishing the saluages,
is like to offer a more fair and ample choice of fruitful habitations, then
hitherto our gentleness and fair comportments could attain unto.

The numbers that were slain in those several Plantations.
1 AT Captain Berkleys Plantation, himself and 21. others, seated at the
Falling-Crick, 66. miles from James City. 22 2 Master Thomas Sheffelds
Plantation, some three miles from the Falling-Crick, himself and 12. others.
13 3 At Henrico Island, about two miles from Sheffelds Plantation. 6 4 Slain of
the College people, twenty miles from Henrico. 17 5 At Charles City, and of
Captain Smiths men. 5 6 At the next adjoining Plantation. 8 7 At William
Farrars house. 10 8 At Brickley hundred, fifty miles from Charles City, Master
Thorp and 10 9 At Westouer, a mile from Brickley. 2 10 At Master John Wests
Plantation. 2 11 At Captain Nathaniel Wests Plantation. 2 12 At Lieutenant
Gibs his Plantation. 12 13 At Richard Owens house, himself and 6 14 At Master
Owen Macars house, himself and 3 15 At Martins hundred, seven miles from James
City. 73 16 At another place. 7 17 At Edward Bonits Plantation. 50 18 At Master
Waters his house, himself and 4 19 At Apamatucks River, at Master Perce his
Plantation, five miles from the College. 4 20 At Master Macocks Diuident,
Captain Samuel Macock, and 4 21 At Flowerda hundred, Sir George Yearleys
Plantation. 6 22 On the other side opposite to it. 7 23 At Master Swinhows
house, himself and 7 24 At Master William Bickars house, himself and 4 25 At
Weanock, of Sir George Yearleys people. 21 26 At Powel Brook, Captain
Nathaniel Powel, and 12 27 At South-hampton hundred. 5 28 At Martin Brandons
hundred. 7 29 At Captain Henry Spilmans house. 2 30 At Ensign Spences house.
5 31 At Master Thomas Perse his house by Mulbery I Will, himself and 4
The whole number 347.

Men in this taking bettered with affliction,
Better attend, and mind, and mark Religion,
For then true voices issue from their hearts,
Then speak they what they think^ in inmost parts,
The truth remains, they cast off sained Arts.
How they were reduced to five or six places.
THis lamentable and so unexpected a distaster caused them all believe the
opinion of Master Stockam, and drove them all to their wits end: it was twenty
or thirty days ere they could resolve what to do, but at last it was
concluded, all the petty Plantations should be abandoned, and drawn only to
make good five or six places, where all their labors now for the most part
must redound to the Lords of those Lands where they were resident. Now for want
of Boats, it was impossible upon such a sudden to bring also their cattle, and
many other things, which with much time, charge and labor they had then in
possession with them; all which for the most part at their departure was burnt,
ruined and destroyed by the Saluages. Gooki^s and (...), resolutions.
Only Master Gookins at Nuports-newes would not obey the Commanders command in
that, though he had scarce five and thirty of all sorts with him, yet he
thought himself sufficient against what could happen, and so did to his great
credit and the content of his Adventurers. Master Samuel Jorden gathered
together but a few of the straglers about him at Beggers-bush, where he
fortified and lived in despite of the enemy. Nay, Mistrisse Proctor, a proper,
civil, mod^st Gentlewoman did the like, till perforce the English Officers
forced her and all them with her to go with them, or they would fire her house
themselves, as the Saluages did when they were gone, in whose despite they had
kept it, and what they had a month or three weeks after the Massacre; which
was to their hearts a grief beyond comparison, to lose all they had in that
manner, The opinion of Captain Smith.
only to secure others pleasures. Now here in England it was thought, all
those remainders might presently have been reduced into fifties or hundreds in
places most convenient with what they had, having such strong houses as they
reported they had, which with small labor might have been made invincible
Castles against all the Saluages in the Land, and then presently raised a
company, as a running Army to torment the Barbarous and secure the rest, and
so have had all that Country betwixt the Rivers of Powhatan and Pamavuke to
range and sustain them; especially all the territories of Kecoughtan, Chiskact
and Paspahege, from Ozenies to that branch of Pamavuke, coming from
Youghtanund, which strait of land is not past 4. or 5. miles, to have made a
peninsula much bigger then the Summer Isles, environed wi^h the broadest parts
of those two maine Rivers, which for plenty of such things as Virgnia affords
is not to be exceeded, and were it well manured, more then sufficient for ten
thousand men. This, were it well understood, cannot but be thought be^ter then
^o bring five or six hundred to lodge and live on that, which before would not
well receive and maintain a hundred, planting little or nothing, but spend
that they have upon hopes out of England, one evil begetting another, till the
disease is past cure: Therefore it is impossible but such courses must produce
most fearful miseries and extreme extremities; if it prove otherwise, I
should be exceeding glad. I confess I am somewhat too bold to censure other
men's actions being not present, but they have done as much of me; yea many here
in England that were never there, and also many there that knows little more
then their Plantations, but as they are informed; and this does touch the glory
of God, the honor of my Country, and the public good so much, for which there
has been so many fair pretenses, that I hope none will be angry for speaking
my opinion, seeing the old Proverb does allow losers leave to speak; and Du
Bart as says, Even as the wind the angry Ocean moves,
Wave hunteth Wave, and Billow Billow shoues,
So do all Nations iustell each the other,
And so one people do pursue another,
And scarce a sec^nd has the first vnhoused,
Before a third him thence again have roused.


AMongst the multitude of these several Relations, The providence of Captain
Nuse.
it appears Captain Nuse seeing many of the difficulties to ensue, caused as
much Corn to be planted as he could at Elizabeth's city, and though some
destroyed that they had set, fearing it would serve the Saluages for
Ambuscadoes, trusting to relief by trade, or from England, which has ever
been one cause of our miseries, for from England we have not had much, and
for trading, every one has not Ships, Shalops, Interpreters, men and
provisions to perform it, and those that have, use them only for their own
private g^ine, not the public good, so that our beginning this year does
cause many to distrust the event of the next. Here we will leave Captain Nuse
for a while, lamenting the death of Captain Norton, a valiant industrious
Gentleman, adorned with many good qualities, besides Physic and Surgery,
which for the public good he freely imparted to all gratis, but most
bountifully to the poor; and let us speak a little of Captain Croshaw
amongst the midst of those broiles in the River of Patawom^ke.

Being in a small Bark called the Elizabeth, Captain Croshaw his voyage to
Patawom^k.
under the command of Captain Spilman, at Cekacawone, a Saluage stole aboard
them, and told them of the Massacre, and that Opechancanough had plotted with
his King and Country to betray them also, which they refused, but them of
Wighcocomoco at the mouth of the river had undertaken it; upon this Spilman
went thither, but the Saluages seeing his men so vigilant and well armed, they
suspected themselves discovered, and to color their guilt, the better to
delude him, so contented his desire in trade, his Pinnace was near fraught;
but seeing no more to be had, Croshaw went to Patawomek* where he intended to
stay and trade for himself, by reason of the long acquaintance he had with
this King that so earnestly entreated him now to be his friend, his
countenancer, his Captain and director against the Pazaticans, the
Nacotchtanks* and Moyaons his mortal enemies. Of this opportunity Croshaw was
glad, as well to satisfy his own desire in some other purpose he had, as to
keep the King as an opposite to Opechancanough, and adhere him unto us, or at
least make him an instrument against our enemies; so only Elis Hill stayed
with him, and the Pinnace returned to Elizabeth's City; here shall they rest
also a little, till we see how this news was entertained in England.

It was no small grief to the Council and Company, The arrival of this news
in England.
to understand of such a supposed impossible loss, as that so many should fall
by the hands of men so contemptible; and yet having such warnings, especially
by the death of Nemattanow, whom the Saluages did think was shot-free, as he
had persuaded them, having so long e^caped so many dangers without any hurt.
But now to leap out of this labyrinth of melancholy, all this did not so
discourage the noble adventurers, nor diverse others still to undertake new
several Plantations, but that diverse ships were dispatched away, for their
supplies and assistance thought sufficient. Yet Captain Smith did entreat and
move them to put in practice his old offer, seeing now it was time to use both
it and him, how slenderly heretofore both had been regarded, and because it is
not impertinent to the business, it is not much amiss to remember what it was.

The project and offer of Captain John Smith, to the Right Honorable, and
Right Worshipful Company Virginia.
Captain Smiths offer to the Company.
IF you please I may be transported with a hundred Soldiers and thirty Sailers
by the next Michaelmas, with victual, munition, and such necessary provision,
by Gods assistance, we would endeavor to enforce the Saluages to leave their
Country, or bring them in that fear and subjection that every man should
follow their business securely, whereas now half their times and labors are
spent in watching and warding, only to defend but altogether unable to
suppress the Saluages, because every man now being for himself will be
unwilling to be drawn from their particular labors, to be made as pack-horses
for all the rest, without any certainty of some better reward and preferment
then I can understand any there can or will yet give them.

These I would employ only in ranging the Countries, and tormenting the
Saluages, and that they should be as a running Army till this were effected,
and then settle themselves in some such convenient place, that should ever
remain a garrison of that strength, ready upon any occasion against the
Saluages, or any other for the defense of the Country, and to see all the
English well armed, and instruct them their use. But I would have a Bark of
one hundred tons, and means to build six or seven Shalops, to transport
them where there should be occasion.

Toward the charge, because it is for the general good, and what by the
massacre and other accidents, Virginia is disparaged, and many men and their
purses much discouraged, how ever a great many do hasten to go, thinking to
be next heirs to all the former losses, I fear they will not find all
things as they do imagine; therefore leaving those gilded conceits, and diue
into the true estate of the Colony; I think if his Majesty were truly
informed of their necessity, and the benefit of this project, he would be
pleased to give the custom of Virginia, and the Planters also according to
their abilities would add thereto such a contribution, as would be fit to
maintain this garrison till they be able to subsist, or cause some such other
collections to be made, as may put it with all expedition in practice;
otherwise it is much to be doubted, there will neither come custom, nor any
thing from thence to England within these few years.

Now if this should be thought an imploiment more fit for ancient Soldiers
there bred, then such new comers as may go with me; you may please to leave
that to my discretion, to accept or refuse such voluntaries, that will hazard
their fortunes in the trialls of these events, and discharge such of my company
that had rather labor the ground then subdue their enemies: what relief I
should have from your Colony I would satisfy and spare them (when I could) the
like courtesy. Notwithstanding these doubts, I hope to feed them as well as
defend them, and yet discover you more land unknown then they all yet know, if
you will grant me such privileges as of necessity must be used.

For against any enemy we must be ready to execute the best can be devised by
your state there, but not that they shall either take away my men, or any thing
else to employ as they please by virtue of their authority, and in that I have
done somewhat for New England as well as Virginia, so I would desire liberty
and authority to make the best use I can of my best experiences, within the
limits of those two Patents, and to bring them both in one Map, and the
Countries betwixt them, giving always that respect to the Governors and
government, as an Englishman does in Scotland* or a Scotchman in England, or as
the regiments in the Low Countries do to the Governors of the Towns and
Cities where they are billited, or in Garrison, where though they live with
them, and are as their servants to defend them, yet not to be disposed on at
their pleasure, but as the Prince and State does command them, and for my own
pains in particular I ask not any thing but what I can produce from the
proper labor of the Saluages.

Their Answer.
I Cannot say, it was generally for the Company, Their answer,
for being published in their Court, the most that heard it liked exceeding
well of the motion, and some would have been very large Adventurers in it,
especially Sir John Brooks and Master David Wyffin, but there were such
divisions amongst them, I could obtain no answer but this, the charge would be
too great; their stock was decayed, and they did think the Planters should
do that of themselves if I could find means to effect it; they did think I
might have leave of the Company, provided they might have half the pillage,
but I think there are not many will much strive for that imploiment, for
except it be a little Corn at some time of the year is to be had, I would not
give twenty pound for all the pillage is to be got amongst the Saluages in
twenty years: but because they supposed I spoke only for my own ends, it were
good those understand prouidents for the Companies good they so much talk of,
were sent thither to make trial of their profound wisdoms and long
experiences.

The manner of the Sallery.
About this time also was propounded a proposition concerning a Sallery of five
and twenty thousand pounds to be raised out of Tobacco, as a yearly pension to
be paid to certain Officers for the erecting a new office, concerning the
sole importation of Tobacco, besides his Majesty's custom, fraught, and all
other charges. To nominate the undertakers, favorers and opposers, with their
arguments ( pro) and ( con) would be too tedious and needless being so
publicly known; the which to establish, spent a good part of that year, and
the beginning of the next. This made many think wonders of Virginia, to pay
such pensions extraordinary to a few here that were never there, and also in
what state and pomp some Chieftaines and diverse of their associates live in
Virginia, and yet no money to maintain a Garrison, pay poor men their wages,
nor yet five and twenty pence to all the Adventurers here, and very little to
the most part of the Planters there, bred such differences in opinion it was
dissolved.

Now let us return to Captain Croshaw at Patawomek, Captain Croshaw states
at Patawomek, and his adventures.
where he had not been long ere Opechancanough sent two baskets of beads to
this King, to kill him and his man, assuring him of the Massacre he had made,
and that before the end of two Moons there should not be an Englishman in all
their Countries: this fearful message the King told this Captain, who
replied, he had seen both the cowardice and treachery of Opechancanough
sufficiently tried by Captain Smith, therefore his threats he feared not, nor
for his favor cared, but would nakedly fight with him or any of his with their
own swords; if he were slain, he would leave a letter for his Country men to
know, the fault was his own, not the Kings; two days the King deliberated
upon an answer, at last told him the English were his friends, and the Saluage
Emperor Opitchapam now called Toyatan, was his brother, therefore there should
be no blood shed betwixt them, so he returned the Presents, willing the
Pamavukes to come no more in his Country, lest the English, though against his
will, should do them any mischief.

Not long after, The escape of Waters and his W^^e.
a Boat going abroad to seek out some relief amongst the Plantations, by
Nuports-newes met such ill weather, though the men were saved they lost their
boat, which the storm and waves cast upon the shore of Nandsamund, where
Edmund Waters one of the three that first stayed in Summer Isles, and found the
great piece of Ambergris, dwelling in Virginia at this Massacre, he and his
wife these Nandsamunds kept Prisoners till it chanced they found this Boat, at
which purchase they so rejoiced, according to their custom of triumph, with
songs, dances and inuocations, they were so busied, that Waters and his wife
found opportunity to get secretly into their Canow, and so crossed the River to
Kecoughtan, which is nine or ten miles, whereat the English no less wondered
and rejoiced, then the Saluages were madded with discontent. Thus you may see
how many desperate dangers some men escape, when others die that have all
things at their pleasure.

The arrival of Captain (...) at Patawomek.
All men thinking Captain Croshaw dead, Captain Hamer arriving with a Ship and
a Pinnace at Patawomeke, was kindly entertained both by him and the King; that
Don Hamar told the King he came for Corn: the King replied he had none, but
the Nacotchtanks and their confederats had, which were enemies both to him and
them; if they would fetch it, he would give them 40. or 50 choice Bow-men to
conduct and assist them. Those Saluages with some of the English they sent, who
so well played their parts, they slew 18. of the Nacotchtanks, some write but
4. and some they had a long skirmish with them; where the Patawomeks were so
eager of revenge, they drive them not only out of their town, but all out of
fight through the woods, thus taking what they liked, and spoiling the rest,
they retired to Patawomek, where they lef^ Captain Croshaw, with four men
more, Croshaws Fort and plot for trade.
the rest set sail for James town. Captain Croshaw now with five men and
himself found night and day so many Alarums, he retired into such a convenient
place, that with the help of the Saluages, he had quickly fortified himself
against all those wild enemies. Captain Nuse his Pinnace meeting Hamar by the
way understanding all this, came to see Captain Croshaw: after their best
enterchanges of courtesies, Croshaw writ to Nuse the estate of the place where
he was, but understanding by them the poor estate of the Colony, offered if
they would send him but a bold Shallop, with men, arms and provision for
trade, the next Harvest he would provide them Corn sufficient, but as yet it
being but the latter end of sune, there was little or none in all the Country.

^^^taine Madys^^ ^ent to Pataw^m^k.
This being made known to the Governor and the rest, they sent Captain
Madyson with a ship and pinnace, and some six and thirty men: those Croshaw a
good time taught the use of their arms, but receiving a letter from Boyse his
Wife, a prisoner with nineteen more at Pamavuke, to use means to the
Governor for their liberty; So he dealt with this King, he got first two of
his great men to go with him to James town, and eight days after to send
four of his counsel to Pamavuke, there to stay till he sent one of his two to
them, to persuade Opachankanough to send two of his with two of the
Patawomekes, to treat about those prisoners, and the rest should remain their
hostage at Pamavuke; but the Commanders, at James town, it seems, liked not
of it, and so sent the Patawomekes back again to their own Country, and
Captain Croshaw to his own habitation.

The industry of Captain Nuse.
All this time we have forgot Captain Nuse, where we left him but newly
acquainted with the Massacre, calling all his next adjoining dispersed
neighbors together, he regarded not the pestring his own house, nor any thing
to relieve them, and with all speed entrenched himself, mounted three piece of
Ordnance, so that within 14. days, he was strong enough to defend himself
from all the Saluages, yet when victual grew scant, some that would forage
without order, which he punished, near occasioned a mutiny. Notwithstanding,
he behaved himself to fatherly and kindly to them all, they built two houses
for them he daily expected from England, a fair Well of fresh water mantled
with brick, because the River and Cricks are there brackish or salt; in all
which things he played the Sawyer, Carpenter, Dauber, Laborer, or any thing;
wherein though his courage and heart were steeled, he found his body was not
made of Iron, for he had many sicknesses, and at last a Dropsy, no less
grief to himself, then sorrow to his Wife and all under his government. These
crosses and losses were no small increasers of his malady, nor the thus
abandoning our Plantations, the loss of our Harvest, and also Tobacco which
was as our money; the Vineyard our Vineyetours had brought to a good
forwardness, bruised and destroyed with Dear, and all things ere they came to
perfection, with weeds, disorderly persons or wild beasts; so that as we are I
cannot perceive but the next year will be worse, being still tormented with
pride and flattery, idleness and covetousness, as though they had vowed here
to keep their Court with all the pestilent vices in the world for their
atte^dants, enchanted with a conceited stateliness, even in the very bottom
of miserable senselessness.

Shortly after, Sir George Yearly and Captain William Powel, Captain Powel
kills 3. Saluages.
took each of them a company of well disposed Gentlemen and others to seek
their enemies. Yearl^y ranging the shore of Wean^ck, could see nothing but
their old houses which he burnt, and so went home: Powel searching another
part, found them all fled but three he met by chance, whose heads he cut off,
burnt their houses, and so returned; for the Saluages are so light and swift,
though we see them (being so loaded with armor) they have much advantage of
us though they be cowards. The opinion of Captain Smith.


I confess this is true, and it may cause some suppose they are grown
invincible: but will any go to catch a Hare with a Taber and a Pipe? for who
knows not though there be monsters both of men and beasts, fish and foul, yet
the greatest, the strongest, the wildest, cruellest, fiercest and cunningest,
by reason, art and vigilance, courage and industry has been slain, subjected
or made tame, and those are still but Saluages as they were, only grown more
bold by our own simplicities, and still will be worse and worse till they be
tormented with a continual pursuit, and not with lying enclosed within
Palizados, or affrighting them out of your sights, thinking they have done
well, can but defend themselves: and to do this to any purpose, will require
both charge, patience and experience. But to their proceedings. Sir George
Yearleys iourny to Accomack.


About the latter end of June, Sir George Yearley accompanied with the
Council, and a number of the greatest Gallants in the Land, stayed three or
four days with Captain Nuse, he making his moan to a chief man amongst
them for want of provision for his Company, the great Commander replied he
should turn them to his green Corn, which would make them plumpe and fat:
these fields being so near the Fort, were better regarded and preserved then
the rest, but the great man's command, as we call them, was quickly obeyed, for
though it was scarce half grown either to the greatness or goodness, they
devoured it green though it did them small good. Sir George with his company
went to A^comack to his new P^antation, where he stayed near six weeks; some
Corn he brought home, but as he adventured for himself, he accordingly
enjoyed the benefit; some pety Magazines came this Summer, but either the
restraint by Proclamation, or want of Boats, or both, caused few but the
Chieftaines to be little better by them. So long as Captain Nuse had any thing
we had part; Captain Nuse his misery.
but now all being spent, and the people forced to live upon Oisters and Crabs,
they became so faint no work could be done; and where the Law was, no work,
no meat, now the case is altered, to no meat, no work; some small quantity of
Milk and Rice the Captain had of his own, and that he would distribute
gratis as he saw occasion; I say gratis, for I know no place else, but it was
sold for ready payment: those ears of Corn that had escaped till August,
though not ripe by reason of the late planting, the very Dogs did repair to
the Corn fields to seek them as the men till they were hanged; and this I
protest before God is true that I have related, not to flatter Nuse, nor
condemn any, but all the time I have lived in Virginia, I have not seen nor
heard that any Commander has taken such continual pains for the public, or
done so little good for himself, and his virtuous wife was no less charitable
and compassionate according to her power. For my own part, although I found
neither Mulberies planted, houses built, men nor victual provided, as the
honorable Adventurers did promise me in England; yet at my own charge,
having made these preparations, and the silke-Wormes ready to be covered, all
was lost, but my poor life and children, by the Massacre, the which as God in
his mercy did preserve, I continually pray we may spend to his glory. An
Alarm, four slain.
The 9. of September, we had an alarm, and two men at their labors slain;
the Captain, though extreme sick, sallied forth, but the Saluages lay hid in
the Corn fields all night, where they destroyed all they could, and killed two
men more, much mischief they did to Master Edward Hills cattle, yet he alone
defended his house though his men were sick and could do nothing, and this
was our first assault since the Massacre.

The kindness of the King of Patawomek.
About this time Captain Madyson passed by us, having taken Prisoners, the King
of Patawomek, his son, and two more, and thus it happened; Madyson not liking
so well to live amongst the Saluages as Croshaw did, built him a strong house
within the Fort, so that they were not so sociable as before, nor did they much
like Poole the Interpret; many Alarums they had, but saw no enemies: Madyson
before his building went to Moyaones, where he got provision for a month, and
was promised much more, so he returned to Patawomek and built this house, and
was well used by the Saluages. Now by the four great men the King sent to
Pamavuke for the redemption of the Prisoners, Madyson sent them a letter, but
they could neither deliver it nor see them: so long they stayed that the King
grew doubtful of their bad usage, that he swore by the Skies, if they
returned not well, he would have wars with Opechankanough so long as he had
any thing: at this time two of Madysons men ran from him, to find them he
sent Master John Vpton and three more with an Indian guide to Nazatica, where
they heard they were. At this place was a King beat out of his Country by the
N^costs, enemies to the Patawomeks; this expulsed King though he professed much
love to the Patawomeks, yet he loved not the King because he would not help
him to revenge his injuries, but to our Interpreter Poole he protested great
love, promising if any treason were, he would reveal it; our guide conducted
this Bandy to with them up to Patawomek and there kept him; our Fugitives we
found the Patawomeks had taken and brought home, and the four great men
returned from Pamavuke; not long after, this expulsed King desired private
conference with Poole, urging him to swear by his God never to reveal what
he would tell him, Poole promised he would not; then quoth this King, those
great men that went to Pamavuke, went not as you suppose they pretended, but to
contract with Opechankanough how to kill you all here, and these are their
plots.

A Saluage^ policy.
First, they will procure half of you to go a fishing to their furthest town,
and there set upon them, and cut off the rest; if that fail, they will feign a
place where are many strangers would trade their Furs, where they will
persuade half of you to go trade, and there murder you and kill them at home;
and if this fail also, then they will make Alarums two nights together, to
tire you out with watching, and then set upon you, yet of all this, said he,
there is none acquainted but the King and the great Coniurer.

This being made known to the Captain, we all stood more punctually upon our
guard, Mad^son takes the King and kills 30. o^ 40.
at which the Saluages wondering, desired to know the cause; we told them we
expected some assault from the Pamavukes, whereat they seemed contented, and
the next day the King went on hunting with two of our men, and the other a
fishing and abroad as before, till our Shallop returned from James town with
the two Saluages, sent home with Captain Croshaw: by those the Governor sent
to Madyson, that this King should send him twelve of his great men; word of
this was sent to the King at another town where he was, who not coming
presently with the Messenger, Madyson conceited he regarded not the message,
and intended as he supposed the same treason. The next morning the King coming
home, being sent for, he came to the Captain and brought him a dish of their
daintiest fruit; then the Captain fained his return to James town, the King
told him he might if he would, but desired not to leave him destitute of aid,
having so many enemies about him; the Captain told him he would leave a guard,
but entreated his answer concerning the twelve great men for the Governor; the
King replied, his enemies lay so about him he could not spare them, then the
Captain desired his son and one other; my son, said the King, is gone
abroad about business, but the other you desire you shall have, and that other
sits by him, but that man refused to go, whereupon Madyson went forth and
locked the door, leaving the King, his son, and four Saluages, and five
English men in the strong house, and setting upon the town with the rest of
his men, slew thirty or forty men, women and children; the King demanding the
cause, Poole told him the treason, crying out to entreat the Captain cease
from such cruelty: but having slain and made fly all in the town, he
returned, taxing the poor King of treason, who denied to the death not to know
of any such matter, but said, This is some plot of them that told it, only to
kill me for being your friend. Then Madyson willed him, to command none of his
men should shoot at him as he went aboard, which he presently did, and it was
performed: so Madyson departed, leading the King, his son, and two more to
his ship, promising when all his men were shipped, he should return at
liberty; notwithstanding he brought them to James town, The King set at
liberty.
where they lay some days, and after were sent home by Captain Hamer, that
took Corn for their ransom, and after set fail for New found Land.

But, alas the cause of this was only this
They understood, nor knew what was amiss.
Ever since the beginning of these Plantations, A digression
it has been supposed the King of Spain would invade them, or our English
Papists endeavor to dissolve them. Bu^ neither all the Counsels of Spain* nor
Papists in the world could have devised a better course to bring them all to
ruin, then thus to abuse their friends, nor could there ever have been a
better plot, to have overthrown Opechankanough then Captain Chroshaws, had it
been fully managed with expedition. But it seems God is angry to see Virginia
made a stage where nothing but murder and indiscretion contends for victory.

Amongst the rest of the Plantations all this Summer little was done, Their
proceedings of the other plantations.
but securing themselves and planting Tobacco, which passes there as current
Silver, and by the often turning and winding it, some grow rich, but many poor,
notwithstanding ten or twelve ships or more has arrived there since the
massacre, although it was Christmas ere any returned, and that return greatly
revived all men's longing expectation here in England: for they brought news,
that notwithstanding their extreme sickness many were recovered, and finding
the Saluages did not much trouble them, except it were sometimes some
disorderly straglers they cut off. To lull them the better in security, they
sought no revenge till their Corn was ripe, then they drew together three
hundred of the best Soldiers they could, that would leave their private
business, 300 surpriseth Nandsamund.
and adventure themselves amongst the Saluages to surprise their Corn, under
the conduct of Sir George Yearley, being embarked in convenient shipping, and
all things necessary for the enterprise, they went first to Nands^mund, where
the people set fire on their own houses, and spoiled what they could, and then
fled with what they could carry; so that the English did make no slaughter
amongst them for revenge. Their Corn fields being newly gathered, they
surprised all they found, burnt the houses remained unburned, and so departed.
Quartering about Kecoughtan, Samuel Collyer slain.
after the Watch was set, Samuel Collyer one of the most ancientest Planters,
and very well acquainted with their language and habitation, humors and
conditions, and Governor of a Town, when the Watch was set going the round,
unfortunately by a Centinell that discharged his piece, was slain.

They surprise Pamavuke.
Thence they sailed to Pamavuke, the chief seat of Opechankanough, the
contriuer of the massacre: the Saluages seemed exceeding fearful, promising
to bring them Sara, and the rest of the English yet living, with all the Arms,
and what they had to restore, much desiring peace, and to give them any
satisfaction they could. Many such devices they fained to procrastinate the
time ten or twelve days, till they had got away their Corn from all the other
places up the River, but that where the English kept their quarter: at last,
when they saw all those promises were but delusions, they seized on all the
Corn there was, set fire on their houses: and in following the Saluages that
fled before the^, some few of those naked Devils had that spirit, they lay in
ambuscado, and as our men marched discharged some shot out of English pieces,
and hurt some of them flying at their pleasures where they listed, burning
their empty houses before them as they went to make themselves sport: so they
escaped, and Sir George returned with Corn, where for our pains we had three
bushels apeece, but we were enjoined before we had it, to pay ten shillings the
bushel for fraught and other charges. Thus by this means the Saluages are
like as they report, to endure no small misery this Winter, and that some of
our men are returned to their former Plantations.

The opinion of Captain Smith.
What other passages or impediments happened in their proceedings, that they were
not fully revenged of the Saluages before they returned, I know not; nor could
ever hear more, but that they supposed they slew two, and how it was
impossible for any men to do more then they did: yet worthy Ferdinando Courtus
had scarce three hundred Spaniards to conquer the great City of Mexico, where
thousands of Saluages dwelled in strong houses: but because they were a
ciuilized people, had wealth, and those mere Barbarians as wild as beasts
have nothing; I entreat your patience to tell you my opinion, which if it be
Gods pleasure I shall not live to put in practice, yet it may be hereafter
useful for some, but howsoever I hope not hurtful to any, How to subject all
the Saluages in Virginia.
and this it is.

Had these three hundred men been at my disposing, I would have sent first one
hundred to Captain Rawley Chroshaw to Patawomek, with some small Ordnance for
the Fort, the which but with daily exercising them, would have struck that love
and admiration into the Patowomeks, and terror and amazement into his enemies,
which are not far off, and most seated upon the other side the River, they
would willingly have been friends, or have given any composition they could,
before they would be tormented with such a visible fear.

Now though they be generally persidious, yet necessity constraines those to a
kind of constancy because of their enemies, and neither my self that first
found them, Captain Argall, Chroshow, nor Hamar, never found themselves in
fifteen years trials: nor is it likely now they would have so hostaged their
men, suffer the building of a Fort, and their women and children amongst them,
had they intended any villainy; but suppose they had, who would have desired a
better advantage then such an advertisement, to have prepared the Fort for such
an assault, and surely it must be a poor Fort they could hurt, much more take,
if there were but five men in it durst discharge a piece: Therefore a man not
well knowing their conditions, may be as well too jealous as too careless; Such
another Lope Skonce would I have had at Onawmanient* and one hundred men more
to have made such another at Atquacke upon the River of Toppahanock, which is
not past thirteen miles distant from Onawmanient: each of which twelve men
would keep, as well as twelve thousand, and spare all the rest to be employed
as there should be occasion. And all this with these numbers might easily have
been done, if not by courtesy, yet by compulsion, especially at that time of
September when all their fruits were ripe, their beasts fat, and infinite
numbers of wild Foul began to repair to every creek, that men if they would
do any thing* could not want victual. This done, there remained yet one
hundred who should have done the like at Ozinicke, upon the River of
Chickahamania, not past six miles from the chief habitations of
Opechankanough. These small Forts had been cause sufficient to cause all the
Inhabitants of each of those Rivers to look to themselves. Then having so many
Ships, Barks, and Boats in Virginia as there was at that present, with what
facility might you have landed two hundred and twenty men, if you had but
only five or six Boats in one night; forty to range the branch of
Mattapanyent, forty more that of Youghtanund, and forty more to keep their
randiuous at Pamavuke it self. All which places lie so near, they might hear
from e^ch other within four or five hours, and not any of those small
parties, if there were any valor, discretion, or industry in them, but as
sufficient as four thousand, to force them all to contribution, or take or
spoil all they had. For having thus so many convenient randeuous to believe
each other, though all the whole Countries had been our enemies, where could
they rest, but in the depth of Winter we might burn all the houses upon all
those Rivers in two or three days? Then without fires they could not live,
which they could not so hide but we should find, and quickly so tire them
with watching and warding, they would be so weary of their lives, as either fly
all their Countries, or give all they had to be released of such an hourly
misery. Now if but a small number of the Saluages would assist us, as there is
no question but diverse of them would; And so suppose they could not be drawn
to such faction; were to believe they are more virtuous then many Christians,
and the best governed people in the world. All the Pamavukes might have been
dispatched as well in a month as a year, and then to have dealt with any
other enemies at our pleasure, and yet made all this toil and danger but a
recreation.

If you think this strange or impossible, 12 men with my self I found
sufficient, to go where I would adays, and surprise a house with the people,
if not a whole town in a night, or encounter all the power they could make, as
a whole Army, as formerly at large has been related: And it seems by these
small parties last amongst them, by Captain Crashow, Hamar, and Madyson, they
are not grown to that excellency in policy and courage but they might be
encountered, and their wives and children apprehended. I know I shall be taxed
for writing so much of my self, but I care not much, because the judicial
know there are few such Soldiers as are my examples, have writ their own
actions, nor know I who will or can tell my intents better then my self.

Some again find as much fault with the Company for meddling with so many
Plantations together, because they that have many Irons in the fire some must
burn; but I think no if they have men enough know how to work them, but
howsoever, it were better some burn then have none at all. The King of Spain
regards but how many powerful Kingdoms he keeps under his obedience, and for
the Saluage Countries he has subjected, they are more then enough for a good
Cosmographer to nominate, and is three Mole-hills so much to us; and so many
Empires so little for him? For my own part, I cannot choose but grieve, that
the actions of an Englishman should be inferior to any, and that the command of
England should not be as great as any Monarchy that ever was since the world
began, I mean not as a Tyrant to torment all Christendom, but to suppress
her disturbers, and conquer her enemies.

For the great Romans got into their hand
The whole worlds compass, both by Sea and Land,
Or any seas, or heaven, or earth extended,
And yet that Nation could not be contented.
Much about this time arrived a small Bark of Barnestable, The arrival of
Captain Butler, and his accidents.
which had been at the Summer Isles, and in her Captain Nathaniel Butler, who
having been Governor there three years, and his Commission expired, he took
the opportunity of this ship to see Virginia: at James Town he was kindly
entertained by Sir Francis Wyat the Governor. After he had rested there
fourteen days, he fell up with his ship to the River of Chickahamania, where
meeting Captain William Powell* joining together such forces as they had to
the number of eighty, they set upon the Chickahamanians, that fearfully fled,
suffering the English to spoil all they had, not daring to resist them. Thus
he returned to James town, where he stayed a month, at Kecoughtan as much
more, and so returned for England.

A strange deliverance of Master A^gent and others.
But riding at Kecoughtan, M. John Argent, son to Doctor Argent, a young
Gentleman that went with Captain Butler from England to this place, Michael
Fuller, William Gany, Cornelius May, and one other going ashore with some goods
late in a fair evening, such a sudden gust did arise, that drive them thwart
the River, in that place at least three or four miles in breadth, where the
s^ore was so shallow at a low water, and the Boat beating upon the Sands, they
left her, wading near half a mile, and often up to the chin: So well it happened,
Master Argent had put his Bandileir of powder in his hat, which next God was
all their preseruations: for it being February, and the ground so cold, their
bodies became so benumbed, they were not able to strike fire with a steel and
a stone he had in his pocket; the stone they lost twice, and thus those poor
souls groping in the dark, it was Master Argents chance to find it, and with
a few withered leaves, reeds, and brush, make a small fire, being upon the
Chisapeaks shore, their mortal enemies, great was their fear to be
discovered. The joyful morning appearing, they found their Boat and goods
drive ashore, not farie from them, but so split she was unserviceable: but so
much was the frost, their clothes did freeze upon their backs, for they durst
not make any great fire to dry them, lest thereby the bloody Saluages might
discry them, so that one of them died the next day, and the next night digging
a grave in the Sands with their hands, buried him. In this bodily fear they
lived and fasted two days and nights, then two of them went into the Land to
seek fresh water; the others to the Boat to get some meal and oil, Argent
and his Comrado found a Canow, in which they resolved to adventure to their
ship, but she was a drift in the River before they returned: thus frustrate of
all hopes, Captain Butler the third night ranging the shore in his Boat to
seek them, discharged his Muskets, but they supposing it some Saluages had got
some English pieces, they grew more perplexed then ever, so he returned and
lost his labor. The fourth day they unloaded their Boat, and stopping her
leakes with their handkerchiefes, and other rags, two rowing, and two bailing
out the water; but far they went not ere the water grew upon them so fast,
and they so tired, they thought themselves happy to be on shore again, though
they perceived the Indians were not far off by their fires. Thus at the very
period of despair, Fuller undertook to sit a stride upon a little piece of an
old Canow; so well it pleased God the wind and tide served, by padling with his
hands and feet in the water, beyond all expectation God so guided him three or
four hours upon this board, he arrived at their ship, where they no less
amazed then he tired, they took him in. Presently as he had concluded with his
Companions, he caused them discharge a piece of Ordnance if he escaped, which
gave no less comfort to Master Argent and the rest, then terror to those
Plantations that heard it, (being late) at such an unexpected alarm: but
after, with warm clothes and a little strong water, they had a little
recovered him, such was his courage and care of his distressed friends, he
returned that night again with Master Felgate to conduct him to them, and so
giving thanks to God for so hopeless a deliverance, it pleased his Divine
power, both they and their provision came safely aboard, but Fuller they doubt
will never recover his benumbed legs and thighs.

Now before Butlers arrival in England, many hard speeches were rumored
against him for so leaving his charge, before he received order from the
Company: Diverse again of his Soldiers as highly commended him, for his good
government, art, judgment and industry. But to make the misery of Virginia
appear that it might be reformed in time, how all those Cities, Towns,
Corporations, Forts, Vineyards, Nurseries of Mulberies, Glasse-houses, Iron
forges, Guest-houses, Silke-wormes* Colleges, the Companies great estate, and
that plenty some do speak of here, are rather things in words and paper then
in effect, with diverse reasons of the causes of those defects; if it were
false, his blame nor shame could not be too much: but if there be such defects
in the government, and distress in the Colony, it is thought by many it has
been too long concealed, and requires rather reformation then disputation:
but howeuer, it were not amiss to provide for the worst, for the best will
help it self. Notwithstanding, it was apprehended so hardly, and examined with
that passion, that the brute thereof was spread abroad with that expedition, it
did more hurt then the massacre; and the fault of all now by the vulgar rumor,
must be attributed to the vnwholesomnesse of the air, and barrenness of the
Country, as though all England were naught, because the Fens and Marshes are
unhealthy; or barren, because some will lie under windows and starve in
Cheap Side, rot in Goales, die in the street, highways, or any where, and use
a thousand devices to maintain themselves in those miseries, rather then take
any pains, to live as they may by honest labor, and a great part of such like
are the Planters of Virginia, and partly the occasion of those defailements.

How Captain Spilman was left in the River of Patawomek. The Earl of
Southampton Treasurer.
Captain H^nrie Spilman a Gentleman, that has lived in those Countries
thirteen or fourteen years, one of the best Interpreters in the Land, being
furnished with a Bark and six and twenty men, he was sent to trucke in the
River of Patawomek, where he had lived a long time amongst the Saluages,
whether he presumed too much upon his acquaintance amongst them, or they
sought to be revenged of any for the slaughter made amongst them by the English
so lately, or he sought to betray them, or they him, are all several
relations, but it seems but imaginary: for then returned report they left him
ashore about Patawomek, but the name of the place they knew not, with one and
twenty men, being but five in the Bark, the Saluages ere they suspected any
thing, boorded them with their Canowes, and entered so fast, the English were
amazed, till a Sailer gave fire to a piece of Ordnance only at random; at the
report whereof, the Saluages leapt ouer-boord, so distracted with fear, they
left their Canowes and swum a shore; and presently after they heard a great
brute amongst the Saluages a shore, and saw a man's head thrown down the
bank, whereupon they weighed Anchor and returned home, but how he was
surprised or slain, is uncertain.

Thus things proceed and vary not a jot,
Whether we knew them, or we know them not.
A particular of such necessaries as either private families, or single
persons, shall have cause to provide to go to Virginia, whereby greater
numbers may in part conceive the better how to provide for themselves.
Apparel. Apparel for one man, and so after the rate for more.

A Monmoth Cap. 1 s. 10 d. 3 falling bands. 1 s. 3 d. 3 shirts. 7 s. 6 d. 1
Waste-coat. 2 s. 2 d. 1 suit of Canuase. 7 s. 6 d. 1 suit of Frize. 10 s. 1
suit of Cloth. 15 s. 3 pair of Irish stockings. 4 s. 4 pair of shoes. 8 s. 8
d. 1 pair of garters. 10 d. 1 dozen of point^. 3 d. 1 pair of Canuas sheets.
8 s. 7 else of Canuas to make a bed and boulster, to be filled in Virginia,
serving for two men. 8 s. 5 else of course Canuas to make a bed at Sea for two
men. 5 s. 1 course rug at sea for two men. 6 s. 4 l.
Victual for a whole year for a man, and so after the rate for more.
8 bushels of meal. 2 l. 2 bushels of pease. 6 s. 2 bushels of Otemeale. 9 s.
1 gallon of Aquavitae. 2 s. 6 d. 1 gallon of oil. 3 s. 6 d. 2 gallons of
Vinegar. 2 s. 3 l. 3 s.
Arms for a man, but if half your men be armed it is well, so all have swords
and pieces.
1 Armor complete, light. 17 s. 1 long piece five foot and a half, near
Musket bore. 1 l. 2 s. 1 Sword. 5 s. 1 Belt. 1 s. 1 Bandilier. 1 s. 6 d. 2
pound of powder. 18 s. 6 pound of shot or Lead, Pistol and Goose shot. 5 s. 3
l. 9 s. 6 d.
Tools for a family of six persons, and so after the rate for more.
5 broad howes at 2 s. a piece. 10 s. 5 narrow howes at 16 d. a piece. 6 s. 8
d. 2 broad axes at 3 s. 8 d. a piece. 7 s. 4 d. 5 felling axes at 18 d. a
piece. 7 s. 6 d. 2 steel handsawes at 16 d. a piece. 2 s. 8 d 2 two handsawes
at 5 s. a piece. 10 s. 1 whipsaw, set and filed, with box, file and wrest. 10
s. 2 hammers 12 d. a piece. 2 s. 3 shouels 18 d. a piece. 4 s. 6 d. 2 spades at
18 d. a piece. 3 s. 2 Augers at 6 d. piece. 1 s. 6 Chissels at 6 d. a piece. 3
s. 2 Percers stocked 4 d. a piece. 8 d. 3 Gimblets at 2 d. a piece. 6 d. 2
Hatchets at 21 d. a piece. 3 s. 6 d. 2 frowes to cleave pale 18 d. each 3 s. 2
hand Bills 20 d. a piece. 3 s. 4 d. 1 Grindstone. 4 s. Nails of all sorts to
the value of 2 l. 2 Pickaxes. 3 s. 6 l. 2 s. 8 d.
Household implements for a family and six persons, and so for more or less
after the rate.
1 Iron pot. 7 s. 1 Kettell. 6 s. 1 large Drying Pan. 2 s. 6 d. 1 Gridiron. 1
s. 6 d. 2 Skellots. 5 s. 1 Spit. 2 s. Platters, dishes, spoones of wood. 4 s. 1
l. 8 s.
For Sugar, Spice, and Fruit, and at Sea for six men. 12 s. 6 d. So the full
charge after this rate for each person, will amount about the sum of 12 l. 10
s. 10 d. The passage of each man is 6 l. The fraught of these provisions for a
man, will be about half a tun, which is 1 l. 10 s. So the whole charge will
amount to about 20 l.
Now if the number be great, Nets, Hooks and Lines, but Cheese, Bacon, Kine and
Goats must be added. And this is the usual proportion the Virginia Company do
bestow upon their Tenants they send.

A brief relation written by Captain Smith to his Majesty's Commissioners for
the reformation of Virginia, concerning some aspersions against it.
Honorable Gentlemen, for so many fair and Nauigable Rivers so near
adjoining, and piercing through so fair a natural Land, free from any
inundations, or large Fenny unwholesome Marshes, I have not seen, read, nor
heard of: And for the building of Cities, Towns, and Wharfage, if they will
use the means, where there is no more ebb nor flood, Nature in few places
affoords any so convenient, for salt Marshes or Quagmires. In this tract of
James Town River I know very few; some small Marshes and Swamps there are, but
more profitable then hurtful: and I think there is more low Marsh ground
betwixt Eriffe and Chelsey, then Kecoughton and the Falls, which is about one
hundred and eighty miles by the course of the River.

Being enjoined by our Commission not to vnplant nor wrong the Saluages, The
causes of our first miseries.
because the channel was so near the shore, where now is James Town, then a
thick grove of trees; we cut them down, where the Saluages pretending as
much kindness as could be, they hurt and slew one and twenty of us in two
hours: At this time our diet was for most part water and bran, and three
ounces of little better stuff in bread for five men a meal, and thus we lived
near three months: our lodgings under boughs of trees, the Saluages being
our enemies, whom we neither knew nor understood; occasions I think sufficient
to make men sick and die.

Necessity thus did enforce me with eight or nine, But ^8 English in all
Virginia.
to try conclusions amongst the Saluages, that we got provision which recovered
the rest being most sick. Six weeks I was led captive by those Barbarians,
though some of my men were slain, and the rest fled, yet it pleased God to
make their great Kings daughter the means to return me safe to James town,
and relieve our wants, and then our Commonwealth was in all eight and thirty,
the remainder of one hundred and five.

Being supplied with one hundred and twenty, Proofs of the healthfulnesse of
the Country.
with twelve men in a boat of three tuns, I spent fourteen weeks in those
large waters; the contents of the way of my boat protracted by the skale of
proportion, was about three thousand miles, besides the River we dwell upon,
where no Christian known ever was, and our diet for the most part what we
could find, yet but one died.

The Saluages being acquainted, How the Saluages became subjected.
that by command from England we durst not hurt them, were much imboldned; that
famine and their insolences did force me to break our Commission and
instructions, cause Powhatan fly his Country, and take the King of Pamavuke
Prisoner; and also to keep the King of Paspahegh in shackels, and put his men
to doubletaskes in chains, till nine and thirty of their Kings paid us
contribution, and the offending Saluages sent to James town to punish at our
own discretions: in the two last years I stayed there, I had not a man slain.

All those conclusions being not able to prevent the bad events of pride and
idleness, having received another supply of seventy, How we lived of the
natural fruits of the Country.
we were about two hundred in all, but not twenty workmen: In following the
strict directions from England to do that was impossible at that time; So it
happened, that neither we nor they had any thing to eat, but what the Country
afforded naturally; yet of eighty who lived upon Oysters in June and July,
with a pint of corn a week for a man lying under trees, and 120 for the most
part living upon Sturgion, which was dried til we pounded it to powder for
meal, yet in ten weeks but seven died.

It is true, we had of Tools, Arms, and Munition sufficient, some Aquavitae,
Vinegar, Proof of the Commodities we returned.
Meal, Pease, and Otemeale, but in two years and a half not sufficient for
six months, though by the bills of loading the proportions sent us, would well
have contented us, notwithstanding we sent home ample proofs of Pitch, Tar,
Soap Ashes, Wainskot, Clapboord, Silk grass, Iron Ore, some Sturgion and
Glass, Saxefras, Cedar, Cypris, and black Walnut, crowned Powhaton, sought
the Monacans Country, according to the instructions sent us, but they caused
us neglect more necessary works: they had better have given for Pitch and Soap
ashes one hundred pound a tun in Denmark: We also maintained five or six
several Plantations.

James town being burnt, we rebuilt it and three Forts more, What we built.
besides the Church and Storehouse, we had about forty or fifty several
houses to keep us warm and dry, environed with a palizado of fourteen or
fifteen foot, and each as much as three or four men could carry. We dug a
fair Well of fresh water in the Fort, where we had three Bulwarks, four and
twenty piece of Ordnance, of Culuering, Demiculuering, Sacar and Falcon, and
most well mounted upon convenient plat-formes, planted one hundred acres of
Corn. We had but six ships to transport and supply us, and but two hundred
seventy seven men, boys, and women, by whose labors Virginia being brought to
this kind of perfection, the most difficulties past, and the foundation thus
laid by this small means; yet because we had done no more, they called in our
Commission, took a new in their own names, and appointed us near as many
offices and Officers as I had Soldiers, that neither knew us nor we them,
without our consents or knowledge; since there have gone more then one hundred
ships of other proportions, and eight or ten thousand people. Now if you please
to compare what has been spent, sent, discovered and done this fifteen
years, by that we did in the three first years, and every Governor that has
been there since, give you but such an account as this, you may easily find
what has been the cause of those disasters in Virginia.

Then came in Captain Argall, and Master Sedan, in a ship of Master Cornelius,
to fish for Sturgion, who had such good provision, we contracted with them for
it, whereby we were better furnished then ever.

Not long after came in seven ships, with about three hundred people; but
rather to supplant us then supply us, their Admiral with their authority
being cast away in the Bermudas, very angry they were we had made no better
provision for them. Seven or eight weeks we withstood the inundations of these
disorderly humors, till I was near blown to death with Gunpowder, which
occasioned me to return for England.

How I left the Country.
In the year 1609 about Michaelmas, I left the Country, as is formerly
related, with three ships, seven Boats, Commodities to trade, harvest newly
gathered, eight weeks provision of Corn and Meal, about five hundred persons,
three hundred Muskets, shot, powder, and match, with arms for more men then we
had. The Saluages their language and habitation, well known to two hundred
expert Soldiers; Nets for fishing, tools of all sorts, apparel to supply
their wants: six Mares and a Horse, five or six hundred Swine, many more
Powltry, what was brought or bred, but victual there remained.

My charge.
Having spent some five years, and more then five hundred pounds in procuring
the Letters Patents and setting forward, and near as much more about New
England, etc. Thus these nineteen years I have here and there not spared any
thing according to my ability, nor the best advice I could, to persuade how
those strange miracles of misery might have been prevented, which lamentable
experience plainly taught me of necessity must ensue, but few would believe me
till now too dearly they have paid for it. Wherefore hitherto I have rather
left all then undertake impossibilities, or any more such costly taskes at such
chargeable rates: My reward.
for in neither of those two Countries have I one foot of Land, nor the very
house I builded, nor the ground I dug with my own hands, nor ever any
content or satisfaction at all, and though I see ordinarily those two Countries
shared before me by them that neither have them nor knows them, but by my
descriptions: Yet that does not so much trouble me, as to hear and see those
contentions and divisions which will hazard if not ruin the prosperity of
Virginia, if present remedy be not found, as they have hindered many hundreds,
who would have been there ere now, and makes them yet that are willing to
stand in a demurre.

For the Books and Maps I have made, I will thank him that will show me so
much for so little recompense, and bear with their errors till I have done
better. For the materials in them I cannot deny, but am ready to affirm them
both there and here, upon such grounds as I have propounded, which is to have
but fifteen hundred men to subdue again the Saluages, fortify the Country,
discover that yet unknown, and both defend and feed their Colony, which I most
humbly refer to his Majesty's most judicial judgment, and the most honorable
Lords of his Privy Council, you his trusty and well-beloued Commissioners, and
the Honorable company of Planters and well-willers to Virginia, New England
and Sommer-Ilands.

Out of these Observations it pleased his Majesty's Commissioners for the
reformation of Virginia, to desire my answer to these seven Questions.
Quest. 1. WHat conceive you is the cause the Plantation has prospered no
better since you left it in so good a forwardness?

Answ. Idleness and carelessness brought all I did in three years in six
months to nothing, and of five hundred I left, scarce threescore remained, and
had Sir Thomas Gates not got from the Bermudas, I think they had been all
dead before they could be supplied.

Quest. 2. What conceive you should be the cause, though the Country be good,
there comes nothing but Tobacco?

Answ. The often altering of Governors it seems causes every man make use of
his time, and because Corn was stinted at two shillings six pence the bushel,
and Tobacco at three shillings the pound, and they value a man's labor a year
worth fifty or threescore pound, but in Corn not worth ten pound, presuming
Tobacco will furnish them with all things; now make a man's labor in Corn
worth threescore pound, and in Tobacco but ten pound a man, then shall they
have Corn sufficient to entertain all comers, and keep their people in
health to do any thing, but till then, there will be little or nothing to any
purpose.

Quest. 3. What conceive you to have been the cause of the Massacre, and had
the Saluages had the use of any pieces in your time, or when, or by whom they
were taught?

Answ. The cause of the Massacre was the want of marshall discipline, and
because they would have all the English had by destroying those they found so
carelessly secure, that they were not provided to defend themselves against any
enemy, being so dispersed as they were. In my time, though Captain Nuport
furnished them with swords by truck, and many fugitives did the like, and some
Pieces they got accidentally, yet I got the most of them again, and it was
death to him that should show a Saluage the use of a Piece. Since I understand
they became so good shot, they were employed for Fowlers and Huntsmen by the
English.

Quest. 4. What charge think you would have settled the government both for
defense and planting when you left it?

Answ. Twenty thousand pound would have hired good laborers and mechanical
men, and have furnished them with cattle and all necessaries, and 100. of them
would have done more then a thousand of those that went, though the Lord
Laware, Sir Ferdinando Waynman, Sir Thomas Gates and Sir Thomas Dale were
persuaded to the contrary, but when they had tried, they confessed their error.

Quest. 5. What conceive you would be the remedy and the charge?

Answ. The remedy is to send Soldiers and all sorts of laborers and
necessaries for them, that they may be there by next Michaelmas, the which to
do well will stand you in five thousand pound, but if his Majesty would please
to lend two of his Ships to transport them, less would serve, besides the
benefit of his grace to the action would encourage all men.

Quest. 6. What think you are the defects of the government both here and
there?

Answ. The multiplicity of opinions here, and Officers there, makes such
delays by questions and formalitie, that as much time is spent in complement
as in action; besides, some are so desirous to employ their ships, having six
pounds for every Passenger, and three pounds for every tun of goods, at which
rate a thousand ships may now better be procured then one at the first, when
the common stock defrayed all fraughts, wages, provisions and Magazines,
whereby the Ships are so pestred, as occasions much sickness, diseases and
mortality, for though all the Passengers die they are sure of their fraught;
and then all must be satisfied with Orations, disputations, excuses and hopes.
As for the letters of advice from hence, and their answers thence, they are so
well written, men would believe there were no great doubt of the performance,
and that all things were well, to which error here they have been ever much
subject; and there not to believe, or not to relieve the true and poor estate
of that Colony, whose fruits were commonly spent before they were ripe, and
this loss is nothing to them here, whose great estates are not sensible of the
loss of their adventures, and so they think; or will not take notice; but it
is so with all men: but howsoever they think or dispose of all things at their
pleasure, I am sure not my self only, but a thousand others have not only
spent the most of their estates, but the most part have lost their lives and
all, only but to make way for the trial of more new conclusions, and he that
now will adventure but twelve pounds ten shillings, shall have better respect
and as much favor then he that sixteen year ago adventured as much, except
he have money as the other has, but though he have adventured five hundred
pound, and spent there never so much time, if he have no more and not able to
begin a family of himself, all is lost by order of Court.

But in the beginning it was not so, all went then out of one purse, till those
new devices have consumed both money and purse; for at first there were but six
Patentees, now more then a thousand, then but thirteen Counsailors, now not
less then an hundred; I speak not of all, for there are some both honorable
and honest, but of those Officers, which did they manage their own estates no
better then the affairs of Virginia, they would quickly fall to decay so well
as it; but this is most evident, few Officers in England it has caused to
turn Banquerupts, nor for all their complaints would leave their places,
neither yet any of their Officers there, nor few of the rest but they would be
at home, but fewer Adventurers here will adventure any more till they see the
business better established, although there be some so wilfully improuident
they care for nothing but to get thither, and then if their friends be dead, or
want themselves, they die or live but poorly for want of necessaries, and to
think the old Planters can relieve them were too much simplicity; for who here
in England is so charitable to feed two or three strangers, have they never so
much; much less in Virginia where they want for themselves. Now the general
complaint says, that pride, covetousness, extortion and oppression in a few
that ingrosses all, then sell all again to the comminalty at what rate they
please, yea even men, women and children for who will give most, occasions no
small mischief amongst the Planters.

As for the Company, or those that do transport them, provided of necessaries,
God forbid but they should receive their charges again with advantage, or that
masters there should not have the same privilege over their servants as here,
but to sell him or her for forty, fifty, or threescore pounds, whom the Company
has sent over for eight or ten pounds at the most, without regard how they
shall be maintained with apparel, meat, drink and lodging, is odious, and
their fruits suitable, therefore such merchants it were better they were made
such merchandise themselves, then suffered any longer to use that trade, and
those are defects sufficient to bring a well settled Commonwealth to misery,
much more Virginia.

Quest. 7. How think you it may be rectified?

Answ. If this Majesty would please to entitle it to his Crown, and yearly
that both the Governors here and there may give their accounts to you, or some
that are not engaged in the business, that the common stock be not spent in
maintaining one hundred men for the Governor, one hundred for two Deputies,
fifty for the Treasurer, five and twenty for the Secretary, and more for the
Marshall and other Officers who were never there nor adventured any thing, but
only preferred by favor to be Lords over them that broke the ice and beat the
path, and must teach them what to do, if any thing happen well, it is their
glory; if ill, the fault of the old directors, that in all dangers must endure
the worst, yet not five hundred of them have so much as one of the others; also
that there be some present course taken to maintain a Garrison to suppress
the Saluages, till they be able to subsist, and that his Majesty would please
to remit his custom, or it is to be feared they will lose custom and all, for
this cannot be done by promises, hopes, counsels and countenances, but with
sufficient workmen and means to maintain them, not such delinquents as here
cannot be ruled by all the laws in England, yet when the foundation is laid,
as I have said, and a commonwealth established, then such there may better be
constrained to labor then here: but to rectify a commonwealth with debaushed
people is impossible, and no wise man would throw himself into such a society,
that intends honestly, and knows what he undertakes, for there is no Country
to pillage as the Romans found: all you expect from thence must be by labor.

For the government I think there is as much ado about it as the Kingdoms of
Scotland and Ireland, men here conceiting Virginia as they are, erecting as
many stately Offices as Officers with their attendants, as there are laborers
in the Country, where a Constable were as good as twenty of their Captains,
and three hundred good Soldiers and laborers better then all the rest that
go only to get the fruits of other men's labors by the title of an office.
Thus they spend Michaelmas rent in Mid-summer Moon, and would gather their
Harvest before they have planted their Corn.

As for the maintenance of the Officers, the first that went never demanded
any, but adventured good sums, and it seems strange to me, the fruits of all
their labors, besides the expense of an hundred and fifty thousand pounds, and
such multitudes of people, those collateral Officers could not maintain
themselves so well as the old did, and having now such liberty to do to the
Saluages what they will, the others had not. I more then wonder they have not
five hundred Saluages to work for them toward their general maintenance, and
as many more to return some content and satisfaction to the Adventurers, that
for all their care, charge and diligence, can hear nor see nothing but
miserable complaints; therefore under your correction to rectify all, is with
all expedition to pass the authority to them who will relieve them, lest all
be consumed ere the differences be determined. And except his Majesty
undertake it, or by Act of Parliament some small tax may be granted throughout
his Dominions, as a Penny upon every Poll, called a head-penny; two pence upon
every Chimney, or some such collection might be raised, and that would be
sufficient to give a good stock, and many servants to sufficient men of any
faculty, and transport them freely for paying only homage to the Crown of
England, and such duties to the public good as their estates increased reason
should require. Were this put in practice, how many people of what quality you
please, for all those disasters would yet gladly go to spend their lives
there, and by this means more good might be done in one year, then all those
pety particular undertakings will effect in twenty.

For the Patent the King may, if he please, rather take it from them that have
it, then from us who had it first, pretending to his Majesty what great matters
they would do, and how little we did, and for any thing I can conceive, had we
remained still as at first, it is not likely we could have done much worse; but
those often altering of governments are not without much charge, hazard and
loss. If I be too plain, I humbly crave your pardon; but you requested me,
therefore I do but my duty. For the Nobility, who knows not how freely both
in their Purses and assistances many of them have been to advance it,
committing the managing of the business to inferior persons, amongst whom
questionless also many have done their utmost best, sincerely and truly
according to their conceit, opinion and understanding; yet gross errors have
been committed, but no man lives without his fault; for my own part, I have
so much ado to amend my own, I have no leisure to look into any man's
particular, but those in general I conceive to be true. And so I humbly rest

Yours to command, I. S.


The King has pleased to take it i^to (...) ^^^sideration.
THus those discords, not being to be compounded among themselves, nor yet by
the extraordinary diligences, care and pains of the noble and right worthy
Commissioners, Sir William Jones, Sir Nicholas Fortescue, Sir Francis Goston,
Sir Richard Sutton, Sir Henry Bourgchier and Sir William Pit; a Corante was
granted against Master Deputy Farrar, and 20. or 30. others of that party to
plead their causes before the right Honorable, the Lords of his Majesty's
Privy Council: now notwithstanding all the Relations, Examinations, and
intercepting of all Letters whatsoever came from thence, yet it seems they
were so far unsatisfied and desired to know the truth, as well for the
preservation of the Colony, as to give content and do all men right, they sent
two Commissioners strictly to examine the true estate of the Colony. Upon whose
return after mature deliberation, it pleased his royal Majesty to suppress
the course of the Court at Deputy Farrars, and that for the present ordering
the affairs of Virginia, until he should make a more full settlement thereof,
the Lord Viscount Mandeuile, Lord President of his Majesty's Privy Council,
and also other Privy Counselors, with many understanding Knights and
Gentlemen, should every Thursday in the afternoon meet at Sir Thomas Smiths in
Philpot lane, where all men whom it should concern may repair, to receive
such directions and warrant for their better security, as more at large you may
see in the Proclamation to that effect, under the great Seal of England, dated
the 15. of July, 1624. But as for the relations last returned, what numbers
they are, how many Cities, Corporations, towns, and houses, cattle and horse
they have, what fortifications or discoueries they have made, or revenge upon
the Saluages; who are their friends or foes, or what commodities they have more
then Tobacco, and their present estate or what is presently to be put in
execution, in that the Commissioners are not yet fully satisfied in the one,
nor resolved in the other, at this present time when this went to the Press, I
must entreat you pardon me till I be better assured.

Thus far I have traveled in this Wilderness of Virginia, not being ignorant
for all my pains this discourse will be wrested, tossed and turned as many
ways as there is leaves; that I have writ too much of some, too little of
others, and many such like objections. To such I must answer, in the Companies
name I was requested to do it, if any have concealed their approved
experiences from my knowledge, they must excuse me: as for every fatherles* or
stolen relation, or whole volumes of sofisticated rehearsals, I leave them to
the charge of them that desire them. I thank God I never undertook any thing
yet any could tax me of carelessness or dishonesty, and what is he to whom I
am indebted or troublesome? Ah! were these my accusers but to change cases and
places with me but 2. years, or till they had done but so much as I, it may be
they would judge more charitably of my imperfections. But here I must leave all
to the trial of time, both my self, Virginia's preparations, proceedings and
good events, praying to that great God the protector of all goodness to send
them as good success as the goodness of the action and Country deserves, and
my heart desires.

FINIS.
THE FIFTH BOOK.
THE GENERAL HISTORY OF THE BERMVDAS, now called the Summer Isles, from their
beginning in the year of our Lord 1593. to this present 1624. with their
proceedings, accidents and present estate.

BEfore we present you the matters of fact, it is fit to offer to your view the
Stage whereon they were acted, for as Geography without History seems a
carcass without motion, so History without Geography, wandreth as a Vagrant
without a certain habitation. The description of the Isles.
Those Islands lie in the huge maine Ocean, and two hundred leagues from any
continent, situated in 32. degrees and 25. minutes, of Northerly latitude, and
distant from England West South-West, about 3300. miles, some twenty miles in
length, and not past two miles and a half in breadth, environed with Rocks,
which to the Northward, Westward, and South-East, extend further then they
have bin yet well discovered: by reason of those Rocks the Country is naturally
very strong, for there is but two places, and scare two, unless to them who
know them well, where shipping may safely come in, and those now are exceeding
well fortified, but within is room to entertain a royal Fleet: the Rocks in
most places appear at a low water, neither are they much covered at a high,
for it ebbs and flows not past five foot; the shore for most part is a Rock,
so hardened with the sun, wind and sea, that it is not apt to be worn away
with the waves, whose violence is also broke by the Rocks before they can come
to the shore: it is very uneven, distributed into hills and dales; the mold is
of diverse colors, neither clay nor sand, but a mean between; the red which
resembles clay is the worst, the whitest resembling sand and the blackest is
good, but the brown betwixt them both which they call white, because there is
mingled with it a white meal is the best: under the mould two or three foot
deep, and sometimes less, is a kind of white hard substance which they call
the Rock: the trees usually fasten their roots in it; neither is it indeed
rock or stone, or so hard, though for most part more harder then Chalk; nor
so white, but pumish-like and spungy, easily receiving and containing much
water. In some places Clay is found under it, it seems to be engendered with
rain water, draining through the earth, and drawing with it of his substance
unto a certain depth where it congeales; the hardest kind of it lies under
the red ground like quarries, as it were thick slates one upon another,
through which the water has his passage, so that in such places there is
scarce found any fresh water, for all or the most part of the fresh water
comes out of the Sea draining through the sand, or that substance called the
Rock, leaving the salt behind, it becomes fresh: sometimes we dug wells of
fresh water which we find in most places, and but three or four paces from
the Sea side, some further, the most part of them would ebb and flow as the
Sea did; and be level or little higher then the superficies of the sea, and in
some places very strange, dark and cumbersome Caves.

The clime, temper and fertility.
The air is most commonly clear, very temperate, moist, with a moderate heat,
very healthful and apt for the generation and nourishing of all things, so as
many things transported from hence yield a far greater increase, and if it be
any living thing it becomes fatter and better; by this means the country is so
replenished with Hens and Turkies, within the space of three or four years,
that many of them being neglected, forsake the houses and become wild, and so
live in great abundance; the like increase there is in Hogs, tame Conies, and
other Cattle according to their kinds. There seems to be a continual Spring,
which is the cause some things come not to that maturity and perfection as were
requisite; and though the trees shed their leaves, yet they are always full of
green; the Corn is the same they have in Virginia, and the West Indies: of
this and many other things without plowing or much labor, they have two
Haruests every year, for they set about March, which they gather in July; and
again in August, which they reap in December; and little slips of Fig Trees
and Vines do usually bear fruit within the year, and sometimes in less; but
we find not the Grapes as yet come to any perfection; the like fertility it
has in Oranges and Limons, Pomgranates, and other things. Concerning the
serenity and beauty of the sky, it may as truly be said of those Islands as
ever it was said of the Rhodes, that there is no one day throughout the 12.
months, but that in some hour thereof, the sun looks singularly and clear
upon them: for the temperature it is beyond all others most admirable; no cold
there is beyond an English April, nor heat much greater then an ordinary July
in France, so that frost and snow is never seen here, nor stinking and
infectious mists very seldom, by reason of the maine Ocean, there is some wind
stirring that cooles the air: the winter they have observes the time with
ours, but the longest days and nights are shorter then ours almost by two
hours.

Trees and Fruits.
We found it at first all ouergrowne with weeds, and plants of several kinds,
as many tall and goodly Cedars, infinite store of Palmetoes, numbers of
Mulberies, wild Oliue-trees store, with diverse others unknown both by name and
nature, so that as yet they become lost to many useful employments, which time
and industry no doubt will one day discover, and even already certain of the
most notorious of them have gotten them appellations from their apparent
effects, as the Prickell-peare which grows like a shrub by the ground, The
Prickell Pear.
with broad thick leaves, all ouer-armed with long and sharp dangerous
thorns, the fruit being in form not much unlike a small green Pear, and on
the outside of the same color, but within blood red, and exceeding full of
juice; with grains not much unlike the Pomgranat, The poison weed.
and coloring after its nature. The poisoned weed is much in shape like our
English Iuy, but being but touched, causes redness, itching, and lastly
blisters, the which howsoever after a while pass away of themselves without
further harm, yet because for the time they are somewhat painful, it has got
it self an ill name, although questionless of no ill nature. Here is also
frequently growing a certain tall Plant, The red weed.
whose stalk being all over covered with a red rind, is thereupon termed the
red weed, the root whereof being soked in any liquor, or but a small quantity
of the Juice drunk alone, procures a very forcible vomit, and yet is generally
used by the people, and found very effectual against the pains and distempers
of the stomach.

The purging Bean.
A kind of Wood-bind there is likewise by the Sea very commonly to be found,
which runs upon trees twining it self like a Vine: the fruit somewhat
resembles a Bean, but somewhat flatter, the which any way eaten works
excellently in the nature of a purge, and though very vehemently, yet without
all peril. The costiue tree.
Contrary to this, another small tree there is, which causes costiuenesse;
there is also a certain Plant like a bramble bush, which bears a long yellow
fruit, having the shell very hard, and within it a hard berry, that beaten and
taken inwardly purges gently. Red Pepper.
There is another fruit much like our Barberies, which being beaten or bruised
between the teeth, sets all the mouth on an extreme heat very terrible for the
time, to avoid which they are swallowed down whole, and found of the same or
better operation then the red Pepper, and thence borrows the name. In the
bottom of the Sea there is growing upon the Rocks a large kind of Plant in
the form of a Vine leaf, but far more spread with veins in color of a pale
red, very strangely interlaced and wouen one into another, which we call the
Feather, but the virtue thereof is altogether unknown, The Sea feather.
but only regarded for the rarity. Now besides these natural productions,
Fruits transported.
prouidences and pains since the Plantation, have offered diverse other feeds
and plants, which the soil has greedlily embraced and cherished, so that at
this present 1623. there are great abundance of white, red and yellow colored
Potatoes, Tobacco, Sugarcanes, Indicos, Parsnips, exceeding large R^dishes, the
American bread, the Cassado root, the Indian Pumpian, the Water-millon,
Musk-millon, and the most delicate Pine-apples, Plantans, and Papawes, also the
English Artichoke, Pease, etc. briefly whatsoever else may be expected for the
satisfaction either of curiosity, necessity or delight.

Neither has the air for her part been wanting with due supplies of many
sorts of Fowls, as the gray and white Hearne, the gray and green Plouer,
Birds.
some wild Ducks and Malards, Coots and Red-shankes, Sea-wigions,
Gray-bitterns, Cormorants, numbers of small Birds like Sparrowes and Robins,
which have lately been destroyed by the wild Cats, Wood-pickars, very many
Crows, which since this Plantation are killed, the rest fled or seldom seen
except in the most uninhabited places, from whence they are observed to take
their flight about sun set, directing their course toward the North-west,
which makes many conjecture there are some more Islands not far off that way.
Sometimes are also seen Falcons and Iar-falcons, Ospraies, a Bird like a
Hobby, but because they come seldom, they are held but as passengers; but
above all these, most deserving observation and respect are those two sorts of
Birds, the one for the tune of his voice, the other for the effect, called the
Cahow, and Egge*bird, which on the first of May, a day constantly observed,
fall a laying infinite store of Eggs near as big as Hens, Egge-Birds.
upon certain small sandy baies especially in Coupers I Will; and although men
sit down amongst them when hundreds have bin gathered in a morning, yet there
is has stayed amongst them till they have gathered as many more: they continue
this course till Midsummer, and so tame and feareles, you must thrust them off
from their Eggs with your hand; then they grow so faint with laying, they
suffer them to breed and take infinite numbers of their young to eat, which are
very excellent meat.

The Cahow is a Bird of the night, Cahowes.
for all the day she lies hid in holes in the Rocks, where they and their young
are also taken with as much ease as may be, but in the night if you but whoop
and hollow, they will light upon you, that with your hands you may choose the
fat and leave the lean; those they have only in winter: their Eggs are as big
as hens, but they are speckled, the other white. Mr. Norwood has taken twenty
dozen of them in three or four hours, and since there has been such havoc
made of them, they were near all destroyed, till there was a strict inhibition
for their preservation. The Tropicke bird is white, The Tropicke Bird and the
Pemblicos presagements.
as large as a Pullet, with one only long Feather in her tail, and is seldom
seen far distant from other of the Tropicks: another small Bird there is,
because she cries Pemblyco they call her so, she is seldom seen in the day
but when she sings, as too often she does very clamorously; too true a Prophet
she proves of huge winds and boisterous weather: there were a kind of small
Owls in great abundance, but they are now all slain or fled: some tame Ducks,
Geese and Pigeons there are, but the two latter prosper not.

Concerning vermin and noisome creatures, there are not many, Of Vermin.
but only Rats and Cats, there increased since the Plantation, but how they
agree together you shall hear hereafter. The Musketas and Flies are also too
busy, with a certain India Bug, called by the Spaniards a Cacarootch, the
which creeping into Chests they eat and defile with their ill-sented dung: also
the little Ants in summer time are so troublesome, they are forced to dry their
figs upon high frames* and anoint their feet with tar, wherein they stick,
else they would spoil them all ere they could be dried: Worms in the earth
also there are, but too many, so that to keep them from destroying their Corn
and Tobacco, they are forced to worm them every morning, which is a great
labor, else all would be destroyed. Lizards there were many and very large,
but now none, and it is laid they were destroyed by the Cat. (...)
Certain Spiders also of very large size are found hanging upon trees, but
instead of being any way dangerous as in other places, they are here of a most
pleasing aspect, all over dressed, as it were with Silver, Gold, and Pearl, and
their Webs in the Summer wouen from tree to tree, are generally a perfect raw
silk, and that as well in regard of substance as color, and so strong
withal, that diverse Birds bigger than Black-birds, being like Snipes, are
often taken and snared in them as a Net: then what would the Silke-worme do
were she^ there to feed upon the continual green Mulbery?

Ashes.
But above all the rest of the Elements, the Sea is found most abundantly
liberal: hence have they as much excellent Fish, and as much variety as need
be desired. The most of which being unknown to our Northern parts, got there
new names, either for their shapes or conditions; as the large Rocke-fish from
his like hew, and haunting amongst the Rocks, the fat Hog-fish from his
swine-like shape and shout: for this is not the old known Hog-fish with
brussels on his back; the delicate Amber-fish from his taste and smell,
Angell-fish, Cony-fish, the small yellow tail from that natural painting; the
great Growper from his odd and strange grunting, some of them yet known to
the Americans, as the Purgoose, the Cauallo, the Gar-fish, Flying-fish and
Morerayes: the rest are common to other Continents; as the Whale in great
numbers, the Sharke, the Pilot-fish, the Sea-Breame, the Oyster and Lobster,
with diverse others; twenty Tortoises have been taken in a day, and some of
them will afford half a bushel of Eggs, and suffice to feed forty men at a
meal. And thus have you briefly epitomized Mother Natures benefits to this
little, yet dainty spot of earth, neither were it ingenuity to conceal wherein
she inclines to the Stepdame, especially since the particulars are so few, as
rather requisite Antidotes against idleness to rouse up industry, The most
hurtful things in those Isles.
then any great cause of much distaste, much less despair: and of those to
speak troth, there are only two: viz. the Winds, and the Worms, especially
in the Spring and Autumn; and thus conditioned as yet we will let rest these
small Islands, in the midst of this mighty and maine Ocean, so environed on
every side, by infinite numbers of uncertain scattered Rocks, lying shallowly
hid under the surface of the water, a league, two, three, four, or five, to
Sea, to the which aduantagers added by art, as hereafter you shall hear at
large, and find described in the Map. It may well be concluded to be the most
impregnable place in the world, and although the Amber Greece, Pearls, nor
Tobacco, are of that quantity and certainty to be relied upon to gain wealth;
yet by practice and experience they find, by Silk, Saffron, Indico, Madar,
Sugarcanes, Wine, Oil, and such like great profit may be expected: yet were
those hopeless in regard of their conueniency to nourish and maintain
themselves, and relieve them shall visit them with wood, water, and other
necessaries, besides what an eyesore they are already becommed to them that
have them not, and how dear and precious to them that have them, I think none
will deny but they are well worth the keeping: and so we will proceed to the
accidents that befell the first finders; also the proceedings of the first
Planters and their successors, Master Norrod, Thomas Sparks, and diverse others.

A brief relation of the shipwreck of Henry May.
How it is supposed they were called the Bermud^^.
HOw these Isles came by the name of Bermudas, or the infinite number of black
Hogs, or so fearful to the world, that many called them the I Will of Devils,
that all men did shun as Hell and perdition; I will not expostulate, nor
trouble your patiences with those uncertain antiquities further then thus; our
men found diverse crosses, pieces of Spanish moneys here and there. Two or three
wracks also they found, by certain inscriptions to be some Spanish, some
Dutch, some French; but the greatest rumor is, that a Spanish ship called
Bermudas was there cast away, carrying Hogs to the West Indies that swam a
shore, and there increased: how the Spaniards escaped is uncertain: but they
say, from that ship those Isles were first called Bermudas, which tilt then for
six thousand years had been namelesse.

But the first Englishman that was ever in them, was one Henry May, a worthy
Mariner that went with Captain Lancaster to the East Indies 1591. and in their
return by the West Indies, being in some distress, sent this Henry May for
England by one Mounsier de la Barbotier, to acquaint the Merchants with their
estate. The last of November, says May, we departed from Laguna in Hispaniola,
and the seventeenth of December following, we were cast away upon the
North-west of the Bermudas; the Pilots about noone made themselves Southwards
of the Isles twelve leagues, and demanded of the Captain their Wine of hight as
out of all danger, which they had: but it seem, they were either drunk, or
careless of their charge; for through their negligences a number of good men
were cast away. I being but a stranger amongst fifty and odd Frenchmen, it
pleased God to appoint me to be one of them should be saved. In this extremity
we made a raft, which we towed with our Boat, there were but six and twenty of
us saved; and I seeing scarce room for the one half, durst not pass in
amongst them till the Captain called me along with him, leaving the better
half to the seas mercy: that day we rowed till within two hours of night ere
we could land, being near dead with thirst, every man took his way to seek
fresh water, at length, by searching amongst many weeds, we found some rain
water, but in the maine are many fair Baies, where we had enough for digging.

Now it pleased God before our ship split we saved our Carpenters tools, The
building and calking their Bark.
some Nails, Sails, and Tacklings, wherewith we went roundly to work, and
built a Bark of eighty tunues: In stead of Pitch, we made Lime, mixed with
Tortoise oil, and as the Carpenters calked her, I and another paid the seames
with this plaster, which being in April, became quickly dry, and as hard as a
stone.

In April it was so hot, we feared our water would fail, His return for
England.
two great Chests we made, which we calked as our ship; those we stowed on
each side our maine Mast, filled them with water and thirty live Tortoises:
we found many Hogs, but so lean we could not eat them; the tops of the
Palmetaberries was our bread, and the juice we got out of the trees we cut
down our drink, and of the leaves, which are more then an Ell long, we
covered our Cabens, and made our beds, and found many of those provisions as is
related, but little foul weather. The eleventh of May it pleased God to set us
clear of the I Will, after we had lived there five months: and the twentieth
we fell with Cape Britton, near New found Land, where refreshing our selves
with wood and water, and such things as we could get of the Saluages, it seemed
a good Country, but we stayed not past four hours before we set sail for
the bank of New found land, where we met many ships, but not any would take
in a man of us, until it pleased God we met a Bark of Fawmothe, which
received us for a little time, and with her we took a French ship, wherein I
left Captain de la Barbotier, my dear friend, and all his Company: and in
August arrived at Falmouth in this honest English Bark, 1594.

Written by me Henry May.

The first English ship known to have been cast away upon the Bermudas 1609.
From the relation of Mr. Jordan, Master John Euens, Master Henry Shelly, and
diverse others.
YOu have heard, that when Captain Smith was Governor of Virginia, there were
nine ships sent with Sir Thomas Gates, and Sir George Summers, and Captain
Nuport with five hundred people, to take in the old Commission, and rectify a
new government: they set sail in May, and in the height of thirty degrees of
Northerly latitude, they were taken with an extreme storm, A most desperate
estate by a storm.
or rather a part of Hericano, upon the five and twentieth of July, which as
they write, did not only separate them from the Fleet, but with the violent
working of the Seas, their ship became so shaken, torn, and leake, she
received so much water as covered two tire of Hogsheads above the ballace, that
they stood up to the middles, with Buckets, Baricos, and Kettles, to bail out
the water. Thus bailing and pumping three days and three nights without
intermission, and yet the water seemed rather to increase then diminish, in so
much that being all utterly spent with labor, were even resolved without any
hope to shut up the hatches, and commit themselves to the mercy of the Sea,
which is said to be merciless, or rather to the mercy of Almighty God, whose
mercy far exceeds all his works; seeing no sense or hope in man's
apprehension, but presently to sink: some having some good and comfortable
waters, fetched them and drank one to another, as taking their last leaves
until a more happy, and a more joyful meeting in a more blessed world, when
it pleased God out of his most gracious and merciful providence, so to direct
and guide their ship for her most advantage;

The care and judgment of Sir George Summers.
That Sir George Summers all this time sitting upon the poupe, scarce taking
leisure to eat nor sleep, couing the ship to keep her as upright as he could,
otherways she must long ere that needs have foundered, most wishedly and
happily descried land; whereupon he most comfortably encouraged them to follow
their work, many of them being fast asleep: this unlooked for welcome news,
as if it had bin a voice from heaven, hurrieth them all above hatches, to look
for that they durst scarce believe, so that improuidently forsaking that task
which imported no less then their lives, they gave so dangerous advantage to
their greedy enemy the salt water, which still entered at the large breaches of
their poor wooden castle, as that in gaping after life, they had well-nigh
swallowed their death. Surely it is impossible any should now be urged to do
his best, and although they knew it, An evident token of Gods mercy.
that place all men did so shun, yet they spread all the fail they could to
attain them: for not long it was before they struck upon a rock, till a
surge of the sea cast her from thence, and so from one to another, till most
luckily at last so upright betwixt two, as if she had been in the stocks, till
this they expected but every blow a death: But now behold, suddenly the wind
gives place to a calm, and the billows, which each by ouertaking her, would
in an instant have shiuered her in pieces, become peaceable and still, so that
with all conueniency and ease, they unshipped all their goods, victual, and
persons into their Boats, and with extreme joy, even almost to amazedness,
arrived in safety, though more then a league from the shore, without the loss
of a man; yet were they in all one hundred and fifty: yet their deliverance
was not more strange in falling so happily upon the land, as their feeding and
preservation was beyond their hopes; for you have heard, it has been to the
Spaniards more fearful then an Vtopian Purgatory, and to all Seamen no less
terrible then an enchanted den of Furies and Devils, the most dangerous,
unfortunate, and forlorn place in the world, and they found it the richest,
healthfullest and pleasantest they ever saw, as is formerly said. Sir George
Summers (...)


Being thus safe on shore, they disposed themselves to search the Isles for food
and water; others to get a shore what they could from the ship; not long Sir
George wandered but found such a fishing, that in half an hour with a hook
and line, he took so many as sufficed the whole company, in some places they
were so thick in the Coues, and so great, they durst not go in left they
should bite them, and these rock fish are so great two will load a man, and
fatter nor better fish cannot be. Mr. Shelly found a Bay near a quarter of a
mile over, so full of Mullets, as none of them before had ever seen or heard
of the like: the next day seeking to kill them with fis-gigs, they stracke so
many the water in many places was red with blood, yet caught not one, but with
a net they caught so many as they could draw a shore, with infinite number of
Pilchards and diverse other sorts; great craw-fishes in a night by making a fire
they have taken in great quantity. Sir George had twice his hook and line
broke out of his hand, but the third time he made it so strong he caught the
same fish, which had pulled him into the Sea had not his men got hold of him,
whereby he had his three hooks again were found in her belly. At their first
hunting for hogs they found such abundance; they killed 32 and this hunting and
fishing was appointed to Captain Robert Walsingham, and Mr. Henry Shelly for
the company in general: they report they killed at least 500. besides Pigs, and
many that were killed by diverse others; for the birds in their seasons, the
facility to make their cabens of Palmera leaves, caused many of them utterly
forget or desire ever to return from thence, they lived in such plenty, peace
and ease.

But let us remember how the Knights began to resolve in those desperate
affairs: What means they m^de to send to Virginia.
many proiects they had, but at last it was concluded, to deck their long boat
with their ship hatches; which done, with all expedition they sent Master
Raven, a very sufficient Mariner, with eight more in her to Virginia, to have
shipping from thence to fetch them away; three weeks or a month they expected
her return, but to this day she was never more heard of; all this time was
spent in searching the Isles: now although God still fed them with this
abundance of plenty, yet such was the malice of envy or ambition, for all this
good service done by Summers, such a great difference fell amongst their
Commanders, that they lived asunder in this distress, rather as mere
strangers then distressed friends: but necessity so commanded, patience had the
victory.

Two ships at this time by those several parties were a building; A marriage,
and two children borne.
in the mean time two children were borne, the Boy was called Bermudas, the
Girl Bermuda, and amongst all those sorrows they had a merry English marriage;
the form of those Isles you may see at large in the Map of Mr. Norwood, where
you may plainly see no place known has better walls, nor a broader ditch. But
having finished and rigged their two new Cedar ships with such provisions they
saved from the Sea-aduenturer they left amongst the Rocks, they called the one
the Patience, the other the Deliverance; they used Lime and Oil, as May did
for Pitch and Tar. Sir George Summers had in his Bark no Iron at all but one
bolt in her Keele; now having made their provisions of victual and all things
ready, they set sail the tenth of May 1610. only leaving two men behind
them, called Christopher Carter and Edward Waters, that for their offenses, or
the suspicion they had of their judgments, fled into the woods, and there
rather desired to end their days then stand to their trials and the event of
Justice; for one of their consorts was shot to death, and Waters being tied to
a tree also to be executed, had by chance a Knife about him, and so secretly
cut the Rope, he ran into the woods where they could not find him. There were
two Saluages also sent from Virginia by Captain Smith, the one called
Namuntack, the other Matchumps, but some such differences fell between them,
that Matchumps slew Namuntack, and having made a hole to bury him, because it
was too short, he cut of his legs and laid them by him, which murder he
concealed till he was in Virginia.

The four and twentieth of the same month they arrived in Virginia at James
town, Their arrival in Virginia.
where they found but threescore persons, as you may read at large in the
History of Virginia, of the five hundred left by Captain Smith, also of the
arrival of the Lord Laware, that met them thus bound for England, returned
them back, and understanding what plenty there was of hogs and other good
things in the Bermudas, was desirous to send thither to supply his necessary
occasions; whereupon Sir George Summers, the best acquainted with the place,
whose noble mind ever regarded a general good more then his own ends, though
above threescore years of age, and had means in England suitable to his rank,
offered himself by Gods help to perform this dangerous voyage again for the
Bermudas, which was kindly accepted, so upon the 19. of June, he embarked in
his Cedar ship, about the burden of thirty tons, and so set sail.

Sir George S^mmers his return to the Bermudas.
Much foul and cross weather he had, and was forced to the North parts of
Virginia, where refreshing himself upon this unknown coast, he could not be
diuerted from the search of the Bermudas, where at last with his company he
safely arrived: but such was his diligence with his extraordinary care, pains
and industry to dispatch his business, and the strength of his body not
answering the ever memorable courage of his mind, having lived so long in such
honorable services, the most part of his well beloved and virtuous life, God
and nature here determined, should ever remain a perpetual memory of his much
bewailed sorrow for his death: finding his time but short, after he had taken
the best course he could to settle his estate, like a valiant Captain he
exhorted them with all diligence to be constant to those Plantations, and with
all expedition to return to Virginia. In that very place which we now call
Saint Georges town, this noble Knight died, whereof the place takes the name.
But his men, as men amazed, seeing the death of him who was even as the life of
them all, embalmed his body and set sail for England, being the first that
ever went to seek those Islands, which have been ever since called Summers
Isles, in honor of his worthy memory, leaving three men behind them, that
voluntarily stayed, whose names were Christopher Carter, Edward Waters, there
formerly left as is said, and Edward Chard. This Cedar ship at last with his
dead body arrived at Whit-Church in Dorsetshire, where by his friends he was
honorably buried, with many vollies of shot, and the rites of a Soldier, and
upon his tomb was bestowed this Epitaph.

(...)
Hei mihi Virginia quod tam cito praeterit Aestas,
Autumnus sequitur, saeuiet inde and biems;
At ver perpetuum nascetur, and Anglialaeta,
Decerpit flores florida terra tuas.
In English thus:

Alas Virginia's Summer so soon past,
Autumn succeeds and stormy Winters blast,
Yet Englands joyful Spring with joyful showers,
O Florida, shall bring thy sweetest flowers.
The proceedings of the three men.
THe honor of this resulution belongs principally to Carter, for through his
importunity, not to leave such a place abandoned, Chard and Waters were moved
to stay with him, and the rest promised with all the speed they could again to
reuisit them. But the ship once out of sight, those three Lords, the sole
inhabitants of all those Islands, began to erect their little common wealth for
a while with brotherly regency, repairing the ground, planting Corn, and such
seeds and fruits as they had, building a house, etc. Then making privy search
amongst the creusses and corners of those craggy Rocks, what this maine Ocean
since the worlds creation had thrown amongst them, at last they chanced upon
the greatest piece of Ambergris was ever seen or heard of in one lump, A
piece of Ambergris of 80. pound weight.
being in weight fourscore pound, besides diverse other small pieces.

But now being rich, they grew so proud and a^bitious, contempt took such
place, they fell out for superiority, though but three forlorn men, more then
three thousand miles from their native Country, and but small hope ever to see
it again. Notwithstanding, they sometimes fell from words to blows about
mere trifles: in one of which fights, one of them was bitten with his own
dog, as if the dumb beast would reprove them of their folly; at last Chard and
Waters, the two greater spirits, must try it out in the field, but Carter
wisely stole away their weapons, affecting rather to live amongst his enemies,
then by being rid of them live alone; and thus those miserable men lived full
two years, so that all their clothes were near worn clean from their backs,
and their hopes of any foreign relief as naked as their bodies. At last they
began to recover their wits, yet in a fashion perhaps would have cost them
dearer then when they were mad; for concluding a tripartite peace of their
Marachin war, they resolved to frame as good a Boat as they could, and
therein to make a desperate attempt for Virginia, or New found Land; but no
sooner were they entered into that resolution, but they descried a sail
standing in for the shore, though they neither knew what she was, nor what she
would, they were so ouer-ioyed, with all possible speed they went to meet her,
and according to their hearts desire she proved an Englishman, whom they
safely conducted into their harbor.

Now you are to understand, that Captain Matthew Summers. How they were
supplied. 1611.
Nephew and heir to Sir George, that returned with his dead body, though both
he and his Company did their utmost in relating all those passages to their
Contrymen and adventurers, their relations were believed but as travelers
tales, till it came to be apprehended by some of the Virginia Company, how
beneficial it might be, and helpful to the Plantation in Virginia, so that
some one hundred and twenty of them bought the pretended right of all the
Company, and had sent this ship to make a trial; but first they had obtained
Letters Patents of the Kings most excellent Majesty. Sir Thomas Smith was
elected Treasurer and Governor here, and Master Richard More to be Governor of
the Isles and Colony there.

The first beginning of a Colonie in the Somer Isles, under the command of
Master Richard More, extracted out of a plot of Master Richard Norwood
Surueior, and the relations of diuer's others.
MAster More thus finding those three men not only well and lusty, The
arrival of Master More.
but well stored with diverse sorts of provisions, as an Acre of Corn ready to
be gathered, numbers of Pumpions and Indian Beans, 1612.

Sir Thomas Smith Treasurer.


many Tortoises ready taken, good store of hogs flesh salted, and made in
flitches of Bacon, were very good, and so presently landed his goods and sixty
persons toward the beginning of July 1612. upon the South side of Smiths I Will.

Not long after his arrival, Their differences about the Ambergris.
More having some private intelligence of this Ambergris, took first Chard
in examination, he being one of the three the most masterfull spirit, what
Ambergris, Pearl, Treasure, or other Commodities they had found. Chard no
less witty then resolute, directly answered; Not any thing at all but the
fruits of the I Will, what his fellows had done he knew not, but if they had, he
doubted not but to find it out, and then he should know it certainly. This he
spoke only to win time to swear his Consorts to secrecy, and he would find
the means how they should all return in that ship with it all for England,
otherwise they should be deceived of all. Till this was effected they thought
every hour an age; now for the better conueiance of it aboard, they acquainted
it to Captain Dauis, master of the ship, and one Master Edwin Kendall, that
for their secrecy and transportation should participate with them: Without
further ceremony the match was accepted, and absolutely concluded, the plot
laid, time and place set down to have it aboard. But Carter, were it for fear
the Governor at last should know of it, to whom so often they had denied it; or
that the rest should deceive him, is uncertain; but most certain it is, he
revealed all the plot to Master More: To get so much wealth he knew would
please them in England, though it did displease all his Company, and to lose
such a prize he would not for hazarding a mutiny. So first he revealed
himself to Kendall in fair terms, reproving his dishonesty, but not being
answered according to his expectation, he committed both Chard and him to
person. The next Sabboath day Dauis coming on shore, More also taxed with very
hard language and many threats, to lay him fast also if he mended not his
manners; Dauis for the present replied little, but went with him to the place
of prayer: but in the midst of divine service he goes away, commanding all his
Seamen to follow him presently aboard, where he encourages them to stand to
him like men, and he would free the Prisoners, have all the Ambergris for
themselves, and so be gone.

Chard in danger of hanging.
The Governor hearing of this resolution, prepares with his company to repulse
force with force, so that a general expectance of a civil uncivil war
possessed every man; but this threatening gust passed over more calmlier then
was expected; for Dauis having better advised with himself, repen^ed his
rashness, and desired a reconcilement with the Governor. Peace thus concluded,
Kendall was set at liberty, but Chard was condemned, and upon the ladder to be
hanged for his obstinacy; yet upon better consideration More repriued him, but
kept him a prisoner all the time he stayed in the Country, which was generally
thought a very bad reward for his great desert, and that there was more of this
Ambergris imbeziled, then would have contented all the finders, that never
had any consideration at all. The greatest part though More thus recovered, yet
Dauis and Kendall had so much, either by the ignorance or conniuency of the
Governors, that arriving in England, they prepared themselves for a new voyage;
at last they two falling out, the Company having notice thereof, so tormented
them both, they gave over their voyage, and durst not be seen a long time
after.

Master Mores industry in fortifying and planting.
The Governor thus rid of the ship and those discontents, removed his seat from
Smiths I Will to Saint Georges, after he had fitted up some small Cabbens of
Palmata leaves for his wife and family, in that valley where now stands their
prime town called S. Georges, he began to apply himself to fortify the
Country, and training his men in the exercise of arms. For although he was
but a Carpenter, he was an excellent Artist, a good Gunner, very witty and
industrious: he built and laid the foundation of eight or nine Forts, called
the Kings Castle, Charles Fort, Pembrookes Fort, Smiths Fort, Pagits Fort,
Gates Fort, Warwicks Castle, Saint Katharines Fort, etc. mounting in them all
the Ordnance he had, preparing the ground to build Houses, plant Corn, and
such Fruits as they had.

A contention of the Minister against the Governor.
Being thus busied, and as the necessity of the time required, keeping his men
somewhat hard at work, Master Keath his Minister, were it by the secret
provocation of some drones, that grew weary of their taskes, or his affection
to popularity is not certain: But he begins to tax the Governor in the Pulpit,
he did grind the faces of the poor, oppressing his Christian brethren with
Pharoab* taxes. More finding this in short time, might breed ill blood, called
the Company together and also the Minister, urging them plainly, to tell him
wherein he had deserved those hard accusations: whereupon, with an universal
cry they affirmed the contrary, so that Keath down of his knees to ask him
forgiveness. But Master More kindly took him up, willing him to kneel to
God, and hereafter be more modest and charitable in his speeches;
notwithstanding two other discontents so vpbraided More with that doctrine, and
stood to maintain it, he impaneled a Jury, with a great deal of seeming much
ado he would hang them being condemned, one of them with the very fear, fell
into a dead Palsy; so that the other was set at liberty, and proved after a
very good labourer.

Many conclusions he tried about the Sea-venture, the wrack of Sir George
Summers, but he got only for his pains but two piece of Ordnance. Two pieces
w^^hed out of the Sea Adventure.

The first supply.


Having framed a Church of timber, it was blown down by a tempest, so that he
built another in a more closer place with Palmeta leaves.

Before this year was expired, the aduenterers sent them an aduiso with
thirty Passengers and good provisions, to prepare with all expedition for
their defense against the Spaniard, whom they understood ere long would visit
them: This occasioned him to keep all his men together in that I Will so hard at
work, that wanting liberty to go abroad for food, living only on that they
had, and expected daily to receive from England, they were so ouer-toiled, many
fell sick, but none died. Very earnest this ship was to have all the
Ambergris, which M. More perceiving, was the chiefest cause of their
coming, and that it was the only loadstone to draw from England still more
supplies; for all the express command sent from the Company, he returned this
ship but with the one third part; so from thence she went to Virginia, and not
long after arrived safely in England.

But before her return the Company sent the Martha with sixty Passengers
more* they arrived in June with one Master Bartlet to survey the Island, 1613.
The second supply.

Sir Thomas Smith Treasurer.


and the estate of the Colonie, with express command for all the Ambergris:
but More perceiving him not as he would have him, and that the Company began to
mistrust him, would send no more but another third part, wherewith they
returned, leaving a Frenchman to make trial of the Mulberies for Silk, but
he did not bring any thing to perfection; excusing himself, they were not the
right Mulberies he expected. About this time they were in hope of a small crop
of Tobacco, but it was most spoiled for want of knowledge to use it. Now in
England Master More became amongst the Merchants marvelous distasteful, for the
detaining so long the Ambergris; which delays they so much abhorred, they
forthwith dispatched the Elizabeth the second time and forty Passengers, much
rebuking More for so long detaining the Ambergris: for the which, having now
no more colorable excuses, he delivered it, wherewith the ship went to
Virginia, and thence home. In this ship was brought the first Potato roots, A
strange increase of Potatoes.
which flourished exceedingly for a time, till by negligence they were almost
lost (all but two castaway roots) that so wonderfully have increased, they are
a maine relief to all the Inhabitants. This ship was not long gone but there
came two Spanish ships, The attempt of two Spanish ships.
founding with their Boat, which attempted to come in: but from the Kings
Castle Master More made but two shot, which caused them presently depart. Mark
here the handy work of the divine providence, for they had but three quarters
of a barrel of powder, and but one shot more, and the powder by carelessness
was tumbled down under the mussels of the two pieces, were discharged, yet not
touched with fire when they were discharged.

This fear thus past, appears another much worse, which was the extremity of
famine; in this extemity God sent Captain Daniel Elfrid with a caruell of
meal which a little relieved them, but brought withal so many Rats, that
within two years after near ruined all; now though Elfrid had deceived his
friend Fisher of this Caruell in the West. Indies, they revenged Fishers
injury, for Elfrid had his passage for England, and they made use of all he
had. Some two months after, came in the Blessing with an hundred Passengers;
and two days after the Star with a hundred and four score more, amongst
which were many Gentlemen, as Master Lower for Marshall, Master Barret, Master
Felgate, and diverse others; but very improper for what they undertook. Within
fourteen days after came in the Margaret and two Frygats, and in them one
hundred and threescore Passengers; also Master Bartlet came now expressly to
divide the Country into Tribes, and the Tribes into shares. But Master More
finding no mention made of any part for himself nor all them with him, as he
was promised in England, by no means would admit of any division, nor suffer
his men from finishing their fortifications, which was so necessary, it was his
maine ambition to see that accomplished; but such unkindness grew betwixt this
Master Bartlet and the Governor, that the rude multitude with all the disdain
they could devise caused Bartlet return for England as he came. About this
time William Millington was drawn into the Sea by a fish, but never after ever
seen.

England, so that Master More grew more and more in dislike with the company; A
great famine and mortality. Sir Thomas Smith Treasurer.
notwithstanding he followed the building of these Forts so earnestly,
neglecting planting of Corn, till their store was near all consumed, whereby
they became so feeble and weak, some would not, others could not go abroad to
seek relief, but statued in their houses, and many that went abroad, through
weakness were subject to be suddenly surprised with a disease called the
Feauges, which was neither pain nor sickness, but as it were the highest
degree of weakness, depriving them of power and ability from the execution of
any bodily exercises, whether it were working, walking, or what else: being
thus taken, if any presently gave them food, many times they straight
recovered, yet some after a little rest would be able to walk, but if they
found not present succor, died.

A strange being of Ravens.
About this time or immediately before, came in a company of Ravens, which
continued amongst them all the time of this mortality and then departed, which
for any thing known, neither before nor since were ever seen or heard of:
this with diverse other reasons caused Master More to go out to Sea, to see if
he could discover any other Islands, but he went not far ere ill weather
forced him back; and it were a noble adventure of him would undertake to make
more perfect all the dangers are about the Summer Isles.

All works abandoned to get only victual.
Thus famine and misery caused Governor More leave all his works, and send
them abroad to get what they could; one hundred and fifty of the most weak and
sick he sent to Coupers I Will, where were such infinite numbers of the Birds
called Cahowes, which were so fearelesse they might take so many as they would,
and that admired abundance of fish, that the extremity of their hunger, and
their gluttony was such, those heavenly blessings they so consumed and wasted
by careles^^sse and surfeiting, many of them died upon those silly Birds that
offered themselves to the slaughter, which the Governor understanding, caused
them for change of air to be removed to Port-royall, and a Company of Fishers
with a Boat to relieve them with fish, but the Gange grew so lazy the poor
weaklings still died; they that remained killed the Cattle they found in the
I Will, faining the heat caused them to run into the Sea and so were drowned; so
that the Governor sent again for them home, but some obtained leave still to
live abroad; one amongst the rest hid himself in the Woods, and lived only on
Wilkes and land Crabs, sat and lusty many months, but most of them being at
Saint Georges, ordinarily was taken one hundred and fifty or two hundred great
fishes daily for their food; for want of hooks and lines, the Smith made
hooks of old swords, and lines of old ropes, but finding all those poor
Engines also decay, they sent one of the two Frigates last left with them for
England, to tell them of this misery. All which was now attributed to Master
Mores perverseness, who at first when he got the Ambergris had not such a
general applause, but now all the worst could possibly be suggested was too
good for him; yet not knowing for the present how to send a better, they let
him continue still, though his time was near expired, and with all speed sent
the Welcome fraught with provision, where she well arrived, and proved her
self as welcome in deed as in name; for all those extremities, Master Jews
Hues writes, not one of all those threescore that first began this
Plantation was dead, which shows it was not impossible, but industry might
have prevented a great part of the others sluggish carelessness.

A supply, and M. Mores return.
This ship much refreshed this miserable Colony, but Master More seeing they
sent not for him, his time being now expired, understanding how badly they
reputed him in England, and that his imploiment now was more for their own
ends then any good for himself, resolved directly to return with this ship.
Having settled all things in the best order he could, left the government to the
charge of the counsel of six to succeed each other monthly, till they had
further directions from England; whose names were Captain Miles Kendall,
Captain John Mansfield, Thomas Knight, Charles Caldycot, Edward Waters, and
Christopher Carter, with twelve others for their assistances. More thus taking
leave of those Islands, arrived in England, much wrangling they had, but at last
they confirmed him according to promise eight shares of Land, and so he was
dismissed of his charge, with show of favor and much friendship.

The rule of the six Governors.
Sir Thomas Smith Treasurer.
which lot lighted upon Master Caldicot. This last supply somewhat abated the
extremity of their miseries, and the better in that their fortifications being
finished, they had the more leisure to go abroad with that means was brought
to that purpose to fish. Chard as you have heard, whom all this while More had
kept Prisoner, they set at liberty: now by reason of their former miseries,
little or nothing could be done; yet this Governor having thus concluded his
month, and prepared a Frigot and two and thirty men, he embarked himself
with two other of his fellow counselors; namely, Knight and Waters for the
West Indies, to get Fruits and Plants, Goats, young Cattle, and such like. But
this poor vessel, whether through ill weather, or want of Mariners, or both,
in stead of the Indies fell with the Canaries, where taking a poor Portugal*
the which they manned with ten of their own people, as soon after separated
from her in a storm, and the next day was taken by a French Pickaroune, so
that the Frigot out of hope of her prize, makes a second time for the
West Indies, where she no sooner arrived, but foundred in the sea; but the men
in their Boat recovered a desolate i will, where after some few months stay, an
English Pyrat took them in, and some of them at last got for England, and some
few years after returned to the Somer Isles.

Captain John Mansfield his month.
THE Frigot thus gone, Captain Mansfield succeeded. Then was contrived a
petition, as from the generality, unto the triumuirat Governors; wherein they
supplicated, that by no means they should resign the government to any should
come from England, upon what terms soever, until six months after the
return of their ship sent to the West Indies: about this unwarrantable action,
M^ster Jews Hues their Preacher was so violent in suppressing it, that such
discontents grew betwixt the Governors and him, and divisions among the
Company, he was arraigned, condemned, and imprisoned, but not long detained
before released. Then the matter fell so hotly again to be disputed betwixt
him and one Master Keath a Scotch-man, that professed schollership, that made
all the people in a great combustion: much ado there was, till at last as they
sat in the Church and ready to proceed to a judiciary course against Master
Hues, suddenly such an extreme gust of wind and weather so ruffled in the trees
and Church; some cried out, A miracle; others, it was but an accident common in
those Isles, but the noise was so terrible it dissolved the assembly*
notwithstanding, Master Hues was again imprisoned, and as suddenly discharged;
but those factions were so confused, and their relations so variable, that such
unnecessary circumstances were better omitted then any more disputed.

This man's month thus ended, begins Master Carter, Master Carter. Captain
Kendall Capt. Mansfield.
which was altogether spent in quietness, and then Captain Miles Kendall had
the rule, whose month was also as quietly spent as his Predecessors. Then
Captain Mansfield begins his second month, when the ship called the Edwin
arrived with good supplies. About this time diverse Boats going to sea were
lost, and some men drowned; and many of the Company repaired to Master Hues,
that there might be a Council according to Master Mores order of six
Governors, and twelve Assistants; whereupon grew as many more such silly
brawles as before, which at last concluded with as simple a reconciliation. In
the interim happened to a certain number of private persons as miserable and
lamentable an accident, as ever was read or heard of, and thus it was:

A wonderful accident.
In the month of March, a time most subject of all others to such tempests; on a
Friday there went seven men in a boat of two or three runs to fish. The
morning being fair, so eager they were of their journey, some went fasting:
neither carried they either meat or drink with them, but a few Palmeta
berries, but being at their fishing place some four leagues from the shore,
such a tempest arose, they were quickly driven from the sight of land in an
ouergrowne Sea, despairing of all hope, only committing themselves to Gods
mercy, set the boat drive which way she would. On Sunday the storm being
somewhat abated, they hoysed sail as they thought toward the Island. In the
evening it grew stark calm; to that being too weak to use their oars, they
lay a drift that night. The next morning Andrew Hilliard, for now all his
companions were past strength either to help him or themselves: before a small
gale of wind spread his sail again. On Tuesday one died, whom they threw over
board. On Wednesday three. And on Thursday at night the sixth. All these but the
last were buried by Hilliard in the Sea, for so weak he was grown he could
not turn him over as the rest, whereupon he stripped him, ripping his belly
with his knife, throwing his bowels into the water, he spread his body abroad
tilted open with a stick, and so lets it lie as a cisterne to receive some
lucky raine-water, and this God sent him presently after, so that in one small
shoure he recovered about four spoonefuls of rain water to his unspeakable
refreshment; he also preserved near half a pint of blood in a shoe, which he
did sparingly drink of to moist his mouth: two several dates he fed on his
flesh, to the quantity of a pound, on the eleventh day from his losing the
sight of land, two flying fishes falls in his boat, whose warm iucie blood he
sucked to his great comfort. But within an hour after to his greater comfort
you will not doubt, he once again descried the land, and within four hours
after was cast upon a rock near to Port royal, where his boat was presently
split in pieces, but himself, though exreamly weak, made shift to clamber up
so steep and high a rock, as would have troubled the ablest man in the I Will to
have done that by day he did by night.

Being thus astride on a rock, the tumbling Sea had gotten such possession in
his brains, that a good while it was before his giddy head would suffer him to
venture upon the forsaking it: toward the morning he craules a shore, and then
to his accomplished joy descernes where he is, and travels half a day without
any refreshment then water, whereof wisely and temperately he stinted himself,
otherwise certainly he had drunk his last. In which case he attaines a
friends house: where at the first they took him for a ghost, but at last
acknowledged and received him with joy, his story after some hours of recovery
of strength to tell it, heard out with admiration: he was not long after
conveyed to the town, where he received his former health, and was living in
the year 1622.

Treasure found in the Summer Isles.
The next news that happened in this time of ease, was, that a merry fellow
having found some few Dollars against the Flemish wrack, the bruit went
current the treasure was found, and they all made men. Much ado there was to
prevent the purloining of it, before they had it: where after they had tired
themselves with searching, that they found, amounted not to above twenty
pounds starling, which is not unlike but to be the remainder of some greater
store, washed from some wrack not far from the shore. A new Governor chosen.


The company by the Edwin receiving news of the revels were kept in Summer
Isles, resolved to make choice of a new Governor, called Master Daniel Tuckar,
that a long time had bin a planter in Virginia in the government of Captain
Smith. All things being furnished for his voyage; he set sail in the George,
consorted with the Edwin, with many passengers, which being discovered by them
in those Isles, they supposed them the Frigot sent to the West Indies; but when
they understood what they were, much preparation they made to resist the new
Governor. Many great ostentations appeared on both sides, but when the
quondam Governor did see his men for most part forsake him; all was very well
and quietly compounded, and with much kindness received and welcomed a shore,
where his Commission was no sooner read, then they accepted and acknowledged
him for their Governor.

The Government of Captain Daniel Tuckar.
Sir Thomas Smith Treasurer.
where finding the Inhabitants both abhorring all exacted labor, as also in a
manner disdaining and grudging much to be commanded by him; it could not but
passionate any man living. But at last according to the Virginia order, he set
every one was with him at Saint Georges, to his task, to clear grounds, fell
trees, set corn, square timber, plant vines and other fruits brought out of
England. These by their task Masters by break a day repaired to the wharfe,
from thence to be employed to the place of their employment, till nine of the
clock, and then in the afternoon from three till Sunne-set. Beside meat,
drink and clothes, they had for a time a certain kind of brass money with a
hog on the one side, in memory of the abundance of hogs was found at their
first landing.

This course thus squared, imitating diverse orders used in Virginia, Captain
Tuckars proceedings.
by Sir Tho. Dale: he began by them to look into his instructions given by the
Company. Whereupon by one Mr. Richard Norwood a Suruayor, sent over for that
purpose, in the time of Master Moore, he began to lay out the eight tribes in
the maine, which were to consist of fifty shares to a tribe; and twenty five
acers to every share. He also began to plant some Colony men, on some of the
especial shares. He swore also certain of the chief men of every tribe to
be Bailiffes thereof; and appointed as many men as he was able for all
supplied shares. The goods landed in the store houses he sent from thence, and
dispersed it to his workmen in general: some Boats also began to be builded;
but the pinace called the Thomas suspected might make an escape, was laid up in
a docke, were she yet remains.

In the beginning of the second month of his government, A Bark sent to the
West Indies.
he directed warrants to all the Bailiffes, for the holding of a general
Assise at Saint Georges, and appointed Master Stokes Lieutenant of the Kings
Castle at the Gurnets head. The Edwin came with him he sent to the West Indies
by directions from England, to trade with the natives, for cattle, corn,
plants, and other commodities. A course of great importance, which had it been
pursued, would certainly have produced more hopeful effects for the good of
the Colony, then all the supplies and Magazines from England has or will in a
long time.

Presently after her departure began the Assizes, executed by his Deputy. The
chief matter handled was the hanging one John Wood a French man, The Assizes.
for speaking many distastefull and mutinous speeches against the Governor, to
show the rest by that example, the power of his authority, which after with his
own hands he so often executed with a bastinado amongst the poorer sort; many
termed it a cruelty, not much less then tyranny: but the sequel is more then
strange.

So it was that five of them, The strange adventure of five men in a boat.
seeing by no means they could get passage for England, resolved to undergo
all hazards but they would make an escape from such servitude. The chief
mariner and plotter of this business, was Richard Sanders and his
confederates, William Goodwin a ship Carpenter, Thomas Harison a Ioyner, James
Barker a Gentleman, and Henry Puet. These repairing to the Governor, and with
pleasing insinuations told him, if he would allow them but things necessary,
they would build him a boat of two or three tons, with a close deck, should
go a fishing all weathers. The Governor half proud that he had brought his
men to so good a pass, as he conceived, to offer themselves to so necessary a
work; instantly with all willingness furnished them with all things they
could desire, and many fair promises to encourage them to perform it with all
expedition. Having made choice of a place most fit from molestation, they went
forward with that expedition, that in a short time she was brought to
perfection. By this time, the ship that brought the Governor, being ready to
depart, he sends a lusty gange to go fetch his new boat to carry him aboard,
but arriving at the place where she was built, they could hear no more of her,
but she was gone the last evening to Sea, to try how she would sail. Much
search and dispute was where this boat should be: but at last they found diverse
letters in the cabbins, to this effect, directed to the Governor, and other
their friends: that their hard and bad usage was so intolerable, and their hope
so small ever again to see their Country, or be delivered from such
servitude, they did rather choose to put themselves to that desperate hazard to
go for England, in which if they miscarried, as it was much to be mistrusted,
their lives and bloods should be required at their hands was the cause. A
compass Dial Barker had borrowed of Master Hues, to whom he writ that as he
had often persuaded them to patience, and that God would pay them though none
did: he must now be contented with the loss of his Dial, with his own
doctrine. Such leisure they found to be merry when in the eye of reason they
were marching into a most certain ruin. The Governor being thus satisfied of
their escape, extremely threatened them no less then a hanging, but the storms
of the Ocean they now more feared then him; good provision by bartering they
had got from the ship, where Goodwin in a brauado told the Mariners, though he
could not be permitted to go with them, yet peradventure he might be in
England before them, whereat the Master and his Mate laughed merrily. But
having been now under sail three weeks, the winds so favored them, they
felt nothing of what they had cause to fear: then a blustering gale blowing in
their teeth, put them to much extremity for diverse days, then becoming more
gentle away they past prosperously some eight or ten days more, till meeting a
French Piccaroune of whom they desired succor, he like himself took from
them what he liked, leaving them not so much as a crosse-staffe to observe
withal, and so cast them off: their course still they continued till their
victual began to fall to the lowest ebb; and the very knees of their small
vessel were half hewed away for fire wood. At last to their infinite joy they
arrived in Ireland, where the Earl of Tomund honorably entertained them, and
caused the boat to be hung up for a Monument, and well she might, for she had
sailed more then 3300. miles by a right line through the maine Sea, without any
sight of land, and I think since God made the world, the like navigations was
never done, nor heard of. This fortunate Sanders going to the East Indies, in
the rifling some ships there took, it was his chance to buy an old chest, for
three or four shillings, but because it wanted a key he repented his
bargain, and would gladly have sold it again for less. A certain time it
lay tossed to and fro as a thing he little regarded, but at last having little
to do, he broke it open, where he found a thousand pounds starling, or so
much gold as bought him in England a good estate, which leaving with his wife
he returned again to the East Indies.

The George setting sail three days after this escape, Plants from the West
Indies.
the Governor seized and confiscated all that those fugitives left behind
them. Within a week after returned the Edwin from the West Indies, furnished
with figs, pynes, sugarcanes, plantaines, papanes and diverse other plants,
which were presently replanted, and since increased into greater numbers, also
an Indian and a Negar, and so much ligna vitae as defrayed all the charge. The
Governor thus busied amongst his plants, making hedges of Figtrees, and
Pomgranets, and several divisions by Palizadoes for the defense of their
guarding and keeping their cattle, for in such husbandry qualities he well
deserved great commendations. The Adventurers to supply him sent with all speed
they could the Hopewell, a small Bark, but an excellent sailer, and in her one
Captain Powell an excellent Mariner, The exploits of Captain Pow^ll.
and well acquainted in the Indies where he was to go trade, after he had
landed his passengers in the Summer Isles: but in his journey at the Western
Isles meeting a Brasile man, he liked the sugar and passengers so well, he
mand the Caruill with his own men, and continued his course, but bethinking
himself how this would be entertained at the Summer Isles, he found such
doubts, he went directly for the West Indies to take time to resolve what to
do: arriving there he met a French rouer, one every way as cunning as
himself, but much more treacherous. A great league of kindness is soon made
between them, upon confidence whereof, Powell and some of the chief with him
being invited aboard him, is easily entised, and in the midst of their cups
both he and his company treacherously made prisoners; and thus was forced to
give him their prise, or hang at the yards arm with all his company. Having
set them a shore, away goes the French man; Powels ship being but hard by,
presently fetched them all a board, but finding his victual near spent, and no
hope at all to recover his prize, set his Portugales on shore, and set sail
for the Summer Isles; where safely arriving, he declared the whole passage to
the Governor, lest some other in telling might make it worse, of which the
Governor seemed well enough to approve.

This Governor still spent his time in good husbandry, The second Assise.
although some of the snarling sort here in England, whom nothing will please,
writ to him he was fitter to be a Gardener then a Governor: some time he
spent in digging of a great pond, but that work proved altogether
unprofitable: about that time was held the second Assise. The greatest matter
passed, was a Proclamation against the spoil of Cahowes, but it came too late,
for they were most destroyed before: a platform he caused to be erected by
Pagits Fort, where a good Fort were very necessary. Captain Powell not having
performed his service in the West Indies, he conditioned with the Company, is
sent thither again by this Governor, and thirteen or fourteen of his best
men, furnished with all things necessary. In the mean time the Company
understanding, that in January, February and March, there are many Whales, for
which fishing they sent the Neptune, a tall ship well provided with every thing
fitting for that purpose. But before she arrived, Captain Tuckar, who had
brought also with him most provisions for that imploiment, sent three good
Shalops to try what could be done, but whether it was the swiftnes of the Whale
in swimming, or the condition of the place, certain it is for all their labor
and hazard, they could kill none, though they struck many.

The third Assise. Sir Thomas Smith Treasurer.
where diverse were punished as their faults deserved: three were condemned to
die; two were repriued, but the third was hanged: the next day there was also a
leuy for the repairing two Forts; but that labor took not such effect as was
intended, for want of good directions.

But the great God of heaven being angry at somewhat happened in those
proceedings, caused such an increase of silly rats, The country near devoured
with rats.
in the space of two years so to abound, before they regarded them, that they
filled not only those places where they were first landed, but swimming from
place to place, spread themselves into all parts of the Country, insomuch that
there was no Island but it was pestered with them; and some fishes have been
taken with rats in their bellies, which they caught in swimming from I Will to
I Will: their nests they had almost in every tree, and in most places their
burrowes in the ground like conies: they spared not the fruits of the plants,
or trees, nor the very plants themselves, but are them up. When they had set
their corn, the rats would come by troops in the night and scratch it out of
the ground. If by diligent watch any escaped till it came to earing, it should
then very hardly escape them: and they became noisome even to the very persons
of men. They used all the diligence they could for the destroying of them,
nourishing cats both wild and tame, for that purpose; they used ratsbane, and
many times set fire on the woods, that often ran half a mile before it was
extinct; every man was enjoined to set twelve traps, and some of their own
accord have set near an hundred, which they ever visited twice or thrice in a
night; they also trained up their dogs to hunt them, wherein they became so
expert, that a good dog in two or three hours would kill forty or fity. Many
other devices they used to destroy them, but could not prevail, finding them
still increasing against them: nay they so devoured the fruits of the earth,
that they were destitute of bread for a year or two; so that when they had it
afterward, they were so wained from it, they easily neglected to eat it with
their meat. Besides they endeavored so much for the planting Tobacco for
present gain, that they neglected many things might more have prevailed for
their good, which caused amongst them much weakness and mortality, since the
beginning of this vermin.

At last it pleased God, but by what means it is not well known, to take them
away; A strange confusion of rats.
in so much that the wild cats and many dogs which lived on them, were
famished, and many of them leaving the woods, came down to their houses, and
to such places where they use to garbish their fish, and became tame. Some have
attributed the destruction of them the to increase of wild cats, but that is
not likely they should be so suddenly increased rather at that time, then four
years before; and the chief occasion of this supposition was, because they
saw some companies of them leave the woods, and slew themselves for want of
food. Others by the coldness of winter, which notwithstanding is never so
great there, as with us in March, except it be in the wind: besides the rats
wanted not the feathers of young birds and chickins, which they daily killed,
and Palmeta moss to build themselves warm nests out of the wind, as usually
they did; neither does it appear that the cold was so mortal to them, seeing
they would ordinarily swim from place to place, and be very fat even in the
midst of winter. It remains then, that as God does sometimes effect his will
without subordinate and secondary causes, so we need not doubt, but that in
the speedy increase of this vermin; as also by the preservation of so many of
them by such weak means as they then enjoyed, and especially in the so sudden
remouall of this great annoyance, there was joined with and besides the
ordinary and manifest means, a more mediate and secret work of God.

About this time Henry Long, with seven others in an extreme storm were cast
away, but three of them escaped. One of them being asked what he thought in
the worst of that extremity, answered, he thought nothing but gallows claim
thy right, and it seems God well heard his prayer, and rewarded his
ingratitude; for he was hanged within half a year after. In that March also
five men went to Sea, but as yet was never heard of, and three more drowned in
a boat. By Hilliards house grew a very fair Cedar, which by a thunder clap was
rent almost to small shiuers, and a man stood by him, and Samuel Tanton, most
fearfully blasted, yet neither they, the house, not a little child, yet a
pair of racks in the house was all torn to fitters. The Neptune not long
after arriving to fish for whale, her fortune proved no better then the
Governors, yet some are of opinion, profit might be made by them.

In May they discried four sail, so that manning all their Forts, they stood
two days in Arms, The return of M. Powel from the Indies.
expecting what they were; at last they found it Master Powell returned from
the West Indies in the Hopewell, where missing such trade as he expected, these
three Frigots coming in his way, he could not choose but take them; Meal,
Hides and Munition was their lading: Fair weather the Governor made with
Powell, till he had got all the goods into his own possession, and then called
Powell to a strict account for doing such an unwarrantable act; much a do then
was betwixt the taker and receiver; but Powell was glad to be excused to answer
it in England, leaving all he had taken behind him in the Isles: The Neptune
also returned with him, but noble Powell lost all his pay and pillage for this
years work. For which the Company sent for to Tuckar, so that he also lost
his part as well as Powell: Notwithstanding, the Governor by this means being
strong in shipping* fitted the Caruill with twelve men, under the command of
Edward Waters formerly spoken of, and sent them to Virginia about such
business as he had conceived. Arriving there, they obtained some goats, and
and hogs, and what they could spare, and so returned for the Summer Isles; but
whether they could not find the Isles for want of skill, or beaten off by ill
weather, or the ill will they bare the Governor, it matters not much: But they
bare up again for Virginia, where they all remained, and would return no more
to Summer Isles.

The Governor thinking to make some use of the hides, A supposed mutiny by M.
Pollard, and M. Rich.
set some that professed themselves Tanners, to make trial of their skill; but
they lost their labors and spoiled the hides. Also he called another Assise
concerning a poor fellow called Gabriel, for concealing some speeches M.
Pollard and M. Rich should use, tending to the dis-reputation of the Governor,
and his injustice and cruelties; which being brought within the compass of
sedition and mutiny, though a year ago; many were called in question about
it, although every one ordinarily had spoke as much. Yet Gabriel for example
sake was condemned to be hanged, and was upon the ladder, but reprieued. The
other two M. Pollard, and M. Rich were imprisoned, but upon better
consideration, the fact appeared so small and ridiculous, upon their submission
they were pardoned, and restored to their places.

The division of the Summer Isles into Tribes, by Master Richard Norwood,
Surueyor.
ACcording to the directions of the Council and Company, 1618. The division of
the Isles into Tribes.

Sir Thomas Smith Treasurer.


as they had determined by lot, M. Norwood took a plot of the I Will, and divided
it with as much faithfulness as he could, assigning to every Aduenturer his
share or proportion, as namely, to lay out a large proportion, to be called
the general land, and employed for public uses, as for the maintenance of the
Governor, Ministers, Commanders of Forts, soldiers, and such like: and to
this end was assigned S. Georges Island, S. David's Island, Longbridge Island,
Smiths Island, Coopers Island, Cony Island, Nonesuch Island, part of the maine, and
sundry other small Isles. The rest was to be divided into eight parts, each part
to be called a tribe, and to have his denomination of some principal person
that was Aduenturer therein: and accordingly the first Tribe to be Eastward,
was then called Bedfords Tribe, now Hamiltons: the second, Smiths: Tribe the
third, Cavendish, now Deuonshires: the fourth, Pembrooks: the fifth, Pagits: the
sixth, Mansils, now Warwicks: the seventh, Southhampton: the eighth, Sands: in
the honors of the Right honorable the Marquis Hamilton, Sir Thomas Smith, the
Earl of Devonshire, the Earl of Pembrooke, the Lord Pagit, the Earl of
Warwick, the Earl of Southhampton, and Sir Edwin Sands. Again each of those
Tribes were to be divided into fifty parts, called shares; and every
Aduenturer to have his shares in these tribes as was determined, by casting
lots in England, the manner of it appears by the Map, and more largely by his
Book of the Suruay of the Country, which is in the Records of the Colony. And
then began this which was before as you have heard, but as an unsettled and
confused Chaos, to receive a disposition, form, and order, and become indeed a
Plantation.

The names of the Adventurers, and their shares in every Tribe, according to
the survey, and the best information yet ascertained, of any of their
alterations.
Hamiltons Tribe.
James L. Marquis Hamil. 6 Share. Sir Edward Harwood. 4 Share. M. John
Delbridge. 3 Share. M. John Dike. 3 Share. M. Ellis Roberts. 2 Share. M. Robert
Phips. 1 Share. M. Ralph King. 1 Share. M. Quicks assigns. 2 Share. M. William
Cannig. 4 Share. M. William Cannig. 1 Share. M. William Web. 1 Share. M. John
Bernards assigns. 2 Share. M. Elias Roberts Iun. 1 Share. M. John Gearing. 2
Share. M. Cleophas Smith. 2 Share. Robert Earl of Warwick. 4 Share. M. Thomas
Couell. 3 Share. M. Greenwels assigns. 1 Share. M. Cley. 1 Share. M. Powlson.
2 Share. M. John Dike. 1.1/2 Share. Common land for conueniency. 25 Share. M.
John Dike. 1. 1/2 Share. M. George Thorps assigns. 1 Share.
2. Smiths Tribe.
Sir Dudley Digs assigns. 2 Share. M. Richard Edwards. 2 Share. M. William
Pane. 4 Share. M. Robert Smith. 2 Share. M. George Barkley assigns. 5 Share.
Sir Samuel Sands. 1 Share. M. Anthony Pennistone. 4 Share. Sir Edwin Sands. 5
Share. Sir Thomas Smith. 5 Share. M. Richard More. 4 Share. M. Ad. Brumfield 2
Share. M Rob. Johnson Alderman. 5 Share. M. John Wroth. 3 Share. M. George
Smith. 4 Share.
3. Devonshire Tribe.
M. Anth. Penistone. 2 Share. M. John Dike. 1 Share. M. John Dike. 1 Share. M.
John Bernards heirs. 2 Shares. Robert Earl of Warwick. 2 Shares. M. Francis
West. 2 Shares. Will. Lord Cavendish. 5 Shares. Will. Earl of Devonshire. 5
Shares. M. Edw. Luckin. 5 Shares. M. Edw. Ditchfield. 1 Shares. M. Edw.
Ditchfield. 4 Shares. M. Will. Nicols. 2 Shares. M. Edw. Ditchfield. 1 Shares.
M. John Fletcher. 2 Shares. M. Gedion Delawne. 2 Shares. M. Anth. Pennistone. 3
Shares. M. Best. 2 Shares. M. Edw. Luckin. 2 Shares. M. Richard Rogers. 2
Shares. M. Will. Palmer. 4 Shares.
4. Pembrookes Tribe.
M. George Smith. 4 Shares. Gleab land. 2 Shares. M. Nicholas Hide. 1 Shares.
Sir Lawrence Hide. 1 Shares. M. Thomas Iudwyn. 2 Shares. Will. Earl of Pemb.
10 Shares. M. Richard Edwards. 1 Shares. M. Harding. 1 Shares. M. Rich.
Edwards. 1 Shares. M. Elias Roberts. 1 Shares. M. Rich. Edwards. 1 Shares. M.
Iacobsons assigns. 1 Shares. M. John Farrar. 1 Shares. M. Nicholas Farrar. 1
Shares. M. Nicholas. Farrar. 1 Shares. M. Will. Canning. 2 Shares. M. Richard
Martin. 2 Shares. M. Moris Abbot. 2 Shares. M. Rich. Caswell. 1 Shares. M.
Rich. Caswell. 2 Shares. M. Will. Caswell. 1 Shares. M. Rich. Edwards. 2
Shares. M. Rich. Caswell. 1 Shares. M. Rich. Edwards. 1 Shares. M. George Sands
assigns. 2 Shares. M. Will. Pain. 2 Shares.
5. Pagits Tribe.
M. John Chamberlain. 5 Shares. M. Tho. Airs, and 4 Shares. M. Rich. Wiseman.
4 Shares. M. Rich. Wiseman 1 Shares. Will. Lord Pagit. 10 Shares. M. Will.
Palmer. 4 Shares. M. Bagnell. 5 Shares. M. John Bale. 1 Shares. M. Wheatley. 4
Shares. M. Christop. Barron. 4 Shares. M. John Wodall. 1 Shares. M. John
Wodall. 1 Shares. M. Lewis. 2 Shares. M. Owen Arthors assigns. 2 Shares. M.
George Etheridge. 4 Shares. (...) 2 Shares. Sir Will. VVade. 1 Shares. M. John
Bernards heirs. 1 Shares.
6. Warwicks Tribe.
M. VVheatley. 2 Shares. Cap. Daniel Tuckar. 2 Shares. M. Will. Felgate. 1
Shares. Rob. Earl of Warwick. 5 Shares. M. George Smith. 5 Shares. M. Sam.
Tickner. 2 Shares. M. Francis Mevell. 1 Shares. M. Sephen Sparrow. 1 Shares. M.
Joseph Man. 5 Shares. Cap. Daniel Tuckar. 2 Shares. M. Elias More. 1 Shares.
Doctor. Anth. Hunton 2 Shares. M. Francis Moverill. 1 Shares. M. Rich. Poulson
1 Shares. M. Math. Shephard. 1 Shares. M. George Tuckar. 10 Shares. M. Chapter
Clitheroe. 1 Shares. M. George Swinow. 2 Shares. M. Rich. Tomlings. 1 Shares.
M. Francis Meverill. 1 Shares. M. John Waters. 2 Shares. M. Martin Bond. 2
Shares.
7. Southamptons Tribe.
Cap. Dan. Tuckar. 4 Shares. M. John Britton. 1 Shares. M. Rich. Chamberland. 3
Shares. M. Leon. Harwods assigns. 1 Shares. M. John Banks. 1 Shares. Sir
Nathanael Rich. 12 Shares. Rob. Earl of Warwick. 3 Shares. M. Richard More.
6 Shares. M. George Scot. 6 Shares. M. Edward Scot. 6 Shares. M. Antho. Abdy. 6
Shares. Hen. Earl of Southampton. 4 Shares. M. And. Broumfield. 2 Shares. M.
Henry Timbed. 2 Shares. Sir Tho. Hewet. 2 Shares. M. Perce. 1 Shares. Sir Raloh
Winwood. 2 Shares.
8. Sandys Tribe.
M. George Barcklies heirs. 5 Shares. Sir Edwin Sands. 5 Shares. M. Ierom
Hidon. 10 Shares. M. Tho. Millin and 2 Shares. M. John Cuffe. 2 Shares. M.
Robert Chamberlain. 2 Shares. M. Abr. Chamberlain. 1 Shares. M. George Smith.
2 Shares. M. Robert Gore. 3 Shares. Sir. Edw. Sackvile. 1 Shares. Sir John
Dauers. 1 Shares. M. Robert Gore. 2 Shares. M. John Delbridge. 1 Shares. M.
John Wroth. 1 Shares. M. John VVests heirs. 4 Shares. M. Richard
Chamberlain. 10 Shares.
Touching the common ground in each Tribe, as also the ouer-plus, you may find
that at large in the Book of Surueyes amongst their Records.

Now though the Country was small, yet they could not conveniently have been
disposed and well settled, without a true description and a survey of it; and
again, every man being settled where he might constantly abide, they knew their
business, and fitted their household accordingly: then they built no more
Cabbens, but substantial houses, they cleared their grounds, and planted not
only such things as would yield them their fruits in a few months, but also
such as would afford them profit within a few years, so that in a short time
the Country began to aspire, and nearly approach unto that happiness and
prosperity, wherein now it flourishes, etc.

The first Magazin.
the Governor prevailed so much with the generality, they built a fair house
of Cedar, which being done, he appropriated it to himself, which occasioned
exceeding much distaste. About this time arrived the Diana with a good supply
of men and provision, and the first Magazin ever seen in those Isles; which
course is not so much commended here, as cursed and abhorred by reason of
enhansements of all the Inhabitants there; six or seven weeks this ship stayed,
then having toward her fraught thirty thousand weight of Tobacco; which
proving good, and coming to a lucky Market, gave great encouragement to the
Adventurers to go lustily forward in their Plantation, and without such
success, there is nothing but grudging and repining. But about the
appropriation of this new built house, many bad discontents grew betwixt the
oppressed Colony and the Governor, especially betwixt him and the Minister, and
Jews, who would neither be feared with threats nor imprisonment, that their
malice continued till they met in England, of which the Minister made the cause
so plaiue, he very well and honestly it seems, discharged himself.

Now in those times of these endless uncivil broiles, Two exploits of
desperate Fugitives.
two desperate men and a proper Gentlewoman got into a Boat, and thinking to
make an escape to Virginia, as appeared by some Letters they left behind them
were never more heard on. The very next month after the like was attempted by
six others, so desirous they were to be rid of their servitude; but their plot
being discovered by one of their society, they were apprehended, arraigned,
and condemned to be hanged: the next day being led with halters about their
necks to the place of execution, one was hanged, and the rest repriued.

The Diana arriving well in England, for all the infinite numbers of
complaints, The arrival of the Blessing.
the Tobacco did help to sweeten all manner of grieuances, yet it bred a
distaste in the opinions of so many, they began to think of another Governor;
but for that time it was so qualified by diverse of his friends, they dispatched
away the Blessing, which arrived in the Somer Isles. Though their general
Letter was fair and courteous to the Governor, yet by the report of the
Passengers and diverse particular letters from his friends, it was assured him
his cruelty and covetousness, for all his pains and industry was much
disliked, nor was he like to enjoy his house, and that land he had planted for
himself, by the extreme oppression of the Comminalty. This caused so many
ielousies to arise in his conceit, that at last he fully resolved to return by
this ship, that no sooner set sail from England, then they proceeded to the
nomination of a new Governor. Many were presented according to the affections
of those that were to give in their voices, but it chiefly rested betwixt one
Captain Southwell, and one Mr Nathaniel Butler, where we will leave them a
while to the consideration of the Court and Company. Now Captain Tuckar having
instituted Captain Kendall one of the six Governors before spoken of for his
substitute, returned with this ship directly for England, as well to excuse
himself of those objections he suspected, as to get assured him the house and
land he had allotted for himself, lest it might otherwise be disposed of in his
absence.

Collected out of their Records by N. B. and the relations of M. Pollard, and
diverse others.

The Government of Captain Miles Kendall, Deputy for Captain Tuckar.
The arrival of two ships.
THE unexpected return of Captain Tuckar, caused a demurre in the election of
the new Governor; some persuading these often changes were so troublesome,
dangerous, and chargeable, it were best to continue Captain Kendall; others
again stood for Captain Tuckar, but during the time of these opinions, the
Gilliflower was dispatched with a supply. Now I should have remembered, Tuckar
was no sooner out of the harbor, but he met Master Elfred in a ship called the
Treasurer, sent from Virginia to trade: by her he writ to his Deputy Master
Kendall, to have a care of all things, and beware of too much acquaintance with
this ship, which he suspected was bound for the West Indies. Notwithstanding,
Elfred received what kindness the I Will could afford; he promised to reuisit
them at his return; this done, because they would not be gouernlesse when his
Deputiship was expired, there was a general assembly, and by that Election
Kendall was confirmed to succeed still Governor. Now they began to apply
themselves to the finishing some plat-forme about Smiths Fort, and laying the
foundation of a Church to be built of Cedar, till the Gillyflower arrived with
some private letters to Kendall, how he was elected Governor of those Isles for
three years. During her stay they held their Assizes, where for some few
suspected facts three were condemned, and the better to terrify the rest, led
to the place of execution, but reprieued; diverse of the rest had their faults
pardoned, and the Gilliflower set sail for New found land.

Captain Butler chosen Governor.
The love and kindness, honesty and industry of this Captain Kendall, has
been very much commended; by others, somewhat disliked: but an Angel in those
imploiments cannot please all men, yet this consideration bred much ill blood
as well here as there, so that the Company directly concluded, Captain Butler
should with what expedition they could, go to be their Governor: In the
Interim they took the opportunity of a ship, called the Sea-flower, bound for
Virginia, and by her sent a Preacher and his Family, with diverse Passengers,
and news of a new Governor. This bred a great distaste amongst many, that
still they should have new officers and strangers for their Governors they
never heard of, and themselves still kept there whether they would or no,
without any preferment, no nor scarce any of them their inhabiting, to have any
land at all of their own, but live all as tenants, or as other men's poor
servants.

About this time came in Captain Kerby with a small Bark from the
West Indies, who having refreshed himself, was very kindly used by the
Governor and so departed. Not long after a Dutch Frigot was cast away upon the
Western shore, yet by the help of the English they saved the men, though the
ship perished amongst the Rocks. A little after one Ensign Wood being about
the loading of a piece, by thrusting a pike into the concauitie, grating upon
the shot, or somewhat about the powder, struck fire within her and so
discharged, but wounded him cruelly and blew him into the Sea, though he was
got out by some that stood by him, yet he died of those wounds. Within two or
three days after, Captain Elfred now comes in a second time: but of that we
shall say more in the government of Captain Butler, who presently after
arrived with a good supply, and was kindly entertained by Captain Kendall and
all the Colony.

From a relation of Tho. Sparks, and diverse others.

The Government of Captain Nathaniel Butler.
Captain Butler being arrived the twentieth of October, A plat-forme burnt,
and much hurt by a Hericano. 1619.
1619. some mutterings there was how to maintain their election of Captain
Kendall, but better remembering themselves, that conceit quickly dissolved. The
next day, Kendall, the Ministers, and the Counsel went aboard to salute the
new Governor, where after they had dined with the best entertainment he could
give them; they saw the Redout belonging to the Kings Castle by a mischance on
fire, whither he repaired with all the means he could to quench it; but all
the platform and cariages were consumed before their faces, and they could not
help it. Two days after he went up to the Town, had his Commission publicly
read, made a short speech to the Company, and so took upon him the government.
Then presently he began to repair the most necessary defects: The next month
came in the Garland, sent from England six or seven weeks before him; so that
being seventeen weeks in her voyage, it was so tedious and grievous to diverse
of the Fresh Water Passengers, that such a sickness bred amongst them, many
died as well Sailers as Passengers. Having taken the best order he could for
their relief, passed through all the Tribes, and held his first Assise in
Captain Tuckars house at the ouer-plus. Toward the last of this month of
Nouemb. there arose a most terrible storm or Hericano, that blew up many great
trees by the roots: the Warwick that brought the Governor was cast away, but
the Garland rid by her, saved her self by cutting down her Masts; and not
long after a second storm, no less violent then the first, wherein the Mount
which was a frame of wood built by Master More for a Watchtower to look out
to Sea, was blown up by the roots, and all that Winter crop of corn blasted:
And thus was the new Governor welcomed.

With the beginning of the new year he began his first piece of fortification,
The refortifying the Kings Castle.
upon a Rock which flankers the Kings Castle, and finding the ship called the
Treasurer stark rotten and unserviceable, he took nine pieces of Ordinance
from her to serve other uses. The Garland for want of means, could not make
her voyage to Virginia as she was appointed; wherefore he entertained her to
return to England, with all the Tobacco they had in the I Will. It was January
before she departed, in which time she failed not much to have been twice
cast away. But those strange and unavoidable mischances, rather seemed to
quicken the Governors industry then to dull it. Having finished the Church
begun by Captain Kendall, with an infinite toil and labor he got three
pieces out of the wrack Warwick. Having an excellent Dutch Carpinter he
entertained of them that were cast away in the Dutch Frigot; he employed him in
building of Boats, whereof they were in exceeding great want. In February they
discovered a tall ship beating too and again, as it seemed by her working,
being ignorant of the Coast; some thought her a Spaniard to view their Forts,
which stand most to that part she so nearly approached; some, English; but the
most, some Dutch man of War: The wind blew to high, they durst not send out a
Boat, though they much doubted she would be foul of their Rocks, but at last
she bore up rommy for the Sea, Ambergris found.
and we heard of her no more. That evening, a lucky fellow it should seem he
was, that found a piece of Ambergris of eight ounces, as he had twice
before, which bringing to the Governor, he had ready money for the one half,
after three pound an ounce, according to their order of Court, to encourage
others to look out for more, and prevent the mischief insueth by concealing
of it.

The arrival of two Dutch Frigots.
Within a few days after, they descried two Frigots that came close to the
shore, and sent a Letter to the Governor, writ in Italian, that they were
Hollanders had been in the West Indies, and desired but to arrive, refresh
themselves with wood and water, and so be gone. The Governor forthwith sent
them to understand, that being there under his Majesty of England to command
those Isles, he was to carry himself a friend to his friends, and an enemy to
his enemies; if therefore he could show a lawful Commission for his being
honestly and nobly employed, he and his should be kindly welcome, otherwise
they were to adventure at their perils. But his Commission was so good, he
stayed there two months, and was so well fitted with Oil and Bacon, they were
all glad and happy of this Dutch Captain Scoutans arrival, with many thanks
to their old friend Captain Powell that had conducted him thither: the Colony
being exceedingly in great want and distress, bought the most part of it at
reasonable rates, so Captain Scoutan returned to the West Indies, and Captain
Powell for his part in the Low Countries. Whilst these things were in action,
the Adventurers in \ England made many a long look for their ships; at last
the Garland brought them all the news, but the Tobacco was so spoiled either
in the leaking ship, or the making up, it caused a great suspicion there could
none was good come from those Isles; where (were they but perfect in the cure)
questionless it would be much better then a great quantity of that they sell
for Verinas, and many a thousand of it in London has been bought and sold by
that title.

The differences betwixt the Ministers.
The Governor being clear of those distractions, falls upon the restoring of
the burnt Redoubt, where he cuts out a large new plat-forme, and mounts seven
great piece of Ordnance upon new cariages of Cedar. Now amongst all those
troubles, it was not the least to bring the two Ministers to subscribe to the
Book of Common Prayer, which all the Bishops in England could not do. Finding
it high time to attempt some conformity, bethought himself of the Liturgy of
Garnsey and Iarse, wherein, all those particulars they so much stumbled at,
were omitted. No sooner was this propounded, but it was gladly embraced by them
both, whereupon the Governor translated it verbatim out of French into English,
and caused the eldest Minister upon Easter day to begin the use thereof at S.
Georges town, where himself, most of the Council, Officers and Auditorie
received the Sacrament: the which form they continued during the time of his
government.

The rebuilding the Mount.
Much about this time, in such a fair morning, that had invited many Boats
far out to the Sea to fish, did rise such a Hericano that much endangered
them all, so that one of them with two Boys were driven to Sea and never more
heard of. The Ministers thus agreed, a Proclamation was published for keeping
of the Sabbath, and all the defective cariages he endeavored to have renewed,
builded a small Boat of Cedar only to go with Ores, to be ready upon any
occasion to discover any shipping, and took order every Fort should have the
like: Also caused numbers of Cedars to be brought from diverse places in flotes,
to rebuild the Mount, which with an unspeakable toil, was raised seven foot
higher then before, and a Falcon mounted at the foot, to be always discharged
for a warning to all the Forts upon the discovery of any shipping, and this he
called Rich Mount. This exceeding toil and labor, having no Cattle but only
men's strengths, caused many petitions to the Governor, that all those general
works might cease till they had reaped their haruests, in that they were in
great distress for victual; which he so well answered, their own shames did
cause them desist from that importunity, and voluntarily perform as much as
he required.

Finding accidentally a little cross erected in a by place, The Tomb of Sir
George Summers.
amongst a many of bushes, understanding there was buried the heart and
intrailes of Sir George Summers, he resolved to have a better memory for so
worthy a Soldier, then that. So finding also a great Marble stone brought out
of England, he caused it by Masons to be wrought handsomely and laid over the
place, which he environed with a square wall of hewn stone, Tomb like;
wherein he caused to be graven this Epitaph he had composed, and fixed it
upon the Marble stone; and thus it was, In the year 1611,
Noble Sir George Summers went hence to heaven;
Whose well tried worth that held him still imploid,
Gave him the knowledge of the world so wide.
Hence 't was by heavens decree, that to this place
He brought new guests, and name to mutual grace.
At last his soul and body being to part,
He here bequeathed his entrails and his heart.


Upon the sixth of June began the second Assise, Their manner of laws reformed.
that reduced them to the direct form used in England. For besides the
Governor and Council, they have the Bailiffes of the Tribes, in nature of the
Deputy Lieutenants of the shires in England, for to them are all precepts and
warrants directed, and accordingly answered and respected; they perform also
the duties of Justices of Peace, within their limits. The subordinate Officers
to these in every tribe, are the Constables, Head-borowes, and Churchwardens;
these are the triers of the Tobacco, which if they allow not to be
marchantable, is burnt: and these are the executioners of their civil and
politic causes.

For points of war and martial affairs, Martial Officers.
they have the Governor for Lieutenant general, the Sergeant mayor, Master of
Ordinance, Captains of Companies, Captains of Forts, with their several
officers, to train and exercise those numbers under their charge, in martial
discipline.

Concerning their Courts for decision of right and justice, the first, Civil
Officers and Courts.
though last in constitution, is their general assembly; allowed by the state
in England, in the nature of a Parliament, consisting of about forty persons;
viz. the Governor, the Counsel, the Bailiffes of the tribes, and two
Burgesses of each tribe chosen by voices in the tribe, besides such of the
Clergy as the Governor thinks most fit, to be held once a year, as you
shall hear more thereof hereafter. The next Court is the Assise or Iayles of
delivery, held twice every year, in Christmas, and Whitson week, for all
criminal offenders, and civil causes betwixt party and party; as actions of
debt, trespass, battery, slander, and the like: and these are determined by a
Jury of twelve men, and above them is also a grand Jury to examine matters of
greater consequence. The last day of the Assise might also well be held a
Court, for hearing the trangressions in matters of contempt, mis-behauiour
toward any Magistrate, riots, seditious speakers, contemners of warrants, and
such like: there are also as occasion shall require, many matters heard by the
Governor, or his Officers, and often justice done in several places, but those
are but as days of hearing, and as preparatiues against their Courts, etc.

At this last Assize eighteen were arrained for criminal causes, The second
Assise.
a number very extraordinary considering the place; but now occasioned by
reason of the hard year, and the store of ill chosen new comers; of these,
some were censured to the whipping post, some burned in the hand, but two were
condemned to die, yet the one was reprieued, the other hanged; this done, every
man returned to his home: many trials they made again about the Warwick, but
to small purpose, her Ordnance being lashed so fast they could not be unloosed,
till the ropes and decks were rotten, yet some few buttes of bear being story
they got, which though it had lien six months under water was very good,
notwithstanding the next year they recovered five pieces of Ordnance.

A general assembly in manner a Parliament.
Upon the first of August, according to the Companies instructions from England,
began the general assembly at the town of Saint George, which was the first
these Isles ever had; consisting as is said, of the Governor, Council,
Bailiffes, and Burgesses, and a Secretary to whom all bills were presented, and
by him openly read in the house, also a Clerk to record the Acts, being thirty
two in all; fifteen of which being sent into England, were by a general
consent received and enacted, the titles whereof are these following: as for
all the reasons for them, they would be too tedious to recite.

Their Acts.
The first was against the unjust sale and letting of apprentises and other
servants, and this was especially for the righting the undertakers in England.
The second, concerning the disposing of aged, diseased, and impotent persons,
for it being considered how careless many are in preferring their friends, or
sending sometimes any they can procure to go, such unserviceable people should
be returned back at their charge that sent them, rather then be burdensome to
the poor Inhabitants in the Isles. The third, the necessary manning the Kings
Castle, being the key of the I Will, that a garrison of twelve able men should be
there always resident: and 3000. ears of corn, and 1000. pounds of Tobacco
paid them by the generality yearly, as a pension. The fourth, against the
making vnmarchantable Tobacco, and Officers sworn to make true trials, and
burn that was naught. The fist, enjoined the erection of certain public
bridges, and the maintenance of them. The sixth, for a continual supply of
victual for all the Forts, to be preserved, till some great occasion to use
it. The seventh was, for two fixed days every year for the Assizes. The
eight, commands the making of highways, and prohibiting the passage over men's
grounds and planted fields, as well to prevent the spoiling of gardens, as
conueniencie to answer any alarm. The ninth, for the preserving young
tortoises and birds, that were carelessly destroyed. The tenth, provided against
vagabonds, and prohibited the entertainment of other men's servants. The
eleventh, compelled the setting of a due quantity of corn for every family.
The twelfth, the care corn being set, enjoined the keeping up of their poultry
till it was past their reaches. The thirteenth, for the preservation of
sufficient fences, and against the selling of marked trees appointed for
bounds. The fourteenth, granted to a leuy for a thousand pound weight of
Tobacco, toward the payment of public works, as the bridges and the mount.
The fifteenth, for the enioyning an acknowledgement and acception of all
resident Governors, and the warranting him to continue, though his time be
expired, till the arrival of a legitimate successor from England, to prevent
all vomeet and presumptuous elections, besides it was desired by petition in
England, the new Gouernous should live two months as a private man after his
arrival, if his predecessor did stay so long, the better to learn and observe
his course. And these are the contents of those fifteen Acts, applied as you
may perceive: which the laws of England could not take notice of, because
every climate has somewhat to it self in that kind in particular; for
otherwise as it is conceived, it had been a high impudency and presumption to
have meddled with them, or indeed with any such as these laws, that had with
such great judgment and justice always provided for.

No sooner was this business over, but the Magazin ship is discovered, and
that night came into the Harbor, The arrival of the Magazin ship.
but in a very weak and sickly case, having cast over board twenty or thirty
of her people, and so violent was the infection, that the most part of the
failers, as well as passengers, were so sick, or dismayed, or both, that the
Master confessed, had they stayed at the Sea but a week longer, they had all
perished. There arrived with this ship diverse Gentlemen of good fashion, with
their wives and families; but many of them crasie by the tediousness of the
voyage: howsoever most of them, by the excellent salubrity of the air, then
which the world has not a better, soon after recovered; yet some there were
that died presently after they got ashore, it being certainly the quality of
the place, either to kill, or cure quickly, as the bodies are more or less
corrupted. By this ship the Company sent a supply of ten persons for the
generality, but of such bad condition that it seemed they had picked the Males
out of Newgate, the Females from Bridewell: As the Governor found it his best
course, to grant out the women to such as were so greedy of wives, and would
needs have them for better for worse; and the men he placed in the Kings
Castle for soldiers. But this bad, weak, sickly supply being dispersed for
their best relief, by the much employment of his boats in remoouing them, many
of his own men became infected, so that for some weeks, they were not able to
do him any service at all. Strict instructions also they brought for the
planting of Sugar cane^, for which the Island being rockie and dry, is so
improper, that few as yet have been seen to prosper: yet there are others
hold the contrary opinion, that there is rain so ordinarily, the Isles are so
moist, as produces all their plants in such infinite abundance: there is no
great reason to suspect this, were it rightly used, more then the r^st. 70000.
weight of Tobacco.
Seventy thousand weight of Tobacco being prepared toward her fraught, she
returned for England. No sooner was she gone then came in another, sent by the
Company and generalty, well conditioned, but she failed not much to have been
cast away amongst those dangerous and terrible rocks; by her came also express
command, they should entertain no other ships, then were directly sent from
the Company: this caused much grudging, and indeed a general distraction and
exclamation among the Inhabitants, to be thus constrained to buy what they
wanted, and sell what they had at what price the Magazin pleased, and to
debar true men from coming to them for trade or relief, that were daily
received in all the harbors in England. So long this ship stayed going for
fraught and wages, the Master not caring how long he lay at that rate in a good
harbor, the Governor was ready to send her away by Proclamation. Thus ended
the first year of the government of C. Butler.

The building of three bridges and other works.
there was also an order to restrain the excessive wages all handicrafts men
would have: and that the Churchwardens should meet twice a year, to have all
their presentiments made perfect against the Assizes. The Assizes done, all the
ablest men were trained in their arms, and then departed to their own homes.
The town thus cleared, he made certain new carriages for some demi
Culuerings, and a large new storehouse of Cedar for the yearly Magazines
goods; finished Warwicks Fort begun by Master More, and made a new platform at
Pagits Fort, also a fair house of lime and stone for the Townes-house. The
three bridges appointed by the general assembly, was followed with such
diligence, though they were more then an hundred, or an hundred and twenty foot
in length, having the foundation and arches in the Sea, were raised and
accomplished, so that man or beast with facility might pass them.

At Whitsonday was held the fourth general Assise at Saint Georges, The
general Assizes, and the proceedings.
where were tried twenty several causes; four or five were whipped or burnt
in the hand, for breaking of houses: also an order was made, that the party
cast in the trial of any cause, should pay to every of the Jurors four
pence: moreover, that not past ten leaves at the most should grow upon a plant
of Tobacco, and that also in the making it up, a distinction should diligently
be observed of two kinds, a better and a worse: then they built a strong stone
house for the Captain of the Kings Castle and corpse du guard; and repaired
what defects they could find in the platformes and carriages.

Captain Powell so often mentioned, having been in the West Indies for the
States of Holland, came to an anchor within shot of their Ordnance, desiring
admittance for wood and water, of which he had great need, but the Governor
would not permit him, so he weighed and departed, whereat the company were so
madded, it was not possible to constrain them to cease their exclaimations
against the Companies inhihition, till they were weary with exclaming: But
still for their better defense, not thinking themselves sufficiently secure,
having finished two new plat-formes more, arrived the Magazin ship, but her
Master was dead, and many of the Passengers, the rest for most part very sick;
and withal, a strange and wonderful report of much complaint made against the
Governor to the Company in England, by some of them returned in the last years
shipping: but it was eight days before she could get in by reason of ill
weather, being forced again to Sea; so that time, they kept every night
continually great fires, she might see the I Will as well by night as day; but at
last she arrived, and he plainly understood, he had more cause a great deal to
look for misconstruction of all his service then an acknowledgment, much less
a recompense any better then his predecessors; but it is no new thing to
require the best desert with the most vildest of ingratitude.

A strange deliverance of a Spanish wrack.
The very next days night after the arrival of the Magazins ship, news was
brought the Governor by a dismayed Messenger from Sands his Tribe, that one
hundred Spaniards were landed in that part, and diverse ships discovered at Sea,
whereupon he presently manned the Forts, and instantly made thitherward in
person with twenty men, determining as he found cause to draw together more
strength by the way. Being got thither by the break of the next day, in stead
of an enemy which he expected, he met only with a company of poor distressed
Portugals and Spaniards, who in their passage from Carthagena in the
West Indies, in consort with the Spanish fleet of Plait; by the same storm
that had endangered the Magazin ship, lost theirs upon those terrible Rocks,
being to the number of seventy persons, were strangely preserved; and the
manner was thus.

About Sunne-set their ship beating amongst the Rocks, some twenty of the
Sailers got into the Boat with what treasure they could, leaving the Captain,
the Master, and all the rest to the mercy of the Sea. But a Boy not past
fourteen years of age that leaped after to have got into the Boat, missing
that hope, it pleased God he got upon a Chest a drift by him, whereon they
report he continued two days, and was driven near to the clean contrary part
of the I Will, where he was taken up near dead, yet well recovered. All this
night the ship sticking fast, the poor distressed in her the next day spying
land, made a raft, and were those gave the alarm first a shore about three of
the clock in the after noone. The morning after, about seven of the clock
came in the Boat to a place called Mangroue Bay; and the same day their
Carpenter was driven a shore upon a Planke near Hog-Bay. There was a
Gentlewoman that had stood wet up to the middle upon the raft from the ship to
the shore, being big with child; and although this was upon the thirteenth of
September, she took no hurt, and was safely delivered of a Boy within three
days after. The best comfort could be given them in those extremities they
had, although some of the baser sort had been rifling some of them before the
Governors arrival: Also the Spanish Captain and the chief with him, much
complained of the treachery of his men to leave him in that manner, yet had
conveyed with them the most of the money they could come by, which he easily
missed; whereupon he suddenly caused all them he accused, to be searched, and
recovered to the value of one hundred and forty pounds starling, which he
delivered into the Captains hands, to be employed in a general purse toward
their general charge: during their stay in the Isles, some of the better sort,
nine or ten weeks dieted at his own table, the rest were billited amongst the
Inhabitants at four shillings the week, till they found shipping for their
passage, for which they paid no more then the English paid themselves; and
for the passage of diverse of them, the Governor was glad to stand bound to the
Master; some others that were not able to procure such friendship, were so
constrained to stay in the Isles, till by their labors they had got so much as
would transport them; and thus they were preserved, relieved, and delivered.

In the month ensuing arrived the second ship, and she also had lost her
Master, How they solemnized the powder treason, and the arrival of two ships.
and diverse of her Passengers; in her came two Virginian Women to be married to
some would have them, that after they were converted and had children, they
might be sent to their Country and kindred to ciuilize them. Toward the end
of this month came in the third ship with a small Magazin, having sold what
she could, carried the rest to Virginia, and never did any of those Passengers
complain either of their good diet, or too good usage at sea; but the clean
contrary still occasioned many of those extremities. The fifth of November the
damnable plot of the powder treason was solemnized, with Prayers, Sermons, and
a great Feast, whereto the Governor invited the chief of the Spaniards, where
drinking the Kings health, it was honored with a quick volly of small shot,
which was answered from the Forts with the great Ordnance, and then again
concluded with a second volley of small shot; neither was the afternoon
without music and dancing, and at night many huge bone-fires of sweet wood.

The Spaniards to express their thankfulness at their departure, The
Spaniards return, and in danger again. 1621.
made a deed of gift to the Governor of whatsoever he could recover of the
wracked ship; but the ships as they went out came so dangerously upon a Rock,
that the poor Spaniards were so dismayed, swearing this place was ominous unto
them, especially the women, that desired rather to go a shore and die
howsoever, than adventure any further in such a labyrinth of dangers, but at
last she got clear without danger, and well to England; the other went to
Virginia, wherein the Governor sent two great Chests filled with all such kinds
and sorts of Fruits and Plants as their Islands had; as Figs, Pomgranats,
Oranges, Lemons, Sugarcanes, Plantanes, Potatoes, Papawes, Cassado roots, red
Pepper, the Prickell Pear, and the like. Three English Murderers found in the
Spanish wrack.
The ships thus dispatched, he goes into the maine, and so out to sea to the
Spanish wrack. He had been there before presently after her ruin, for never
had ship a more sudden death, being now split in pieces all under water. He
found small hope to recover any thing, save a Cable and an Anchor, and two good
Sacars; but the wind was so high he was forced to return, being ten miles
from the shore, only with three Murderers, which were known to be the same
Captain Kendall had sold to Captain Kerby, whose ship was taken by two men of
war of Carthagena, the most of his men slain or hanged, and he being
wounded, died in the woods. Now their Pilot being at this service, got thus
those three Murderers to their ship, and their ship thus to the Bermudas, as
the Spaniards remaining related to the Governor and others.

Having raised three small Bulwarks at Southamptons Fort, Their Assizes, and
other passages.
with two Curtains, and two Rauilings, which indeed is only the true absolute
piece of fortification in the Isles; Christmas being come, and the prefixed day
of the Assise; diverse were whipped and burnt in the hand, only three young
boys for stealing were condemned, and at the very point of hanging repriued.
The Governor then sent his Lieutenant all over the maine to distribute Arms
to those were found most fit to use them, and to give order for their
randezuous, which were hanged up in the Church. About this time it chanced a
pretty secret to be discovered to preserve their corn from the fly, or
weauell, which did in a manner as much hurt as the rats. For the year before
having made a Proclamation that all Corn should be gathered by a certain day,
because many lazy persons ran so after the ships to get Beer and Aquavitae,
for which they will give any thing they have, much had been lost for want of
gathering. This year having a very fair crop, some of the Inhabitants, none
of the best husbands, hastily gathered it for fear of the penalty, threw it
in great heaps into their houses vnhusked, and so let it lie four or five
months, which was thought would have spoiled it: where the good husbands
husked it, and with much labor hung it up, where the Flies did so blow on it,
they increased to so many Weauels, they generally complained of great loss;
but those good fellows that never cared but from hand to mouth, made their
boasts, that not a grain of theirs had been touched nor hurt, there being no
better way to preserve it then by letting it lie in its husk, and spare an
infinite labor formerly had been used. There were also very luckily about
this time found out diverse places of fresh water, of which many of the Forts
were very destitute, and the Churchwardens and Sidemen were very busy in
correcting the prophaners of the Sabbath, Drunkards, Gamesters, and such like.
There came also from Virginia a small Bark with many thanks for the presents
sent them; much Aquauitae, Oil, Sack and Bricks they brought in exchange of
more Fruits and Plants, Ducks, Turkies and Limestone, of which she had plenty,
and so returned. During the abode of the stay of this ship, the marriage of one
of the Virginia maids was consummated with a husband fit for her, attended
with more then one hundred guests, and all the dainties for their dinner could
be provided; they made also another trial to fish for Whales, but it took no
more effect then the former: this was done by the Master of the Virginia ship
that professed much skill that way, but having fraughted his ship with
Limestone, with 20000. weight of Potatoes, and such things as he desired,
returned for Virginia.

A strange Sodomy.
April and May were spent in building a strong new Prison, and perfecting some
of the Fortifications, and by the labor of twenty men in fourteen days was
got from the Spanish wrack four excellent good Sacres, and mounted them at
the Forts. Then began the general Assize, where not fewer then fifty civil,
or rather uncivil actions were handled, and twenty criminal prisoners brought
to the bar; such a multitude of such vild people were sent to this Plantation,
that he thought himself happy his time was so near expired: three of the
foulest acts were these: the first for the rape of a married woman, which was
acquitted by a senseless Jury; the second for buggering a Sow, and the third
for Sodomy with a boy, for which they were hanged; during the time of the
imprisonment of this Buggerer of the Sow, a Dunghill Cock belonging to the
same man did continually haunt a Pigge of his also, and to the wonder of all
them that saw it who were many, did so frequently tread the Pigge as if it had
been one of his Hens, that the Pigge languished and died within a while after,
and then the Cock resorted to the very same Sow (that this fellow was accused
for) in the very same manner; and as an addition to all this, about the same
time two Chickens were hatched, the one whereof had two heads, the other crowed
very loud and lustily within twelve hours after it was out of the shell. A
desperate fellow being to be arraigned for stealing a Turkey, rather then he
would endure his trial, secretly conueighed himself to Sea in a little Boat,
and never since was ever heard of, nor is he ever like to be, without an
exceeding wonder, little less then a miracle. In June they made another trial
about the Spanish wrack, and recovered another Sacre and a Murderer, also he
caused to be hewed out of the maine Rock a pair of large stairs for the
convenient landing of goods and passengers, a work much to the beauty and
benefit of the town. With twenty chosen men, and two excellent Diverse, More
trialls about the wracks.
the Governor went himself to the wrack Warwick* but they could recover but
one Murderer, from thence he went to the Sea-aduenture, the wrack of Sir
George Summers, the hull though two or three fathomes in the water, they found
unperished and with much a do weighed a Sacre, her sheat Anchor, diverse bars
of Iron and pigs of Lead, which stood the Plantation in very great stead.
Toward the end of July he went to seek for a wrack they reported lay under
water with her hatches spiked up, but they could not find her, but from the
Spanish wrack lay there by they weighed three fair Sacres more, and so
returned through the Tribes to Saint Georges: some were also employed to seek
out beds of Oisters for Pearl, some they found, some seed Pearl they got, but
out of one little shell above all the rest they got about 120. small Pearl,
but somewhat defective in their color.

The time of Captain Butlers government drawing near an end, the Colony
presented unto him diverse grieuances, to entreat him to remember to the Lords
and Company in England at his return: also they appointed two to be joined
with him, with letters of credence to solicit in their behalf those grieuances
following: First, they were defrauded of the food of their souls: The Planters
complaints.
for being not fewer then one thousand and five hundred people, dispersed in
length twenty miles, they had at that present but one Minister, nor never had
but two, and they so shortened of their promises, that but only for mere pity
they would have forsaken them. Secondly, neglected in the safety of their lives
by wants of all sorts of munition. Thirdly, they had been censured contrary to
his Majesty's Laws, and not allowed them the benefit of their book as they
are in England, but by Captain Butler. Fourthly, they were frustrated of many
of their covenants, and most extremely pinched and undone by the extortion of
the Magazine, for although their Tobacco was stinted but at two shillings
sixpence the pound, yet they pitched their commodities at what rate they
pleased. Fifthly, their fatherless children are left in little better
condition then slaves, for if their Parents die in debt, their children are
made as bondmen till the debt be discharged: these things being perfected,
there grew a great question of one Heriot for plotting of factions and abusing
the Governor, for which he was condemned to lose his ears, yet he was used so
favorably he lost but the part of one in all.

By this time it being grown past the wonted season of the coming in of ships
from England, after a general longing and expectation, The return of Captain
Butler.
especially of the Governor, whose Commission being near upon expiration,
gave him cause to wish for a mean of deliverance from so troublesome and
thanklesse an imploiment as he had hitherto found it; a sail is discovered,
and long it was not before she arrived in the Kings Castle-Harbour: this Bark
was set out by two or three private men of the Company, and having landed her
supplies, was to go for Virginia; by her the Governor received certain
aduertisements of the carriage and behavior of the Spaniards, which he had
reliued as you have heard the year before; that quite contrary both to his
merit, their vow, and his own expectation, they made clamours against him, the
which being seconded by the Spanish Ambassador, caused the State to fall in
examination about it; whereupon having fully cleared their ingratefulnesse and
impudency, and being assured of the choice of a successor that was to be
expected within five or six weeks; he was desirous to take the opportunity of
this Bark, and to visit the Colony in Virginia in his return for England:
leaving the government to Captain Felgat, Captain Stokes* Master Lewis Hewes,
Master Nedom and Master Ginner, but now his time being fully expired, and the
fortifications finished, viz. The Kings Castle wherein were mounted upon
sufficient Platformes sixteen piece of Ordnances: In Charles Fort two; In
Southampton Fort five, betwixt which and the Castle passes the Channel into
the Harbor, secured by three and twenty pieces of good artillery to play upon
it. In Cowpers I Will is Pembrocks Fort, where is two Pieces. The Channel of Saint
George is guarded by Smiths Fort, and Pagits Fort, in which is eleven piece of
Ordnance. Saint George town is half a league within the Harbor, commanded by
Warwicks Fort, where are three great Pieces, and on the Wharfe before the
Governors house eight more, besides the warning Piece by the mount, and three
in Saint Katharines; so that in all there are ten Fortresses and two and fifty
pieces of Ordnance sufficient and serviceable: their forms and situations you
may see more plainlier described in the Map; and to defend those, he left one
thousand five hundred persons with near a hundred boats, and the I Will well
replenished with store of such fruits, provisions and Poultry, as is formerly
related; yet for so departing and other occasions, much difference has been
betwixt him and some of the Company, as any of his Predecessors, which I rather
wish were reconciled, then to be a reporter of such unprofitable dissentions.

For

Till treachery and faction, and avarice be gone,
Till envy and ambition, and backbiting be none,
Till perjury and idleness, and injury be out,
And truly till that villainy the worst of all that rout;
Unless those vises banished be, what ever Forts you have.
A hundred walls together put will not have power to save.
Master John Barnard sent to be Governor.
The Lord Caue^d^sh T^easu^er. Master Nicholas Farrar Deputy.
TO supply this place was sent by the noble adventurers John Bernard, a
Gentleman both of good means and quality, who arrived within eight days after
Butlers departure with two ships, and about one hundred and forty passengers
with arms and all sorts of munition and other provisions sufficient. During
the time of his life which was but six weeks in reforming all things he found
defective, he showed himself so judicial and industrious as gave great
satisfaction, and did generally promise vice was in great danger to be
suppressed, and virtue and the Plantation much advanced; but so it happened that
both he and his wife died in such short time they were both buried in one day
and one grave, and Master John Harrison chosen Governor till further order
came from England.

What happened in the government of Master John Harrison.
Sir Edward Sackuil Treasurer. Master Gabriel Barber Deputy.
but all the day they lie hid in the ground, and though early in the morning
they kill so many, they would think there were no more, yet the next morning
you shall find as many. The Caterpillars to their fruits are also as
pernicious, and the land Crabs in some places are as thick in their Borowes as
Conies in a Warren, and do much hurt; besides all this, there happened this
year a very heavy disaster, for a ship wherein there had been much swearing
and blaspheming used all the voyage, and landed what she had to leave in those
Isles, iou^ally froliking in their Cups and Tobacco, by accident fired the
Powder, that at the very instant blew up the great Cabin, and some one way and
some another, it is a wonder to think how they could be so blown out of the
gun-roome into the Sea, where some were taken up living, so pitifully burned,
their lives were worse then so many deaths, some died, some lived, but
eighteen were lost at this fatal blast, the ship also immediately sunk with
threescore barrels of meal sent for Virginia, and all the other provision in
her was thus lost.

Note.
Now to consider how the Spaniards, French, and Dutch, have been lost and
preserved in those invincible Isles, yet never regarded them but as monuments of
miseries, though at this present they all desire them; How Sir Thomas Gates*
and Sir George Summers being ready to sink in the sea were saved, what an
incredible abundance of victual they found, how it was first planted by the
English, the strange increase of Rats, and their sudden departure, the five men
came from England in a boat, the escape of Hilliard, and the rest of those
accidents there happened, a man would think it a tabernacle of miracles, and the
worlds wonder, that from such a Paradise of admiration who would think should
spring such wonders of afflictions as are only fit to be sacrificed upon the
highest altars of sorrow, thus to be set upon the highest Pinacles of content,
and presently thrown down to the lowest degree of extremity, as you see have
been the yearly succeedings of those Plantations; the which to overcome, as
it is an incomparable honor, so it can be no dishonor if a man do miscarry
by unfortunate accidents in such honorable actions, the which renown and
virtue to attain has caused so many attempts by diverse Nations besides ours,
even to pass through the very amazement of adventures. Upon the relation of
this news the Company has sent one Captain Woodhouse, a Gentleman of good
repute and great experience in the wars, and no less provident then
industrious and valiant: then returned report, all goes well there. It is too
true, in the absence of the noble Treasurer, Sir Edward Sackvill, now Earl of
Dorset, there have been such complaints betwixt the Planters and the Company,
that by command the Lords appointed Sir Thomas Smith again Treasurer, 1624.
Sir Thomas Smith Treasurer, and Master Edwards Deputy.
that since then according to their order of Court he is also elected, where
now we must leave them all to their good fortune and success, till we hear
further of their fortunate proceedings.

FINIS.
To his friend Captain Smith, upon his description of New England.
SIr; your Relations I have read: which show,
There Is reason I should honor them and you:
And if their meaning I have understood,
I dare to censure thus: Your Proiect's good;
And may (if followed) doubtless quit the pain*
With honor, pleasure and a trebble gain;
Beside the benefit that shall arise
To make more happy our Posterities.
For would we daigne to spare, though 'twere no more
Then what ore-fils, and surfets us in store,
To order Nature's fruitfulness a while
In that rude Garden, you New England style;
With present good, there is hope in after-daies
Thence to repair what Time and Pride decaies
In this rich Kingdom. And the spacious West
Being still more with English blood possessed,
The proud Iberians shall not rule those Seas,
To check our ships from sailing where they please,
Nor future times make any foreign power
Become so great to force a bound to Our.
Much good my mind foretells would follow hence
With little labor, and with less expense.
Thrive therefore thy Design, who ere envy:
England may joy in England's Colony,
Virginia seek her Virgin sisters good,
Be blessed in such happy neighborhood:
Or, whatsoere Fate pleases to permit,
Be thou still honored for first moving it.
George Wither, e societate Lincol.

To that worthy and generous Gentleman, my very good friend, Captain Smith.
MAy Fate thy Project prosper, that thy name
May be eternized with living fame:
Though foul Detraction Honor would pervert,
And Envy ever waits upon desert:
In spite of Pelias, when his hate lies cold,
Return as Jason with a fleece of gold.
Then after-ages shall record thy praise,
That a New England to this I Will did raise:
And when thou di'st (as all that live must die)
Thy fame live here; thou, with Eternity.
R. Gunnell.

To his worthy Captain, the Author.
Often thou have led, when I brought up the Rere
In bloody wars, where thousands have been slain.
Then give me leave in this some part to bear;
And as thy servant, here to read my name.
It Is true, long time thou have my Captain been
In the fierce wars of Transiluania:
Long ere that thou America had seen,
Or led wast captived in Virginia;
Thou that to pass the worlds four parts do deem
No more, then it were to go to bed, or drink,
And all thou yet have done, thou do esteem
As nothing. This does cause me think
That thou I'aue seen so often approved in dangers,
(And thrice captived, thy valor still has freed)
Art yet preserved, to convert those strangers:
By God thy guide I trust it is decreed.
For me: I not commend but much admire
Thy England yet unknown to passers by-her.
For it will praise it self in spite of me;
Thou it, it thou, to all posterity.
Your true friend and soldier, Ed. Robinson.

To my honest Captain, the Author.
MAlignant Times! What can be said or done,
But shall be censured and traduc't by some!
This worthy Work, which thou have bought so dear,
Ne thou, nor it, Detractors need to fear.
Thy words by deeds so long thou have approved,
Of thousands know thee not thou art beloved.
And this great Plot will make thee ten times more
Known and beloved, than ere thou were before.
I never knew a Warrier yet, but thee,
From wine, Tobacco, debts, dice, oaths, so free.
I call thee Warrier: and I make the bolder;
For, many a Captain now, was never Soldier.
Some such may swell at this: but (to their praise)
When they have done like thee, my Muse shall raise
Their due deserts to Worthies yet to come,
To live like thine (admired) till day of Doom.
Your true friend, sometimes your soldier, Tho. Carlton.

NEW ENGLAND
The most remarqueable parts thus named by the high and mighty Prince CHARLES,
Prince of great Britain

THE PORTRAICTUER OF CAPTAIN JOHN SMITH ADMIRAL OF NEW ENGLAND.

These are the Lines that show thy Face; but those
That show thy Grace and Glory, brighter be:
Thy Faire-Discoueries and Fowle-Overthrowes
Of Salvages, much Civilliz'd by thee
Best show thy Spirit; and to it Glory Wyn;
So, thou art Brass without, but Gold within.
If so; in Brass, too soft Smiths Acts to bear
I fix thy Fame, to make Brass steel out wear.
Thine, as thou art Virtues, Go^^^ Dauies. Heref:

HONEY S OIT QVI MAL Y PENSE.

A Scale of Leagues Observed and described by Captayn John Smith. 1614

London Printed by Geor: Low

THE SIXTH BOOK.
THE GENERAL HISTORY OF NEW ENGLAND.

COncerning this History you are to understand the Letters Patent granted by
his Majesty in 1606. for the limitation of Virginia, did extend from 34. to 44.
which was divided in two parts; namely, the first Colony and the second: the
first was to the honorable City of London, and such as would adventure with
them to discover and take their choice where they would, betwixt the degrees of
34. and 41. The second was appropriated to the Cities of Bristol, Exeter and
Plimoth, etc. and the West parts of England, and all those that would adventure
and join with them, and they might make their choice any where betwixt the
degrees of 38. and 44. provided there should be at least 100. miles distance
betwixt these 2. Colonies, each of which had laws, privileges and authority,
for the government and advancing their several Plantations alike. Now this
part of America has formerly been called Norumbega, Virginia, Nuskoncus,
Penaquida, Cannada, and such other names as those that ranged the Coast
pleased. But because it was so mountainous, rocky and full of Isles, few have
adventured much to trouble it, but as is formerly related; notwithstanding,
that honorable Patron of virtue, Sir John Popham, Lord chief Justice of
England, in the year 1606. procured means and men to possess it, and sent
Captain George Popham for President, Captain Rawley Gilbert for Admiral, Sir
Francis Popham Treasurer.
Captain Edward Harlow master of the Ordnance, Captain Robert Dauis
Sargeant-Maior, Captain Elis Best Marshall, Master Seaman Secretary, Captain
James Dauis to be Captain of the Fort, Master Gome Carew chief Searcher: all
those were of the Council, who with some hundred more were to stay in the
Country: they set sail from Plimoth the last of May, and fell with Monahigan
the eleventh of August. At Sagadahock 9. or 10. leagues southward, they planted
themselves at the mouth of a fair nauigable River, but the coast all
thereabouts most extreme stony and rocky: that extreme frozen Winter was so
cold they could not range nor search the Country, and their provision so small,
they were glad to send all but 45. of their company back again: their noble
President Captain Popham died, and not long after arrived two ships well
provided of all necessaries to supply them, and some small time after another,
by whom understanding of the death of the Lord chief Justice, and also of Sir
John Gilbert, whose lands there the President Rawley Gilbert was to possess
according to the adventurers directions, finding nothing but extreme
extremities, they all returned for England in the year 1608. and thus this
Plantation was begun and ended in one year, and the Country esteemed as a
cold, barren, mountainous, rocky Desert.

Notwithstanding, the right Honorable Henry Earl of South-hampton and those
of the I Will of Wight, employed Captain Edward Harlow to discover an I Will
supposed about Cape Cod, but they found their plots had much abused them, for
falling with Monahigan, they found only Cape Cod no I Will but the maine, there
they detained three Saluages aboard them, called Pechmo, Monopet and Pekenimne,
but Pechmo leapt over board, and got away; and not long after with his consorts
cut their Boat from their stern, got her on shore, and so filled her with
sand, and guarded her with Bows and Arrows the English lost her: not far
from thence they had three men sorely wounded with Arrows. Anchoring at the
I Will of Nohone, the Saluages in their Canowes assaulted the Ship till the
English Guns made them retire, yet here they took Sakaweston, that after he
had lived many years in England went a Soldier to the wars of Bohemia. At
Capawo they took Coneconam and Epenow, but the people at Agawom used them
kindly, so with five Saluages they returned for England, yet Sir Francis Popham
sent diverse times one Captain Williams to Monahigan only to trade and make
core fish, but for any Plantations there was no more speeches. For all this, as
I liked Virginia well, though not their proceedings, so I desired also to see
this country, and spend some time in trying what I could find for all those
ill rumors and disasters. From the relations of Captain Edward Harlow and
diverse others.

My first voyage to New England. 1614.
In the month of April 1614. at the charge of Capt. Marmaduke Roydon, Capt.
George Langam, Mr. John Buley and Mr. William Skeleton, with two ships from
London, I chanced to arrive at Monahigan an I Will of America, in 434. of
Northerly latitude: out plot was there to take Whales, for which we had one
Samuel Cramton and diverse others expert in that faculty, and also to make
trialls of a Mine of gold and copper; if those failed, Fish and Furs were then
our refuge to make our selves sauers howsoever: we found this Whale-fishing a
costly conclusion, we saw many and spent much time in chasing them, but could
not kill any. They being a kind of Iubartes, and not the Whale that yields
Fins and Oil as we expected; for our gold it was rather the Masters device to
get a voyage that proiected it, then any knowledge he had at all of any such
matter; Fish and Furs were now our guard, and by our late arrival and long
lingering about the Whale, the prime of both those seasons were past ere we
perceived it, we thinking that their seasons served at all times, but we found
it otherwise, for by the midst of June the fishing failed, yet in July and
August some were taken, but not sufficient to defray so great a charge as our
stay required: of dry fish we made about forty thousand, of Cor-fish about
seven thousand. The commodities I got amounted to 1500. pounds.
Whilst the Sailers fished, my self with eight others of them might best be
spared, ranging the Coast in a small Boat, we got for trifles near eleven
thousand Beuer skins, one hundred Martins, as many Otters, and the most of
them within the distance of twenty leagues: we ranged the Coast both East and
West much further, but Eastward our commodities were not esteemed, they were so
near the French who afforded them better, with whom the Saluages had such
commerce that only by trade they made exceeding great voyages, though they were
without the limits of our precincts; during the time we tried those
conclusions, not knowing the coast, nor Saluages habitations: with these
Furs, the train Oil and Cor-fish, I returned for England in the Bark,
where within six months after our departure from the Downs, we safely
arrived back; the best of this fish was sold for 5. li. the hundred, the rest
by ill usage betwixt three pounds and 50. shillings. The other ship stayed to
fit her self for Spain with the dry fish which was sold at Maligo at forty
Rialls the Quintall, The treachery of Master Hunt.
each hundred weighing two quintals and a half. But one Thomas Hunt the Master
of this ship (when I was gone) thinking to prevent that intent I had to make
there a Plantation, thereby to keep this abounding Country still in
obscurity, that only he and some few Merchants more might enjoy wholly the
benefit of the Trade, and profit of this Country, betrayed four and twenty of
those poor Saluages aboard his ship, and most dishonestly and inhumanely for
their kind usage of me and all our men, carried them with him to Maligo, and
there for a little private gain sold those silly Saluages for Rials of eight;
but this vilde act kept him ever after from any more imploiment to those parts.
Now because at this time I had taken a draught of the Coast, and called it New
England, yet so long he and his Consorts drowned that name with the Echo of
Cannaday, and some other ships from other parts also, that upon this good
return the next year went thither, that at last I presented this Discourse
with the Map, to our most gracious Prince Charles, humbly entreating his
Highness he would please to change their ba^barous names for such English, as
posterity might say Prince Charles was their Godfather, which for your better
understanding both of this Discourse and the M^p, peruse this Schedule, which
will plainly show you the correspondency of the old names to the new, as his
Highness named them.

How Prince Charles called the most remarkable places in New England.
The old names. The new names. Cape Cod. Cape James. The Harbor at Cape Cod.
Milforth haven. Chawum. Barwick. Accomack. Plimoth. Sagoquas. Oxford.
Massachusetts Mount. Cheuit hills. Massachusits River. Charles River. Totan.
Famouth. A great Bay by Cape Anne. Bristow. Cape Tragubigsanda. Cape Anne.
Naembeck. Bastable. Aggawom. Southampton. Smiths Isles. Smiths Isles.
Passataquack. Hull. Accominticus. Boston. Sassanows Mount. Snowdon hill.
Sowocatuck. Ipswich. Bahanna. Dartmouth. A good Harbor within that Bay.
Sandwich. Ancociscos Mount. Shuters hill. Ancocisco. The Base. Anmonghcawgen.
Cambridge. Kenebecka. Edenborow. Sagadabock. Leth. Pemmayquid. S. John's town.
Segocket. Norwich. Mecadacut. Dunbarton. Pennobscot. Aberden. Nusket. Low
mounds. Those being omitted I named my self. Monahigan. Barties Isles.
Matinack. Willowbies Isles. Metinacus. Haughtons Isles.

The rest of the names in the Map, are places that had no names we did know.

But to continue the History succeedingly as near with the day and year as
may be. Returning in the Bark as is said; Aspersions against New England.
it was my ill chance to put in at Plimoth, where imparting those my purposes
to diverse I thought my friends, whom as I supposed were interested in the dead
Patent of this unregarded Country, I was so encouraged and assured to have the
managing their authority in those parts during my life, and such large
promises, that I engaged my self to undertake it for them. Arriving at London,
though some malicious persons suggested there was no such matter to be had in
that so bad abandoned Country, for if there had, other could have found it so
well as I; therefore it was to be suspected I had robbed the French men in New
France or Cannada, and the Merchants see me forth seemed not to regard it, yet
I found so many promised me such assistance, that I entertained Michael Cooper
the Master of the Bark, that returned with me and others of the Company: how
he dealt with others, or others with him, I know not; but my public proceeding
gave such encouragement, that it became so well apprehended by some few of the
Virginia Company, as those proiects for fishing only was so well liked, they
furnished Couper with four good ships to Sea, before they at Plimoth had made
any provision at all for me; but only a small Bark set out by them of the I Will
of Wight. Some of Plimoth, and diverse Gentlemen of the West Country, Captain
Hobson his voyage to Capawuk.
a little before I returned from New England, in search for a Mine of Gold
about an I Will called Capawuck, South-wards from the Shoules of Cape James, as
they were informed by a Saluage called Epenew; that having deluded the^ as it
seems thus to get home, seeing they kept him as a prisoner in his own
Country, and before his friends, being a man of so great a stature, he was
showed up and down London for money as a wonder, and it seems of no less
courage and authority, then of wit, strength, and proportion: for so well he
had contrived his business, as many reported he intended to have surprised the
ship; but seeing it could not be effected to his liking, before them all he
leaped ouer-boord. Many shot they made at him, thinking they had slain him,
but so resolute they were to recover his body, the master of the ship was
wounded, and many of his company; And thus they lost him, and not knowing more
what to do, returned again to England with nothing, which so had discouraged
all your West Country men, they neither regarded much their promises, and as
little either me or the Country, till they saw the London ships gone and me in
Plimoth according to my promise, as hereafter shall be related.

The Londoners send four good ships to New England.
I must confess I was beholden to the setters forth of the four ships that
went with Couper, in that they offered me that imploiment if I would accept it;
and I find still my refusal incurred some of their displeasures, whose love
and favor I exceedingly desired; and though they do censure me opposite to
their proceedings, they shall yet still in all my words and deeds find, it is
their error, not my fault that occasions their dislike: for having engaged my
self in this business to the West Country, I had been very dishonest to
have broke my promise, nor will I spend more time in discovery or fishing, till
I may go with a Company for a Plantation; for I know my grounds, yet every one
to whom I tell them, or that reads this Book, cannot put it in practice,
though it may help any that has seen or not seen to know much of those
parts: And though they endeavor to work me out of my own designs, I will not
much envy their fortunes: but I would be sorry their intruding ignorance should
by their defailments bring those certainties to doubtfulnesse. So that the
business prosper I have my desire, be it by whomsoever that are true subjects
to our King and Country: the good of my Country is that I seek, and there is
more then enough for all, if they could be contented.

The situation of New England.
New England is that part of America in the Ocean Sea, opposite to Noua Albion
in the South Sea, discovered by the most memorable Sir Francis Drake in his
Voyage about the world, in regard whereof this is styled New England, being in
the same latitude New France of it is Northwards, Southwards is Virginia, and
all the adjoining continent with new Granado, new Spain, new Andolosia, and
the West Indies. Now because I have been so often asked such strange questions
of the goodness and greatness of those spacious Tracts of Land, how they can
be thus long unknown, or not possessed by the Spaniards, and many such like
demands; I entreat your pardons if I chance to be too plain or tedious in
relating my knowledge for plain men's satisfaction.

Notes of Florida.
Florida is the next adjoining to the Indies, which vnprosperously was
attempted to be planted by the French, a Country far bigger then England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, yet little known to any Christian, but by the
wonderful endeavors of Ferdinando de Soto, a valiant Spaniard, whose writings
in this age is the best guide known to search those parts.

Notes of Virginia.
Virginia is no I Will as many do imagine, but part of the Continent adjoining to
Florida, whose bounds may be stretched to the magnitude thereof, without
offense to any Christian Inhabitant, for from the degrees of thirty to forty
eight, his Majesty has now enlarged his Letters Patents. The Coast extending
Southwest and North-east about sixteen or seventeen hundred miles, but to
follow it aboard the shore may well be three thousand miles at the least: of
which twenty miles is the most gives entrance into the Bay of Chisapeacke,
where is the London Plantation, within which is a Country, as you may perceive
by the Map, of that little I discovered, may well suffice three hundred
thousand people to inhabit: but of it, and the discoueries of Sir Ralph Lain
and Master Heriot, Captain Gosnold, and Captain Waymouth, they have writ so
largely, that posterity may be bettered by the fruits of their labors. But
for diverse others that have ranged those parts since, especially this Country
now called New England, within a kenning sometimes of the shore; some touching
in one place, some in another; I must entreat them pardon me for omitting them,
or if I offend in saying, that their true descriptions were concealed, or never
were well observed, or died with the Authors, so that the Coast is yet still
but even as a Coast unknown and undiscovered. I have had six or seven several
plots of those Northern parts, so unlike each to other, or resemblance of the
Country, as they did me no more good then so much waste paper, though they cost
me more, it may be it was not my chance to see the best; but lest others may
be deceived as I was, or through dangerous ignorance hazard themselves as I
did, I have drawn a Map from point to point, I Will to I Will, and Harbor to
Harbor, with the Soundings, Sands, Rocks, and Land-markes, as I passed close
aboard the shore in a little Boat; although there be many things to be
observed, which the haste of other affairs did cause me to omit: for being
sent more to get present Commodities, then knowledge of any discoueries for any
future good, I had not power to search as I would; yet it will serve to direct
any shall go that ways to safe Harbors and the Saluages habitations: what
Merchandise and Commodities for their labors they may find, this following
discourse shall plainly demonstrate.

Thus you may see of these three thousand miles, Observations so^ presumptuous
ignorant directors.
more then half is yet unknown to any purpose, no not so much as the borders
of the Sea are yet certainly discovered: as for the goodness and true
substance of the Land, we are for most part yet altogether ignorant of them,
unless it be those parts about the Bay of Chisapeack and Sagadahock, but only
here and there where we have touched or seen a little, the edges of those
large Dominions which do stretch themselves into the maine, God does know how
many thousand miles, whereof we can yet no more judge, then a stranger that
saileth betwixt England and France, can describe the harbors and dangers by
landing here or there in some River or Bay, tell thereby the goodness and
substance of Spain, Italy, Germany, Bohemia, Hungaria, and the rest; nay,
there are many have lived forty years in London, and yet have scarce been
ten miles out of the City: so are there many have been in Virginia many
years, and in New England many times, that do know little more then the place
they do inhabit, or the Port where they fished, and when they come home, they
will undertake they know all Virginia and New England, as if they were but two
Parishes or little Islands. By this you may perceive how much they err, that
think every one that has been in Virginia or New England, understands or
knows what either of them are; Or that the Spaniards know one half quarter
of those large Territories they possess, no not so much as the true
circumference of Terra incognita, whose large Dominions may equalize the
goodness and greatness of America for any thing yet known. It is strange
with what small power he does range in the East Indies, and few will understand
the truth of his strength in America: where having so much to keep with such a
pampered force, they need not greatly fear his fury in Summer Isles, Virginia,
or New England, beyond whose bounds America does stretch many thousand miles.
Into the frozen parts whereof, one Master Hutson an English Mariner, did make
the greatest discovery of any Christian I know, where he unfortunately was
left by his cowardly Company, for his exceeding deserts, to end and die a most
miserable death.

For Africa, had not the industrious Portugals ranged her unknown parts, who
would have sought for wealth amongst those fried Regions of black brutish
Negars, where notwithstanding all their wealth and admirable adventures and
endeavors more then one hundred and forty years; they know not one third part
of those black habitations. But it is not a work for every one to manage such
an affair, as make a discovery and plant a Colony, it requires all the best
parts of art, judgment, courage, honesty, constancy, diligence, and industry,
to do but near well; some are more proper for one thing then another, and
therein best to be employed: and nothing breeds more confusion then misplacing
and misimploying men in their undertakings. Columbus, Courts, Pitzara, Zoto,
Magilanus, and the rest served more then a Prentiship, to learn how to begin
their most memorable attempts in the West Indies, which to the wonder of all
ages successefully they effected, when many hundreds of others far above them
in the worlds opinion, being instructed but by relation, came to shame and
confusion in actions of small moment, who doubtless in other matters were both
wise, discreet, generous and courageous. I say not this to detract any thing
from their incomparable merits, but to answer those questionless questions,
that keep us back from imitating the worthiness of their brave spirits, that
advanced themselves from poor Soldiers to great Captains, their posterity to
great Lords, their King to be one of the greatest Potentates on earth, and the
fruits of their labors his greatest power, glory, and renown.

The Description of New England.
THat part we call New England, is betwixt the degrees of forty one and forty
five, the very mean betwixt the North pole and the line; but that part this
Discourse speaks of, stretches but from Penobscot to C^pe Cod, some seventy
five leagues by a right line distant each from other; within which bounds I
have seen at least forty several habitations upon the Sea Coast, and sounded
about five and twenty excellent good Harbors, in many whereof there is
anchorage for five hundred sail of ships of any burden; in some of them for
one thousand, and more then two hundred Isles ouer-growne with good Timber of
diverse sorts of wood, which do make so many Harbors, as required a longer
time then I had to be well observed.

The principal Countries or governments.
The principal habitation Northward we were at, was Pennobscot: Southward along
the Coast and up the Rivers, we found Mecadacut, Segocket, Pemaquid, Nuscoucus,
Sagadahock, Aumoughcowgen, and Kenebeke; and to those Countries belong the
people of Segotago, Paghhuntanuck, Pocopassum* Taughtanakagnet, Warbigganus,
Nassaque, Masherosqueck, Wawrigweck, Mos^oquen, Wakcogo, Pasharanack, etc. To
these are alied in confederacy, the Countries of Ancocisco, Accomynticus,
Passataquack, Aggawom, and Naemkeck: All these for any thing I could perceive,
differ little in language, fashion, or government, though most of them be Lords
of themselves, yet they hold the Bashabes of Penobscot, the chief and greatest
amongst them.

The next I can remember by name, are Mattahunts, two pleasant Isles of Groves,
Gardens, and Corn fields a league in the Sea from the maine: Then Totant,
Massachuset, Topent, Secassaw, Totheet, Nasnocomacack, Accomack, Chawum,
Patuxet, Massasoyts, Pakanokick: then Cape Cod, by which is Pawmet and the I Will
Nawset, of the language and aliance of them of Chawum; the others are called
Massachusetts, and differ somewhat in language, custom, and condition: for
their Trade and Merchandise, to each of their principal families or
habitations, they have diverse Towns and people belonging, and by their
relations and descriptions, more then twenty several habitations and rivers
that stretch themselves far into the Country, even to the Borders of diverse
great Lakes, where they kill and take most of their Otters, from Pennobscot to
Sagadaboc. This Coast is mountainous, and Isles of huge Rocks, but ouer-growne
for most part, with most sorts of excellent good woods, for building Houses,
Boats, Barks or Ships, with an incredible abundance of most sorts of Fish, much
Foul, and sundry sorts of good Fruits for man's use.

Betwixt Sagadahock, and Sowocatuck, there is but two or three Sandy Bays, but
betwixt that and Cape James very many: especially the Coast of the Massachusetts
is so indifferently mixed with high Clay or Sandy clifts in one place, and the
tracts of large long ledges of diverse sorts, and Quaries of stones in other
places, so strangely divided with tinctured veins of diverse colors: as
Freestone for building, Slate for tyling, smooth stone to make Furnasses and
Forges for Glass and Iron, and Iron Ore sufficient conveniently to melt in
them; but the most part so resembles the Coast of Devonshire, I think most of
the clifts would make such Limestone: if they be not of these qualities, they
are so like they may deceive a better judgment then mine: all which are so
near adjoining to those other advantages I observed in these parts, that if
the Ore prove as good Iron and Steel in those parts as I know it is within the
bounds of the Country, I dare engage my head (having but men skillful to work
the Simples there growing) to have all things belonging to the building and
rigging of ships of any proportion and good Merchandise for their fraught,
within a square of ten or fourteen leagues, and it were no hard matter to
prove it within a less limitation.

And surely by reason of those sandy clifts, and clifts of rocks, A proof of
an excellent clime*
both which we saw so planted with Gardens and Corn fields, and so well
inhabited with a goodly, strong, and well proportioned people, besides the
greatness of the Timber growing on them, the greatness of the Fish, and the
moderate temper of the air (for of five and forty not a man was sick, but two
that were many years diseased before they went, notwithstanding our bad
lodging and accidental diet) who can but approve this a most excellent place,
both for health and fertility: and of all the four parts of the world I have
yet seen not inhabited, could I have but means to transport a Colony, I would
rather live here then any where, and if it did not maintain it self, were we
but once indifferently well fitted, let us starve.

The maine staple from hence to be extracted for the present, Staple
Commodities present.
to produce the rest, is Fish, which howbeit may seem a mean and a base
Commodity; yet who will but truly take the pains and consider the sequel, I
think will allow it well worth the labor. It is strange to see, what great
adventures the hopes of setting forth men of war to rob the industrious
innocent would procure, or such massy promises in gross, though more are
choked then well fed with such hasty hopes. Observations of the Hollanders.
But who does not know that the poor Hollanders chiefly by fishing at a great
charge and labor in all weathers in the open Sea, are made a people so hardy
and industrious, and by the venting this poor Commodity to the Easterlings
for as mean, which is Wood, Flax, Pitch, Tar, Rozen, Cordage, and such like;
which they exchange again to the French, Spaniards, Portugals, and English,
etc. for what they want, are made so mighty, strong, and rich, as no state but
Venice of twice their magnitude is so well furnished, with so many fair
Cities, goodly Towns, strong Fortresses, and that abundance of shipping, and
all sorts of Merchandise, as well of Gold, Silver, Pearls, Diamonds, precious
Stones, Silks, Veluets, and Cloth of Gold; as F^sh, Pitch, Wood, or such
gross Commodities? What voiages and discoueries, E^st and West, North and
South, yea about the world, make they? What an Army by Sea and Land have they
long maintained, in despite of one of the greatest Princes of the world, and
never could the Spaniard with all his Mines of Gold and Silver, pay his debts,
his friends, and Army, half so truly as the Hollanders still have done by this
contemptible Trade of Fish. Diverse (I know) may allege many other assistances;
but this is the chiefest Mine, and the Sea the source of those silver streams
of all their virtue, which has made them now the very miracle of industry, the
only pattern of perfection for these affairs: and the benefit of fishing is
that Primum Mobile that turns all their spheres to this height, of plenty,
strength, honor, and exceeding great admiration.

Note.
Herring, Cod, and Ling, is that triplicitie, that makes their wealth and
shippings multiplicitie such as it is: and from which (few would think it)
they should draw so many millions yearly as they do, as more in particular in
the trials of New England you may see; and such an incredible number of ships,
that breeds them so many Sailers, Mariners, Soldiers, and Merchants, never to
be wrought out of that Trade, and fit for any other. I will not deny but others
may gain as well as they that will use it, though not so certainly, nor so
much in quantity, for want of experience: and this Herring they take upon the
Coast of England and Scotland, their Cod and Ling upon the Coast of Izeland,
and in the North seas, if we consider what gains the Hamburgans, the
Biskinners, and French make by fishing; nay, but how many thousands this fifty
or sixty years have been maintained by New found land, where they take
nothing but small Cod, whereof the greatest they make Cor-fish, and the rest is
hard dried, which we call Poore-Iohn, would amaze a man with wonder. If then
from all those parts such pains is taken for this poor gains of Fish,
especially by the H^^landers, that has but little of their own, for building
of ships and setting them to sea; but at the second, third, fourth, or fifth
hand, drawn from so many p^r^s of the world ere they come together to be used
in those voiages: If these (I say) can gain, why should we more doubt then
they; but do much better, that may have most of all those things at our doors
for taking and making, and here are no hard Landlords to rack us with high
rents, or extorting fines, nor tedious pleas in Law to consume us with their
many years disputation for Justice; no multitudes to occasion such impediments
to good orders as in popular States: so freely has God and his Majesty
bestowed those blessings, on them will attempt to obtain them, as here every
man may be master of his own labor and land, Note.
or the greatest part (if his Majesty's royal meaning be not abused) and if he
have nothing but his hands, he may set-vp his Trade; and by industry quickly
grow rich, spending but half that time well, which in England we abuse in
idleness, worse, or as ill. Here is ground as good as any lies in the height
of forty one, forty two, forty three, etc. which is as temperate, and as
fruitful as any other parallel in the world.

Examples of the Altitude comparatively.
As for example, on this side the line, West of it in the South Sea, is Nona
Albion, discovered as is said by Sir Francis Drake: East from it is the most
temperate part of Portugal, the ancient Kingdoms of Galizia, Bisky, Navarre,
Aragon, Cattilonia, Castillia the old, and the most moderatest of Castillia the
new, and Valentia, which is the greatest part of Spain; In Spain.
which if the Histories be true, in the Romans time abounded no less with gold
and silver Mines, then now the West Indies, the Romans then using the Spaniards
to work in those Mines, as now the Spaniards do the Indians. In France.
In France the Provinces of Gascony, Langadooke, Auignon, Province, Dolphine,
Pyamont, and Turyne, are in the same parallel, which are the best and richest
parts of France. In Italy the Provinces of Genua, Lumbardy, and Verona, with a
great part of the most famous state of Venice, the Dukedomes of Bononia,
Mantua, Ferrara, Rauenna, Bolognia, Florence, Pisa, Sienna, Vrbine, Ancona, and
the ancient City and Country of Rome, with a great part of the Kingdom of
Naples. In Slauonia, Istria, and Dalmatia, with the Kingdoms of Albania. In
Greece.
In Grecia those famous Kingdoms of Macedonia, Bullulgaria, Thessalia,
Thracia, or Romania, where is seated the most pleasant and plentiful City in
Europe, Constantinople.

In Asia.
In Asia in the same latitude, are the temperatest parts of Natolia, Armenia,
Persia, and China; besides diverse other large Countries and Kingdoms in those
most mild and temperate Regions of Asia. Beyond the line.
Southward in the same height is the richest of Gold Mines, Chily, and
Baldinia, and the mouth of the great River of Plate, etc. for all the rest of
the world in that height is yet unknown. Besides these reasons, mine own eyes
that have seen a great part of those Cities and their Kingdoms (as well as
it) can find no advantage they have in Nature but this, they are beautified by
the long labor and diligence of industrious people and art; This is only as
God made it when he created the world: Therefore I conclude, if the heart and
intrailes of those Regions were sought, if their Land were cultured, planted,
and manured by men of industry, judgment, and experience; what hope is there,
or what need they doubt, having the advantages of the Sea, but it might
equalize any of these famous Kingdoms in all commodities, pleasures, and
conditions, seeing even the very hedges do naturally afford us such plenty,
as no ship need return away empty, and only use but the season of the Sea.
Fish will return an honest gain, besides all other advantages, her treasures
having yet never been opened, nor her originals wasted, consumed, nor abused.

And whereas it is said the Hollanders serve the Easterlings themselves; The
particular staple commodities that may be had by industry.
and other parts that want with Herring, Ling, and wet Cod: The Easterlings, a
great part of Europe, with Sturgion and Cauiare, as the Black Sea does Grecia,
Podolia, Sagouia, Natolia, and the Hellespont. Cape Blanke, Spain, Portugal,
and the Leuant, with Mulit and Puttargo. New foundland, the most part of the
chief Southern Ports in Europe, with a thin Poore-Iohn, which has been so
long, so much ouer-laied with Fishers, as the fishing decaieth, so that many
often times are constrained to return with a small fraught. Norway and Poland
affoords Pitch and Tar, Masts and Yards. Sweathland and Russia, Iron and
Ropes. France and Spain, Canuase, Wine, Steel, Iron, and Oil, Italy and
Greece, Silks and Fruits. I dare boldly say, because I have seen naturally
growing or breeding in those parts, the same materials that all these are made
of, they may as well be had here, or the most part of them within the distance
of seventy leagues for some few ages, as from all those parts, using but the
same means to have them that they do; but surely in Virginia, their most
tender and daintiest fruits or commodities, would be as perfect as theirs, by
reason of the heat, if not in New England, and with all those advantages.

First, the ground is so fertile, The nature of the ground approved.
that questionless it is capable of producing any Grain, Fruits, or Seeds,
you will sow or plant, growing in the Regions aforenamed: But it may be not to
that perfection of delicacy, because the Summer is not so hot, and the Winter
is more cold in those parts we have yet tried near the Sea side, then we
find in the same height in Europe or Asia: yet I made a Garden upon the top of
a Rocky I Will in three and forty degrees and an half, four leagues from the
maine in May, that grew so well, as it served us for Sallets in June and July.
All sorts of Cattle may here be bred and fed in the Isles or Peninsulaes
securely for nothing. In the Interim, till they increase (if need be) observing
the seasons, I durst undertake to have Corn enough from the Saluages for three
hundred men, for a few trifles; and if they should be vntowards, as it is most
certain they will, thirty or forty good men will be sufficient to bring them
all in subjection, and make this provision, if they understand what to do; two
hundred whereof may eight or nine months in the year be employed in helping
the Fishermen, till the rest provide other necessaries, fit to furnish us with
other Commodities.

In March, April, May, and half June, here is Cod in abundance; In May, The
seasons for fishing approved.
June, July, and August, Mullit and Sturgion, whose Roes do make Cauiare and
Puttargo; Herring, if any desire them: I have taken many out of the bellies of
Cods, some in nets; but the Saluages compare the store in the Sea with the
hairs of their heads: and surely there are an incredible abundance upon this
Coast. In the end of August, September, October, and November, you may have Cod
again to make Core-fish or Poore-Iohn: Hake you may have when the Cod fails
in Summer, if you will fish in the night, which is better then Cod. Now each
hundred you take here, is as good as two or three hundred in New found Land; so
that half the labor in hooking, splitting and touring, is saved: And you may
have your fish at what market you will, before they have any in New found land,
where their fishing is chiefly but in June and July, where it is here in
March, April, May, September, October and November, as is said; so that by
reason of this Plantation, the Merchants may have their fraught both out and
home, which yields an advantage worth consideration. Your Core-fish you may in
like manner transport as you see cause, to serve the Ports in Portugal, as
Lisbone, Auera, Porta Port, and diverse others, (or what market you please)
before your Ilanders return. They being tied to the season in the open Sea,
and you having a double season, and fishing before your doors, may every night
sleep quietly ashore with good cheer, and what fires you will, or when you
please with your wives and family: they only and their ships in the maine
Ocean, that must carry and contain all they use, besides their fraught. The
Mullits here are in that abundance, you may take them with nets sometimes by
hundreds, where at Cape Blanke they hook them; yet those are but a soot and a
half in length; these two, three, or four, as often I have measured, which
makes me suspect they are some other kind of fish, though they seem the same,
both in fashion and goodness. Much Salmon some have found up the Rivers as
they have passed, and here the air is so temperate, Imploiment for poor
people and fatherless children.
as all these at any time may be preserved. Now, young Boys and Girls
Saluages, or any other be they never such idlers, may turn, carry or return
a fish, without either shame or any great pain: He is very idle that is past
twelve years of age and cannot do so much, and she is very old that cannot
spin a thread to make Engines to catch a fish.

The facility of the Plantation.
For their transportation, the ships that go there to fish may transport the
first: who for their passage will spare the charge of double manning their
ships, which they must do in New found land to get their fraught; but one third
part of that company are only proper to serve a stage, carry a Barrow, and
turn Poore-Iohn; notwithstanding, they must have meat, drink, clothes, and
passage so well as the rest. Now all I desire is but this, That those that
voluntarily will send shipping, should make here the best choice they can, or
accept such as shall be presented them to serve them at that rate: and their
ships returning leave such with me, with the value of that they should receive
coming home, in such provisions and necessary tools, arms, bedding,
apparel, salt, nets, hooks, lines, and such like, as they spare of the
remainings; who till the next return may keep their Boats, and do them many
other profitable offices. Provided, I have men of ability to teach them their
functions, and a company fit for Soldiers to be ready upon any occasion,
because of the abuses that have been offered the poor Saluages, and the
liberty that both French and English, or any that will, have to deal with
them as they please; whose disorders will be hard to reform, and the longer
the worse: Now such order with facility might be taken, with every Port,
Town, or City, with free power to convert the benefit of their fraughts to
what advantage they please, and increase their numbers as they see occasion,
who ever as they are able to subsist of themselves, may begin the new Towns in
New England, in memory of their old: which freedom being confined but to the
necessity of the general good, the event (with Gods help) might produce an
honest, a noble, and a profitable emulation.

Present Commodities.
Salt upon Salt may assuredly be made, if not at the first in ponds, yet till
they be provided this may be used: then the ships may transport Kine, Horse,
Goats, course Cloth, and such Commodities as we want; by whose arrival may be
made that provision of fish to fraught the ships that they stay not; and then
if the Sailers go for wages it matters not, it is hard if this return defray
not the charge: but care must be had they arrive in the Spring, or else that
provision be made for them against winter. Of certain red berries called
Kermes, Kermes.
which is worth ten shillings the pound, but of these have been sold for
thirty or forty shillings the pound, may yearly be gathered a good quantity.
Musquasse^.
Of the Muskrat may be well raised gains worth their labor, that will
endeavor to make trial of their goodness. Of Beuers, Otters and Martins,
black Foxes, and Furs of price, Beuers.
may yearly be had six or seven thousand, and if the trade of the French were
prevented, many more: 25000. this year were brought from those northern parts
into France, of which trade we may have as good part as the French if we take
good courses. Of Mines of Gold and Silver, Copper, and probabilities of Lead,
Mines.
Crystal and Alum, I could say much if relations were good assurances; it is
true indeed, I made many trialls according to the instructions I had, which
does persuade me I need not despair but that there are metals in the Country:
but I am no Alcumist, nor will promise more then I know: which is, who will
undertake the rectifying of an iron Forge, if those that buy meat and drink,
coals, ore, and all necessaries at a dear rate, gain, where all these things
are to be had for taking up, in my opinion cannot lose.

Of woods, seeing there is such plenty of all sorts, Woods.
if those that build ships and boats, buy wood at so great a price, as it is in
England, Spain, France and Holland, and all other provisions for the
nourishment of man's life, live well by their trade; when labor is all required
to take these necessaries without any other tax, what hazard will be here but
to do much better, and what commodity in Europe does more decay then wood? for
the goodness of the ground, let us take it fertile or barren, or as it is,
seeing it is certain it bears fruits to nourish and feed man and beast as
well as England, and the Sea those several sorts of fishes I have related:
thus seeing all good things for man's sustenance may with this facility be had
by a little extraordinary labor, till that transported be increased, and all
necessaries for shipping only for labor, to which may added the assistance of
the Saluages which may easily be had, if they be discreetly handled in their
kinds, toward fishing, planting, and destroying woods, what gains might be
raised if this were followed (when there is but once men to fill your store
houses dwelling there, you may serve all Europe better and far cheaper then
can the Island Fishers, or the Hollanders, Cape-blanke, or Newfound land, who
must be at much more charge then you) may easily be coniectured by this example.

Two thousand will fit out a ship of 200. tons, and one of 100. tuns, An
example of the g^^^s upon every year or six months return.
if of the dry fish they both make fraught, that of 200. and go for Spain,
sell it but at ten shillings a quintall, but commonly it gives fifteen or
twenty, especially when it comes first, which amounts to 3. or 4000 pound,
but say but ten, which is the lowest, allowing the rest for waste, it amounts
at that rate to 2000. which is the whole charge of your two ships and the
equipage, then the return of the money and the fraught of the ship for the
vintage or any other voyage is clear gain, with your ship of one hundred
tons of train Oil and Cor-fish, besides the Beuers and other commodities,
and that you may have at home within six months if God please to send but an
ordinary passage; then saving half this charge by the not staying of your
ships, your victual, overplus of men and wages, with her fraught thither with
necessaries for the Planters, the Salt being there made, as also may the nets
and lines within a short time; if nothing may be expected but this, it might in
time equalize your Hollanders gains, if not exceed them, having their
fraughts always ready against the arrival of the ships, this would so
increase our shipping and sailers, and so encourage and employ a great part of
our Idlers and others that want employment fitting their qualities at home,
where they shame to do that they would do abroad, that could they but once
taffe the sweet fruits of their own labors, doubtless many thousands would
be advised by good discipline to take more pleasure in honest industry, then in
their humors of dissolute idleness.

A description of the Country in particular, and their situations.
But to return a little more to the particulars of this Country, which I
intermingle thus with my proiects and reasons, not being so sufficiently yet
acquainted in those parts, to write fully the estate of the Sea, the Air, the
Land, the Fruits, their Rocks, the People, the Government, Religion,
Territories, Limitations, Friends and Foes: But as I gathered from their
niggardly relations in a broken language, during the time I ranged those
Countries, etc. the most Northern part I was at, was the Bay of Pennobscot,
which is East and West, North and South, more then ten leagues: but such were
my occasions, I was constrained to be satisfied of them I found in the Bay,
that the River ran far up into the Land, and was well inhabited with many
people, but they were from their habitations, either fishing amongst the Isles,
or hunting the Lakes and Woods for Dear and Beuers: the Bay is full of great
Isles of one, two, six or eight miles in length, which diuides it into many
fair and excellent good Harbors. On the East of it are the Tarrentines, their
mortal enemies, where inhabit the French, as they report, that live with those
people as one Nation or Family: And Northwest of Pennobscot is Mecaddacut, at
the foot of a high Mountain, a kind of fortress against the Tarrentines,
adjoining to the high Mountains of Pennobscot, against whose feet does beat
the Sea; but over all the Land, Isles, or other impediments, you may well see
them fourteen or eighteen leagues from their situation. Segocket is the
next, then Nuskoucus, Pemmaquid, and Sagadahock: up this River, where was the
Western Plantation, are Aumoughcawgen, Kinnebeke, and diverse others, where are
planted some Corn fields. Along this River thirty or forty miles, I saw
nothing but great high clifts of barren Rocks ouergrowne with Wood, but where
the Saluages dwell there the ground is excellent salt, and fertile. Westward of
this River is the Country of Aucocisco, in the bottom of a large deep Bay,
full of many great Isles, which diuides it into many good Harbors. Sawocotuck
is the next, in the edge of a large Sandy Bay, which has many Rocks and Isles,
but few good Harbors, but for Barks I yet know; but all this Coast to
Pennobscot, and as far as I could see Eastward of it is nothing, but such
high craggy clifty Rocks and stony Isles, that I wonder such great Trees could
grow upon so hard foundations. It is a Country rather to affright then delight
one, and how to describe a more plain spectacle of desolation, or more barren,
I know not, yet are those rocky Isles so furnished with good Woods, Springs,
Fruits, Fish and Foul, and the Sea the strangest Fish Pond I ever saw, that it
makes me think, though the coast be rocky and thus affrightable, the Valleys
and Plains and interior parts may well notwithstanding be very fertile. But
there is no Country so fertile has not some part barren, and New England is
great enough to make many Kingdoms and Countries, were it all inhabited. As
you pass the coast still westward, Accominticus and Passataquack are two
convenient Harbors for small Barks; and a good Country within their craggy
clifts. Augoan is the next: this place might content a right curious judgment,
but there are many sands at the entrance of the Harbor, and the worst is, it
is imbayed too far from the deep Sea; here are many rising hills, and on
their tops and descents are many corn fields and delightful groves: On the
East is an I Will of two or three leagues in length, the one half plain marish
ground, fit for pasture or salt Ponds, with many fair high groves of Mulbery
trees and Gardens; there is also Oaks, Pines, Walnuts, and other wood to make
this place an excellent habitation, being a good and safe Harbor.

Nai^mkeck, though it be more rocky ground, for Augoan is sandy, not much
inferior neither for the harbor, nor any thing I could perceive but the
multitude of people: from hence does stretch into the Sea the fair headland
Tragabigzanda, now called Cape An, fronted with the three Isles we called the
three Turks heads; to the north of this does enter a great Bay, where we found
some habitations and Corn fields, they report a fair River and at least 30.
habitations does possess this Country. But because the French had got their
trade, I had no leisure to discover it: the Isles of Mattahunts are on the west
side of this Bay, where are many Isles and some Rocks that appear a great
height above the water like the Pyramides in Egypt, and amongst them many good
Harbors, and then the country of the Massachusits, which is the Paradise of
all those parts, for here are many Isles planted with Corn, Groves, Mulberies,
saluage Gardens and good Harbors, the Coast is for the most part high clayie
sandy clifts, the sea Coast as you pass shows you all along large Corn
fields, and great troops of well proportioned people: but the French having
remained here near six weeks, left nothing for us to take occasion to examine
the Inhabitants relations, viz. if there be three thousand people upon those
Isles, and that the River does pierce many days journey the entrails of that
Country: we found the people in those parts very kind, but in their f^ry no
less valiant, for upon a quarrel we fought with forty or fifty of them, till
they had spent all their Arrows, and then we took six or seven of their
Canowes, which toward the evening they ransomed for Beuer skins, and at
Quonahasit falling out there but with one of them, he with three others crossed
the Harbor in a Canow to certain rocks whereby we must pass, An Indian
slain, another shot.
and there let fly their Arrows for our shot, till we were out of danger, yet
one of them was slain, and another shot through his thigh.

Then come you to Accomacke an excellent good Harbor, good land, and no want
of any thing but industrious people: after much kindness, we fought also with
them, though some were hurt, some slain, yet within an hour after they became
friends. Cape Cod is the next presents it self; which is only a headland of
high hills, ouer-growne with shrubby Pines, hurts and such trash, but an
excellent harbor for all weathers. This Cape is made by the maine Sea on the
one side, and a great Bay on the other in form of a Sickell, on it does
inhabit the people of Pawmet, and in the bottom of the Bay them of Chawum:
toward the South and South-west of this Cape, is found a long and dangerous
shoule of rocks and sand, but so far as I incercled it, I found thirty
fathom water and a strong current, which makes me think there is a channel
about this Shoule, where is the best and greatest fish to be had winter and
summer in all the Country; but the Saluages say there is no Channel, but that
the Shoales begin from the maine at Pawm^t to the I Will of Nawset, and so
extends beyond their knowledge into the Sea. The next to this is Capawucke, and
those abounding Countries of Copper, Corn, People and Mineralls, which I went
to discover this last yee^e, but because I miscarried by the way I will leave
them till God please I have better acquaintance with them.

The Massachusetts they report sometimes have wars with the Bashabes of
Pennobscot, and are not always friends with them of Chawum and their alliance;
but now they are all friends, and have each trade with other so far as they
have society on each others frontiers, for they make no such voyages as from
Pennobscot to Cape Cod, seldom to Massachset. In the North as I have said they
have begun to plant Corn, whereof the south part has such plenty as they have
what they will from them of the North, and in the Winter much more plenty of
fish and foul, but both Winter and Summer has it in one part or other all the
year, being the mean and most indifferent temper betwixt heat and cold, of
all the Regions betwixt the Line and the Pole, but the Furs Northward are much
better, and in much more plenty then Southward.

The remarkablest Isles and Mountains for land Marks are these: The land
Marks.
the highest I Will is Sorico in the Bay of Pennobscot, but the three Isles, and
the Isles of Matinack are much further in the Sea: Merynacus is also three
plain Isles, but many great Rocks: Monahigan is a round high I Will, and close by
it Monanis, betwixt which is a small Harbor where we rid; in Damerils Isles is
such another, Sagadahocke is known by Satquin, and four or five Isles in their
mouth. Smiths Isles are a heap together, none near them against Accomintycus:
the three Turks heads, are three Isles, seen far to Sea-ward in regard of
the Head-land. The chief Head-lands, are only Cape Tragabigzanda, and Cape
Cod, now called Cape James, and Cape A^ne.

The chief Mountains, them of Pennobscot, the twinkling Mountain of
Acocisco, the great Mountain of Sassanow, and the high Mountain of
M^ss^c^uset. Each of which you shall find in the Map, their places, form, and
al^^^des. The waters are most pure, proceeding from the intrailes of rocky
Mounta^^es: the Herbs and Fruits are of many sorts and kinds, Herbs and Fruits
as Alkermes, Currants, Mu^beries, Vines, Respises, Gooseberies, Plums,
Wall-nuts, Chesse-nuts, Small-(...), Pumpions, Gourds, Strawberies, Beans,
Pease, and Maize; a kind or two of Flax, wherewith they make Nets, Lines, and
Ropes, both small and great, very strong for their quantities.

Woods.
Oak is the chief wood, of which there is great difference, in regard of the
soil where it grows, Fur, Pine, Wall-nut, Chesse-nut, Birtch, Ash, Elm,
Cipris, Cedar, Mulbery, Plum tree, Hazell, Saxefras, and many other sorts.

Birds.
Eagles, Grips, diverse sorts of Hawks, Craines, Geese, Brants, Cormorants,
Ducks, Cranes, Swannes, Sheldrakes, Teale, Meawes, Gulls, Turkies,
Diue-doppers, and many other sorts whose names I know not.

Fishes.
Whales, Grompus, Porkpisces, Turbut, Sturgion, Cod, Hake, Haddocke, Cole, Cuske
or small Ling, Sharke, Mackarell, Herring, Mullit, Base, Pinnacks, Cunners,
Perch, Eeles, Crabs, Lobsters, Mustels, Wilks, Oisters, Clamps, Periwinkels,
and diverse others, etc.

Beasts.
Moos, a beast bigger than a Stag, Dear red and fallow, Beuers, Wol^es, Foxes
both black and other, Aroughcunds, wild Cats, Bears, O^t^rs, M^^tins,
Fitches, Musquassus, and diverse other sorts of Vermin whose names I kn^w not:
all these and diverse other good things do here for want of use still increase
and decrease with little diminution, whereby they grow to that abundance, you
shall scarce find any bay, shallow shore or Coue of sand, where you may not
take many clamps or Lobsters, or both at your pleasure, and in many places load
your Boat if you please, nor Isles where you find not Fruits, Birds, Crabs, and
Mi^stels, or all of them; for taking at a low water Cod, Cuske, Hollibut,
Scare, Turbut, Mackarell, or such like are taken plentifully in diverse sandy
Bays, store of Mullit, Bases, and diverse other sorts of such excellent fish as
many as their Net can hold: no River where there is not plenty of Sturgion, or
Salmon, or both, all which are to be had in abundance observing but their
seasons: but if a man will go at Christmas to gather Cherries in Kent, though
there be plenty in Summer, he may be deceived; so here these plenties have each
their seasons, as I hau^ expressed; we for the most part had little but bread
and Vinegar, and though the most part of July when the fishing decayed, they
wrought all day, lay abroad in the Isles all night, and lived on what they
found, yet were not sick: But I would wish none long put himself to such
plunges, except necessity constrain it: yet worthy is that person to starve
that here cannot live if he have sense, strength and health, for there is no
such penury of these blessings in any place but that one hundred men may in two
or three hours make their provisions for a day, and he that has experience to
manage these affairs, with forty or thirty honest industrious men, might well
undertake (if they dwell in these parts) to subject the Saluages, and feed
daily two or three hundred men, with as good Corn, Fish, and Flesh as the
earth has of those kinds, and yet make that labor but their pleasure: A note
for men that have great spirits and small means.
provided that they have Engines that be proper for their purposes. Who can
desire more content that has small means, or but only his merit to advance
his fortunes, then to tread and plant that ground he has purchased by the
hazard of his life; if he have but the taste of virtue and magnanimity, what
to such a mind can be more pleasant then planting and building a foundation
for his posterity, got from the rude earth by Gods blessing and his own
industry without prejudice to any, if he have any grain of faith or zeal in
Religion, what can he do less hurtful to any, or more agreeable to God, then
to seek to convert those poor Saluages to know Christ and humanity, whose
labors with discretion will triple require thy charge and pain; what so truly
suits with honor and honesty, as the discovering things unknown, erecting
Towns, peopling Countries, informing the ignorant, reforming things unjust,
teaching virtue and gain to our native mother Country; a Kingdom to attend
her, find imploiment for those that are idle, because they know not what to
do: so far from wronging any, as to cause posterity to remember thee, and
remembering thee, ever honor that remembrance with praise. Consider what were
the beginnings and endings of the Monarchies of the Chaldeans, the Syrians, the
Grecians and Romans, but this one rule; what was it they would not do for the
good of their common weal, or their mother City? For example: Rome, what made
her such a Monarchesse, but only the adventures of her youth, not in riots at
home, but in dangers abroad, and the justice and judgment out of their
experiences when they grew aged; what was their ruin and hurt but this, the
excess of idleness, the fondness of parents, the want of experience in
Maiestrates, the admiration of their undeserved honors, the contempt of true
merit, their unjust iealousies, their politic incredulities, their
hypocritical seeming goodness and their deeds of secret lewdness; finally in
fine, growing only formal temporists, all that their Predecessors got in many
years they lost in a few days: those by their pains and virtues became Lords
of the world, they by their case and vices became slaves to their servants;
this is the difference betwixt the use of arms in the field, and on the
monuments of stones, the golden age and the leaden age, prosperity and misery,
justice and corruption, substance and shadows, words and deeds, experience and
imagination, making commonweals, and marring commonweals, the fruits of
virtue, and the conclusions of vice.

Then who would live at home idly, or think in himself any worth to live,
only to eat, drink and sleep, and so die; or by consuming that carelessly,
his friends got worthily, or by using that miserably that maintained virtue
honestly, or* for being descended nobly, and pine, with the vain va^nt of
great kindred in penury, or to maintain a silly show of bravery, toil out thy
heart, soul and time basely; by shifts, tricks, Cards and Dice, or by relating
news of other men's actions, sharke here and there for a dinner or supper,
deceive thy friends by fair promises and dissimulation, in borrowing where
thou never meanest to pay, offend the Laws, surfeit with excess, burden thy
Country, abuse thy self, despair in want, and then cosen thy Kindred, yea
even thy own brother, and wish thy Parents death (I will not say damnation) to
have their estates, though thou see what honors and rewards the world yet
has for them, that will seek them and worthily deserve them.

I would be sorry to offend, or that any should mistake my honest meaning; for
I wish good to all, hurt to none: but rich men for the most part are grown to
that dotage through their pride in their wealth, as though there were no
accident could end it or their life.

And what hellish care do such take to make it their own misery and their
Countries spoil, especially when there is most need of their imploiment,
drawing by all manner of inventions from the Prince and his honest Subjects,
even the vital spirits of their powers and estates: as if their baggs or brags
were so powerful a defense, the malicious could not assault them, when they
are the only bait to cause us not only to be assaulted, but betrayed and
murdered in our own security ere we will perceive it.

An example of secure covetousness.
May not the miserable ruin of Constantinople, their impregnable walls, riches
and pleasures last taken by the Turk, which were then but a bit in comparison
of their mightiness now, remember us of the effects of private covetousness,
at which time the good Emperor held himself rich enough, to have such rich
subjects, so formal in all excess of vanity, all kind of delicacy and
prodigality: his poverty when the Turk besieged the Citizens (whose
merchandising thoughts were only to get wealth) little conceiving the desperate
resolution of a valiant expert enemy, left the Emperor so long to his
conclusions, having spent all he had to pay his young raw discontented
Soldiers, that suddenly he, they, and their City were all a prey to the
devouring Turk, and what they would not spare for the maintenance of them who
adventured their lives to defend them, did serve only their enemies to torment
them, their friends and Country, and all Christendom to this present day. Let
this lamentable example remember you that are rich (seeing there are such great
thieves in the world to rob you) not grudge to lend some proportion to breed
them that have little, yet willing to learn how to defend you, for it is too
late when the deed is doing.

The Romans estate has been worse then this, for the mere covetousness and
extortion of a few of them so moved the rest, that not having any imploiment
but contemplation, their great judgments grew to so great malice, as
themselves were sufficient to destroy themselves by faction; let this move you
to embrace employment, for those whose educations, spirits and judgments want
but your purses, not only to prevent such accustomed dangers, but also to gain
more thereby then you have; and you fathers that are either so foolishly fond,
or so miserably covetous, or so wilfully ignorant, or so negligently careless,
as that you will rather maintain your children in idle wantonness till they
grow your masters, or become so basely unkind that they wish nothing but your
deaths, so that both sorts grow dissolute, and although you would wish them any
where to escape the Gallows and ease your cares, though they spend you fiere
one, two or three hundred pound a year, you would grudge to give half so much
in adventure with them to obtain an estate, which in a small time, but with a
little assistance of your providence, might be better then your own; but if
an Angel should tell you any place yet unknown can afford such fortunes, you
would not believe it, no more then Columbus was believed there was any such
land, as is now the well known abounding America, much less such large
Regions are yet unknown, as well in America, as in Africa and Asia, and Terra
i^cognita.

I have not been so ill bred but I have tasted of plenty and pleasure, as well
as want and misery; The Authors conditions.
nor does necessity yet, or occasion of discontent force me to these endeavors,
nor am I ignorant what small thanks I shall have for my pains, or that many
would have the world imagine them to be of great judgment, that can but
blemish these my designs, by their witty objections and detractions, yet (I
hope) my reasons with my deeds will so prevail with some, that I shall not
want imploiment in these affairs, to make the most blind see his own
senselessness and incredulity, hoping that gain will make them affect that
which Religion, Charity and the common good cannot. It were but a poor device
in me to deceive my self, much more the King and State, my Friends and
Country with these inducements, which seeing his Majesty has given permission,
I wish all sorts of worthy honest industrious spirits would understand, and if
they desire any further satisfaction, I will do my best to give it, not to
persuade them to go only, but go with them; not leave them there, but live
with them there: I will not say but by ill providing and undue managing, such
courses may be taken may make us miserable enough: but if I may have the
execution of what I have proiected, if they want to eat, let them eat or never
digest me; If I perform what I say, I desire but that reward out of the
gains may suit my pains, quality and condition, and if I abuse you with my
tongue, take my head for satisfaction. If any dislike at the years end,
defraying their charge, by my consent they should freely return; I fear not
want of company sufficient, were it but known what I know of these Countries,
and by the proof of that wealth I hope yearly to return, if God please to
bless me from such accidents as are beyond my power in reason to prevent; for
I am not so simple to think that ever any other motive then wealth will ever
erect there a common wealth, or draw company from their ease and humors at
home, to stay in New England to effect my purposes.

And lest any should think the toil might be insupportable, The Planters
pleasures and profit.
though these things may be had by labor and diligence; I assure my self
there are who delight extremely in vain pleasure, that take much more pains
in England to enjoy it, then I should do here to gain wealth sufficient, and
yet I think they should not have half such sweet content: for our pleasure
here is still gains, in England charges and loss; here nature and liberty
affoords us that freely which in England we want, or it costeth us dearly.
What pleasure can be more then being tired with any occasion a shore, in
planting Vines, Fruits, or Herbs, in contriuing their own grounds to the
pleasure of their own minds, their Fields, Gardens, Orchards, Buildings,
Ships, and other works, etc. to recreate themselves before their own doors
in their own Boats upon the Sea, where man, woman and child, with a small
hook and line, by angling may take diverse sorts of excellent Fish at their
pleasures; and is it not pretty sport to pull up two pence, six pence, and
twelve pence, as fast as you can hale and vere a line; he is a very bad Fisher
cannot kill in one day with his hook and line one, two, or three hundred Cods,
which dressed and dried, if they be sold there for ten shillings a hundred,
though in England they will give more then twenty, may not both servant, master
and Merchant be well content with this gain? if a man work but three days in
seven, he may get more then he can spend unless he will be exceedingly
excessive. Now that Carpenter, Mason, Gardener, Tailer, Smith, Sailer, Forger,
or what other, may they not make this a pretty recreation, though they fish but
an hour in a day, to take more then they can eat in a week, or if they will
not eat it, because there is so much better choice, yet sell it or change it
with the Fishermen or Merchants for any thing you want, and what sport does
yield a more pleasing content, and less hurt and charge then angling with a
hook, and crossing the sweet air from I Will to I Will, over the silent streams of
a calm Sea, wherein the most curious may find profit, pleasure and content.

Thus though all men be not fishers, yet all men whatsoever may in other
matters do as well, for necessity does in these cases so rule a common wealth,
and each in their several functions, as their labors in their qualities may
be as profitable because there is a necessary mutual use of all.

For Gentlemen, Imploiments for Gentlemen.
what exercise should more delight them then ranging daily these unknown
parts, using fowling and fishing for hunting and hawking, and yet you shall see
the wild Hawks give you some pleasure in seeing them stoop six or seven
times after one another an hour or two together, at the skults of Fish in the
fair Harbors, as those a shore at a foul, and never trouble nor torment your
selves with watching, mewing, feeding, and attending them, nor kill horse and
man with running and crying, See you not a Hawke; for hunting also, the Woods,
Lakes and Rivers afford not only chase sufficient for any that delights in
that kind of toil or pleasure, but such beasts to hunt, that besides the
delicacie of their bodies for food, their skins are so rich, as they will
recompeuce thy daily labor with a Captains pay.

Imploiments for Laborers.
For Laborers, if those that sow Hemp, Rape, Turnups, Parsnips, Carrats,
Cabidge, and such like; give twenty, thirty, forty, fifty shillings yearly
for an Acre of Land, and meat, drink, and wages to use it, and yet grow rich:
when better, or at least as good ground may be had and cost nothing but
labor; it seems strange to me any such should grow poor.

My purpose is not to persuade children from their parents, men from their
wives, nor servants from their masters; only such as with free consent may be
spared: but that each Parish, or Village, in City, or Country, that will but
apparel their fatherless children of thirteen or fourteen years of age,
or young married people that have small wealth to live on, here by their labor
may live exceeding well. Provided always, that first there be a sufficient
power to command them, houses to receive them, means to defend them, and meet
provisions for the^, for any place may be ouer-laine: and it is most necessary
to have a fortress (ere this grow to practice) and sufficient masters, of all
necessary, mecanicall qualities, to take ten or twelve of them for
Apprentises; the Master by this may quickly grow rich, these may learn their
trades themselves to do the like, to a general and an incredible benefit for
King and Country, Master and Servant.

Examples of the Spaniards.
It would be a History of a large volume, to recite the adventures of the
Spaniards and Portugals, their affronts and defeats, their dangers and
miseries; which with such incomparable honor, and constant resolution, so far
beyond belief, they have attempted and endured in their discoueries and
plantations, as may well condemn us of too much imbecillitie, sloth, and
negligence; yet the Authors of these new inventions were held as ridiculous for
a long time, as now are others that do but seek to imitate their unparalleled
virtues, and though we see daily their mountains of wealth (sprung from the
Plants of their generous endeavors) yet is our sensuality and untowardness
such, The causes of our defailments.
and so great, that we either ignorantly believe nothing, or so curiously
contest, to prevent we know not what future events; that we either so neglect,
or oppress and discourage the present, as we spoil all in the making, crop
all in the blooming; and building upon fair Sand rather then upon rough Rocks,
judge that we know not, govern that we have not, fear that which is not; and
for fear some should do too well, force such against their wills to be idle,
or as ill. And who is he has judgment, courage, and any industry or quality
with understanding, will leave his Country, his hopes at home, his certain
estate, his friends, pleasures, liberty, and the preferment sweet England does
afford to all degrees, were it not to advance his fortunes by enjoying his
deserts, whose prosperity once appearing, will encourage others: but it must
be cherished as a child, till it be able to go and understand it self, and
not corrected nor oppressed above it strength, ere it know wherefore. A child
can neither perform the office nor deeds of a man of strength, nor endure that
affliction he is able: nor can an Apprentise at the first perform the part of
a Master, and if twenty years be required to make a child a man, seven
years limited an Apprentise for his trade: if scarce an age be sufficient to
make a wise man a Statesman, and commonly a man dies ere he has learned to be
discreet; if perfection be so hard to be obtained, as of necessity there must
be Practice as well as Theoricke: Let no man then condemn this paradox
opinion, to say that half seven years is scarce sufficient for a good
capacity to learn in these affairs how to carry himself. And who ever
shall try in these remote places the erecting of a Colony, shall find at the
end of seven years occasion enough to use all his discretion: and in the
Interim, all the content, rewards, gains, and hopes, will be necessarily
required, to be given to the beginning, till it be able to creep, to stand,
and go, and to encourage desert by all possible means; yet time enough to
keep it from running, for there is no fear^ it will grow too fast, or ever to
any thing, except liberty, profit, honor, and prosperity there found, more
bind the Planters of those affairs in devotion to effect it; then bondage,
violence, tyranny, ingratitude, and such double dealing, as binds free men to
become slaves, and honest men turn knaves; which has ever been the ruin of
the most popular Commonweals, and is very unlikely ever well to begin anew.

Who sees not what is the greatest good of the Spaniard, The bliss of Spain.
but these new conclusions in searching those unknown parts of this unknown
world; by which means he dives even into the very secrets of all his
neighbors, and the most part of the world; and when the Portugals and
Spaniards had found the East and West Indies, how many did condemn themselves,
that did not accept of that honest offer of Noble Columbus, who upon our
neglect brought them to it, persuading our selves the world had no such places
as they had found: and yet ever since we find, they still (from time to time)
have found new Lands, new Nations, and Trades, and still daily do find, both
in Asia, Africa, Terra incognita, and America, so that there is neither
Soldier nor Mechanicke, from the Lord to the Beggar, but those parts affoords
them all imploiment, and discharges their native soil of so many thousands of
all sorts, that else by their sloth, pride, and imperfections, would long ere
this have troubled their neighbors, or have eaten the pride of Spain it self.

Now he knows little that knows not England may well spare many more people
then Spain, and is as well able to furnish them with all manner of
necessaries; and seeing for all they have, they cease not still to search for
that they have not, and know not; it is strange we should be so dull, as not
maintain that which we have, and pursue that we know: Surely, I am sure many
would take it ill, to be abridged of the titles and honors of their
predecessor^; when if but truly they would judge themselves, look how inferior
they are to their Noble Virtues, so much they are unworthy of their honors and
livings, which never were ordained for shows and shadows, to maintain
idleness and vice, but to make them more able to abound in honor, by Heroical
deeds of action, judgment, piety, and virtue. What was it both in their purse
and person they would not do, for the good of their Commonwealth, which might
move them presently to set out their spare children in these generous designs;
Religion above all things should move us, especially the Clergy, if we are
religious, to show our faith by our works, in converting those poor Saluages
to the knowledge of God, seeing what pains the Spaniards takes to bring them
to their adultered faith* Honor might move the Gentry, the valiant, and
industrious, and the hope and assurance of wealth, all, if we were that we
would seem, and be accounted; or be we so far inferior to other Nations, or
our spirits so far dejected from our ancient predecessors, or our minds so
upon spoil, piracy, and such villainy, as to serve the Portugal, Spaniard,
Dutch, French, or Turk, (as to the cost of Europe too many do) rather then
our God, our King, our Country, and our selves; excusing our idleness and our
base complaints by want of imploiment, when here is such choice of all sorts,
and for all degrees, in the planting and discovering these North parts of
America.

My second voyage to New England.
London, My second Voyage to New England.
and Sir Ferdinando Gorges, a noble Knight, and a great favorer of those
actions, who persuaded the reverend Deane of Exeter Doctor Sutliffe, and diverse
Merchants of the West, to entertain this Plantation. Much labor I had taken
to bring the Londoners and them to join together, because the Londoners have
most Money, and the Western men are most proper for fishing; and it is near
as much trouble, but much more danger, to fail from London to Plimoth, then
from Plimoth to New England, so that half the voyage would thus be saved, yet
by no means I could prevail, so desirous they were both to be Lords of this
fishing. Now to make my words more apparent by my deeds, to begin a Plantation
for a more ample trial of those conclusions, I was to have stayed there but
with sixteen men, whose names were;

Tho. Dirmer. Gent. John Gosling. Sold. Thomas Digby. Walter Chisell. were to
learn to be Sailers. Edw. Stallings. William Ingram. Daniel Baker. Robert
Miller. Daniel Cage. David Cooper. Adam Smith. And two Boys. Francis Abbot.
John Partridge. Tho. Watson.

I confess I could have wished them as many thousands, had all other
provisions been in like proportion; nor would I have had so few, could I have
had means for more: yet would God have pleased we had safely arrived, I doubted
not but to have performed more then I promised, and that many thousands ere
this would have bin there ere now. The ground and plot for our plantation.
The maine assistance next God I had to this small number, was my acquaintance
amongst the Saluages, especially with Dohoday, one of their greatest Lords, who
had lived long in England, and another called Tantum, I carried with me from
England, and set on shore at Cape Cod; by the means of this proud Saluage, I
did not doubt but quickly to have got that credit amongst the rest of the
Saluages and their alliance, to have had as many of them as I desired in any
design I intended, and that trade also they had by such a kind of exchange of
their Country Commodities, which both with ease and security might then have
been used with him and diverse others: I had concluded to inhabit and defend
them against the Tarentines, with a better power then the French did them;
whose tyranny did enforce them to embrace my offer with no small devotion: and
though many may think me more bold then wise, in regard of their power,
dexterity, treachery, and inconstancy, having so desperately assaulted, and
betrayed many others; I say but this (because with so many, I have many times
done much more in Virginia then I intended here, when I wanted that experience
Virginia taught me) that to me it seems no more danger then ordinary: and
though I know my self the meanest of many thousands, whose apprehensiue
inspection can pierce beyond the bounds of my abilities, into the hidden things
of Nature, Art, and Reason: yet I entreat such, give me leave to excuse my
self of so much imbecillitie, as to say, that in these eighteen years which
I have been conversant with these affairs, I have not learned, there is a
great difference betwixt the directions and judgment of experimental
knowledge, and the superficial conjecture of variable relation: wherein
rumor, humor, or misprision have such power, that often times one is enough to
beguile twenty, but twenty not sufficient to keep one from being deceived.
Therefore I know no reason but to believe my own eyes before any man's
imagination, that is but wrested from the conceits of my own proiects and
endeavors, but I honor with all affection, the counsel and instructions of
judicial directions, or any other honest advertisement, so far to observe,
as they tie me, not to the cruelty of unknown events. The means used to
prevent it and n^c.
These are the inducements that thus drew me to me to neglect all other
imploiments, and spend my time and best abilities in these adventures, wherein
though I have had many discouragements, by the ingratitude of some, the
malicious slanders of others, the falsenesse of friends, the treachery of
cowards, and slownesse of Adventurers.

Now you are to remember, How I set sail and returned.
as I returned first from New England at Plimoth, I was promised four good
ships ready prepared to my hand the next Christmas, and what conditions and
content I would desire, to put this business in practice, and arriving at
London, four more were offered me with the like courtesy. But to join the
Londoners and them in one, was most impossible; so that January with two
hundred pound in Chash for adventure, and six Gentlemen well furnished, I went
from London to the four ships were promised me at Plimoth, but I found no such
matter: and the most of those that had made such great promises, by the bad
return of the ship went for Gold, and their private emulations, were extinct
and qualified. Notwithstanding at last, with a labyrinth of trouble, though the
greatest of the burden lay-on me, and a few of my particular friends, I was
furnished with a ship of two hundred tons; and another of fifty: But ere I
had sailed one hundred and twenty leagues, she brake all her Masts, pumping
each watch five or six thousand strokes; only her spret-saile remained to
spoone before the wind, till we had re-accommodated a Iury-mast to return for
Plimoth, or founder in the Seas.

My Vice Admiral being lost, not knowing of this, proceeded her voyage; My
reimbarkement, encounter with Pirates, and imprisonment by the French.
now with the remainder of those provisions, I got out again in a small Bark
of sixty tuns with thirty men: for this of two hundred, and provision for
seventy, which were the sixteen before named, and fourteen other Sailers
for the ship; with those I set sail again the four and twentieth of June,
where what befell me (because my actions and writings are so public to the
world) envy still seeking to scandalize my endeavors, and seeing no power but
death can stop the chat of ill tongues, nor imagination of men's minds, lest my
own relations of those hard events might by some constructors be made
doubtful, I have thought it best to insert the examinations of those
proceedings, taken by Sir Lewis Stukeley, a worthy Knight, and Vice Admiral of
Devonshire, which was as follows.

The Examination of Daniel Baker, late Steward to Captain John Smith, in the
return of Plimoth, taken before Sir Lewis Stukeley Knight, the eighth of
December, 1615.
THE effect in brief was this: being chased by one Fry an English Pirat,
Edward Chambers the Master, John Miller his Mate, Thomas Digby the Pylot, and
diverse others importuned him to yield; much swaggering we had with them, more
then the Pirates, who agreed upon such fair conditions as we desired, which if
they broke, he vowed to sink rather then be abused. Strange they thought it,
that a Bark of threescore tuns with four guns should stand upon such terms,
they being eighty expert Seamen, in an excellent ship of one hundred and
forty tuns, and thirty six cast Pieces and Murderers: But when they knew our
Captain, so many of them had been his Soldiers, and they but lately run
from Tunis, where they had stolen this ship, wanted victual, and in combustion
amongst themselves, would have yielded all to his protection, or wafted us any
whither: but those mutinies occasioned us to reject their offer, which
afterward we all repented. For at Fiall we met two French Pirates, the one of
two hundred tuns, the other thirty: no disgrace would cause our mutiners fight,
till the Captain offered to blow up the ship rather then yield, till he had
spent all his powder: so that together by the ears we went, and at last got
clear of them for all their shot. At Flowers we were again chased with four
French men of war, the Admiral one hundred and forty tuns, and ninety men
well armed; the rest good ships, and as well provided: much parley we had, but
vowing they were Rochilers, and had a Commission from the King only to secure
true men, and take Portugals, Spaniards, and Pirates, and as they requested, our
Captain went to show his Commission, which was under the broad Seal, but
neither it nor their vows they so much respected, but they kept him, rifled
our ship, manned her with French men, and dispersed us amongst their Fleet:
within five or six days they were increased to eight or nine sail. At last
they surrendered us our ship, and most of our provisions, the defects they
promised the next day to supply, and did. Notwithstanding, there was no way but
our mutiners would for England, though we were as near New England, till the
major part resolved with our Captain to proceed. But the Admiral sending his
Boat for our Captain, they espying a Sail, presently gave chase, whereby our
mutiners finding an opportunity in the night ran away, and thus left our
Captain in his Cap, Bretches, and Wast-coat, alone among the French men: his
clothes, arms, and what he had, our mutiners shared among them, and with a
false excuse, faining for fear lest he should turn man of war, they
returned for Plimoth: fifteen of us being Land-men, not knowing what they did.
Daniel Cage, Edward Stalings, Walter Chisell, David Cooper, Robert Miller, and
John Partridge, upon oath affirms this for truth before the Vice Admiral.

A double treachery.
Now the cause why the French detained me again, was the suspicion this
Chambers and Minter gave them, that I would revenge my self upon the Bank, or
in New found land, of all the French I could there encounter, and how I would
have fired the ship, had they not ouer-perswaded me: and that if I had but
again my Arms, I would rather sink by them, then they should have from me
but the value of a Biscuit; and many other such like tales to catch but
opportunity in this manner to leave me, and thus they returned to Plimoth, and
perforce with the French men I thus proceeded. A fleet of nine French men of
war, and fights with the Spaniard.
Being a fleet of eight or nine sail, we watched for the West Indies fleet,
till ill weather separated us from the other eight: still we spent our time
about the Isles of the Assores, where to keep my perplexed thoughts from too
much meditation of my miserable estate, I writ this Discourse, thinking to have
sent it to you of his Majesty's Council by some ship or other, for I saw their
purpose was to take all they could. At last we were chased by one Captain
Barra, an English Pirat in a small ship, with some twelve Piece of Ordnance,
about thirty men, and near all starued. They fought by courtesy relief of
us, who gave them such fair promises, as at last they betrayed Captain
Wollistone his Lieutenant, and four or five of his men aboard us, and then
provided to take the rest perforce. Now my part was to be prisoner in the
Gun-roome, and not to speak to any of them upon my life, yet had Barra
knowledge what I was. Then Barra perceiving well those French intents, made
ready to fight, and Wollistone as resolutely regarded not their threats, which
caused us demurre upon the matter longer some sixteen hours, and then
returned them again Captain Wollistone and all their Prisoners, and some
victual also upon a small composition: But whilst we were bartering thus with
them; a Caruill before our faces got under the Castle of Gratiosa, from whence
they beat us with their Ordnance.

A prise of Fish.
The next we took was a small English man of Poole from New found land: the
great Cabben at this present was my prison, from whence I could see them
pillage these poor men of all that they had, and half their fish: when he
was gone, they sold his poor clothes at the maine Mast by an outcry, which
scarce gave each man seven pence a piece.

A Scotch prise.
Not long after we took a Scot fraught from Saint Michaels to Bristow, he had
better fortune then the other; for having but taken a Boats loading of Sugar,
Marmelade, Suckets, and such like, we descried four sail, after whom we
stood, who forling their maine Sails attended us to fight, but our French
spirits were content only to perceive they were English red Crosses. Within a
very small time after we chased 4. Spanish ships that came from the Indies, we
fought with them four or five hours, tore their sails and sides with many a
shot betwixt wind and weather, yet not daring to board them, lost them, for
which all the Sailers ever after hated the Captain as a professed coward.

A prise worth 36000 crowns.
A poor Caruill of Brasile was the next we chased; and after a small fight,
thirteen or fourteen of her men being wounded, which was the better half,
we took her with three hundred and seventy chests of Sugar, one hundred hides,
and thirty thousand Rialls of eight.

The next was a ship of Holland, which had lost her Consorts in the Streights
of Magilans, going for the South sea, she was put roomy, she also these French
men with fair promises, cunningly betrayed to come aboard them to show their
Commission, and so made prise of all: the most of the Dutchmen we took aboard
the Admiral, and manned her with Frenchmen, that within two or three nights
after ran away with her for France, the wounded Spaniards we set on shore on
the I Will of Tercera* the rest we kept to sail the Caruill.

A prise worth 300000 crowns.
Within a day or two after, we met a West Indies man of war, of one hundred
and sixty tuns, a fore noone we fought with her, and then took her with one
thousand one hundred Hides, fifty Chests of Cutchancle, fourteen Coffers of
wedges of Silver, eight thousand Rialls of eight, and six Coffers of the King
of Spaines Treasure, besides the good pillage and rich Coffers of many rich
Passengers.

Two months they kept me in this manner to manage their fights against the
Spaniards, and be a Prisoner when they took any English. Now though the
Captain had often broke his promise, which was to put me on shore the Isles, or
the next ship he took; yet at the last he was contented I should go in the
Caruill of Sugar for France, himself seeming as resolved to keep the Seas,
but the next morning we all set sail for France, and that night we were
separated from the Admiral and the rich prise by a storm. Within two days
after we were hailed by two West Indies men: but when they saw us waise them
for the King of France* they gave us their broad sides, shot through our maine
Mast, and so left us. Having lived now this Summer amongst those French men of
war, with much ado we arrived at the Gulion, not far from Rotchell: where
in stead of the great promises they always fed me with, of double satisfaction
and full content, and ten thousand Crowns was generally concluded I should
have; they kept me five or six days Prisoner in the Caruill, accusing me to be
he that burnt their Colony in New France, to force me to give them a discharge
before the Judge of the Admiraltie, and stand to their courtesies for
satisfaction, or lie in prison, or a worse mischief: Indeed this was in the
time of combustion, that the Prince of Candy was with his Army in the field,
and every poor Lord, or men in authority, as little Kings of themselves: For
this injury was done me by them that set out this voyage (not by the Sailers)
for they were cheated of all as well as I, by a few Officers aboard, and the
owners on shore.

But to prevent this choice, My escape from the French men.
in the end of such a storm that beat them all under hatches, I watched my
opportunity to get a shore in their Boat, whereinto in the dark night I
secretly got, and with a half Pike that lay by me, put a drift for Rat I Will:
but the current was so strong, and the Sea so great, I went a drift to Sea,
till it pleased God the wind so turned with the tide, that although I was all
this fearful night of gusts and rain in the Sea the space of twelve hours,
when many ships were driven ashore, and diverse split: (and being with skulling
and bayling the water tired, I expected each minute would sink me) at last I
arrived in an O^zy I Will by Charowne, where certain Fowlers found me near
drowned, and half dead, with water, cold, and hunger. My Boat I pawned to
find means to get to Rotchell; where I understood our man of war and the rich
prize, wherein was the Cap. called Mounsieur Poyrune, and the thirty thousand
Rialls of eight we took in the Caruill, was split, the Captain drowned and
half his Company the same night, within six or seven leagues of that place;
from whence I escaped in the little Boat by the mercy of God, far beyond all
men's reason or my expectation, arriving at Rotchell: What law I had.
upon my complaint to the Judge of the Admiraltie, I found many good words and
fair promises, and ere long many of them that escaped drowning, told me the
news they heard of my own death: These I arresting, their several
examinations did so confirm my complaint, it was held proof sufficient. All
which being performed according to their order of justice, from under the
Judges hand, I presented it to Sir Thomas Edmonds, then Ambassador at
Bordeaux, where it was my chance to see the arrival of the Kings great marriage
brought from Spain.

Here it was my good fortune to meet my old friend Master Crampton, that no
less grieved at my loss, then willingly to his power did supply my wants, and
I must confess, I was more beholden to the French men that escaped drowning in
the man of war, Madam Chanoyes at Rotchell, and the Lawyers of Bordeaux, then
all the rest of my Countrymen I met in France. Of the wrack of the rich
prise, some three thousand six hundred crowns worth of goods came ashore, and
was saved with the Caruill, which I did my best to arrest: the Judge promised I
should have Justice, what will be the conclusion as yet I know not. But under
the color to take Pirates and the West-Indie men (because the Spaniards will
not suffer the French to trade in the West Indies) any goods from thence,
though they take them upon the Coast of Spain are lawful prize, or from any
of his Teritories out of the limits of Europe: and as they betrayed me, though
I had the broad-seale, so did they rob and pillage twenty sail of English men
more, besides them I knew not of the same year.

My return for England.
Leaving thus my business in France I returned to Plimoth, to find them had
thus buried me amongst the French; and not only buried me, but with so much
infamy as such treacherous cowards could suggest to excuse their villainies. The
Chiefetaines of this mutiny that I could find, I laid by the heels, the rest
like themselves confessed the truth, as you have heard. Now how I have or could
prevent these accidents, having no more means, I rest at your censures; but to
proceed to the matter; yet must I sigh and say, How often has Fortune in the
world (think I) brought slavery, freedom, and turned all diversely.
Newfoundland I have heard at the first, was held as desperate a fishing as this
I project for New England, Placentia, and the Bank nere also as doubtful to
the French: But for all the disasters happened me, the business is the same it
was, and the five ships went from London, whereof one was reported more then
three hundred tons, found fish so much, that neither Izeland man, nor
Newfoundland man I could hear of has bin there, will go any more to either
place, if they may go thither. So that upon the good return of my
Vice Admiral, The success of my Vice Admiral.
this year are gone 4 or 5 sails, and from London as many, only to make
voyages of profit: where from Plimoth, as if all the English had bin there till
my return, put all their returns together, they would scarce make one a
savor of near a dozen I could nominate, except one sent by Sir Francis Popam;
though there be fish sufficient, as I am persuaded, to fraugh yearly four or
five hundred Sail, or as many as will go. For this fishing stretches along
the Sea Coast from Cape James to Newfoundland, which is seven or eight hundred
miles at the least, and has his course in the deepes, and by the shore, all
the year long, keeping their hants and feedings, as the beasts of the field,
and the birds of the air. But all men are not such as they should be, that
have undertaken those voyages: All the Romans were not Scipiocs, nor
Carthagenians Hanibals, nor all the Genw^ses Columbusses* nor all the Spaniards
Courteses: had they diued no deeper in the secrets of their discoueries then
we, or stopped at such doubts and poor accidental chances, they had never
been remembered as they are, yet had they no such certainties to begin as we.

But to conclude, Adam and Eve did first begin this innocent work to plant the
earth to remain to posterity, but not without labor, trouble, and industry.
Noe and his family began again the second Plantation; and their seed as it
still increased, has still planted new Countries, and one Country another,
and so the world to that estate it is: but not without much hazard, travel,
mortalities, discontents, and many disasters. Had those worthy Fathers, and
their memorable offspring, not been more diligent for us now in these ages,
then we are to plant that yet are unplanted for the after livers. Had the seed
of Abraham, our Savior Christ, and his Apostles, exposed themselves to no more
dangers to teach the Gospel then we, even we our selves had at this present
been as saluage, and as miserable as the most barbarous Saluage, yet
vnciuilized. The Hebrews and Lacedaemonians, the Goths, the Grecians, the
Romans, and the rest, what was it they would not undertake to enlarge their
Teritories, enrich their subjects, resist their enemies. Those that were the
founders of those great Monarchies and their virtues, were no siluered idle
golden Pharisees, but industrious Iron steeled Publicans: They regarded more
provisions and necessaries for their people, then Jewels, riches, ease, or
delight for themselves; Riches were their Servants, not their Masters. They
ruled (as Fathers, not as Titants) their people as Children, not as Slaves;
there was no disaster could discourage them; and let none think they
incountred not with all manner of encumbrances. And what has ever been the
work of the greatest Princes of the Earth, but planting of Countries, and
ciuilizing barbarous and inhumane Nations to civility and humanity, whose
eternal actions fills our Histories.

Lastly, the Portugals and Spaniards, whose everliving actions before our eyes
will testify with them our idleness, and ingratitude to all posterities, and
the neglect of our duties, in our piety and religion. We owe our God, our King
and Country, and want of Charity to those poor Saluages, whose Country we
challenge, use and possess; except we be but made to use, and mar what our
forefathers made, or but only tell what they did, or esteem our selves too
good to take the like pains. Was it virtue in them to provide that does
maintain us, and baseness in us to do the like for others? Surely no. Then
seeing we are not borne for our selves, but each to help other, and our
abilities are much alike at the hour of our birth, and the minute of our
death: seeing our good deeds or our bad by faith in Christ's merits, is all we
have, to carry our souls to heaven or hell. Seeing honor is our lives
ambition, and our ambition after death to have an honorable memory of our life:
and seeing by no means we would be abated of the dignities and glories of our
predecessors, let us imitate their virtues to be worthily their successors: to
conclude with Lucretius,

Its want of reason, or its reasons want
Which doubts the mind and judgment, so does dant,
That those beginnings makes men not to grant.
John Smith writ this with his own hand.

Here follows a brief Discourse of the trials of New England, with certain
Observations of the Hollanders use and gain by fishing, and the present estate
of that happy Plantation, begun but by sixty weak men, in the year of our
Lord 1620. and how to build a fleet of good ships to make a little Navy Royal,
by the former Author.
HE says, that it is more then four and forty years ago, M. D^e his report.
and it is more then forty years ago since he writ it; that the Herring
Busses out of the Low Countries under the King of Spain, were five hundred,
besides one hundred French men, and three or four hundred sail of Flemings.
The Coast of Wales and Lancashire was used by 300 Sail of Strangers. Ireland
at Beltamore, fraughted yearly three hundred sail of Spaniards, where King
Edward the sixth intended to have made a strong Castle, because of the straight
to have tribute for fishing. Black Rock was yearly fished by three or four
hundred sail of Spaniards, Portugals, and Biskiners.

The Hollanders raise yearly by Herring, Cod, and Ling, The benefit of
fishing, as Mr Gentleman and others report.
thirty thousand pounds: English and French, by Salt-fish, Poore-Iohn, Salmons,
and Pilchards, three hundred thousand pounds: Hambrough and the Sound, for
Sturgion, Lobsters and Eeles, one hundred thousand pounds: Cape Blanke for
Tunny and Mullit, by the Biskiners and Spaniards, thirty thousand pounds.

That the Duke of Medina receives yearly tribute of the Fishers, for Tunny,
The Records of Holland and other learned obseruers
Mallit, and Porgos, more then ten thousand pounds. Lubecke has seven hundred
ships; Hambrough six hundred; Emden lately a Fisher town, one thousand four
hundred, whose customs by fishing has made them so powerful as they be.
Holland and Zeland not much greater then Yorkshire, has thirty walled Towns,
four hundred Villages, and twenty thousand sail of Ships and Hoies; three
thousand six hundred are Fishermen, whereof one hundred are Doggers, seven
hundred Pinkes and Well-Boats, seven hundred Fraud-boats, Britters, and
Tode-boats, with thirteen hundred Busses, besides three hundred that yearly
fish about Yarmouth, where they sell their fish for Gold: and fifteen years
ago they had more then an hundred and sixteen thousand Sea-faring-men.

These fishing ships do take yearly two hundred thousand last of fish, twelve
barrels to a last, which amounts to 300000. pounds by the fisher men's price,
that 14. years ago did pay for their tenths three hundred thousand pound,
which venting in Pumerland, Sprustia, Denmark, Lefeland, Russia, Swethland,
Germany, Netherlands, England, or else where, etc. makes their returns in a
year about threescore and ten hundred thousand pounds, which is seven
millions; and yet in Holland there is neither matter to build ships nor
merchandise to set them forth, yet by their industry they as much increase as
other nations decay; but leaving these uncertainties as they are, of this I am
certain.

That the coast of England, Scotland and Ireland, the North Sea with Island and
the Sound, Newfound-land and Cape Blanke, do serve all Europe, as well the
land towns as ports, and all the Christian shipping, with these sorts of
staple fish, which is transported from whence it is taken many a thousand mile,
viz. Herring, salt Fish, Poore-Iohn, Sturgion, Mullit, Tunny, Porgos, Cauiare,
Buttargo.

Now seeing all these sorts of fish, or the most part of them may be had in a
land more fertile, temperate and plentiful of all necessaries, for the
building of ships, boats and houses, and the nourishment of man, the seasons
are so proper, and the fishings so near the habitations we may there make,
that New England has much advantage of the most of those parts, to serve all
Europe far cheaper then they can, who at home have neither wood, salt, nor
food, but at great rates, at Sea nothing but what they carry in their ships, an
hundred or two hundred leagues from the habitation. But New-Englands fishings
is near land, where is help of Wood, Water, Fruits, Fowls, Corn or other
refreshings needful, and the Terceras, Mederas, Canaries, Spain, Portugal,
Prouaues, Sauoy, Sicillia, and all Italy, as convenient markets for our dry
fish, green fish, Sturgion, Mullit, Cauiare and Buttargo, as Norway,
Swethland, L^^tuania or Germany for their Herring, which is hear also in
abundance for taking; they returning but Wood, Pitch, Tar, Sope-ashes, Cordage,
Flax, Wax, and such like commodities; we Wines, Oiles, Sugars, Silks, and
such merchandise as the Straits offoord, whereby our profit may equalize
theirs, besides the increase of shipping and Mariners: and for proof hereof.

London: also the next year 1615. London, and I with two more from Plimoth,
with all our accidents, successes and returns: France, the Londoners for all
their loss by the Turks, sent four ships more; four more also went from
Plimoth; France, I was persuaded again to go to Plimoth with diverse of my
friends with one hundred pound for our adventures besides our charges, but we
found all things as untoward as before, and all their great promises nothing
but air: yet to prepare the voyage against the next year, having acquainted a
great part of the Nobility with it, and ashamed to see the Prince his Highness
till I had done some what worthy his Princely view; I spent that Summer in
visiting the Cities and Towns of Bristoll, Exeter, Bastable, Bodnam, Perin,
Foy, Milborow, Saltash, Dartmouth, My suit to the Country.
Absom, Tattnesse, and the most of the Gentry in Cornwall and Devonshire,
giving them Books and Maps, showing how in six months the most of those ships
had made their voyages, and some in less, and with what good success; by
which incitation they seemed so well contented, as they promised twenty sail
of ships should go with me next year, and in regard of my pains, charge,
and former losses, the western Commissioners in behalf of themselves and the
rest of the Company, and them hereafter that should be joined to them,
contracted with me by articles indented under our hands, to be Admiral of that
Country during my life, and in the renewing of their Letters Patent so to be
nominated. Half the fruits of our endeavors to be theirs, the rest our own;
being thus engaged, now the business is made plain and likely to prosper,
some of them would not only forget me and their promises, but also obscure me,
as if I had never been acquainted in the business, but I am not the first
they have deceived.

Plimoth, but by reason of their disagreement, the season so wasted, as only
two went forward, the one being of two hundred tons, returned well fraught to
Plimoth, and her men in health, within five months; the other of fourscore
tons went for bilbow with dry fish and made a good return. In this voyage
Edward Rowcroft, alias Stallings, a valiant Soldier, that had been with me in
Virginia, and was with me also when I was betrayed by the French, was sent
again in those ships, and having some wrong offered him there by a French man,
he took him, and as he writ to me, went with him to Virginia with fish, to
trade with them for such commodities as they might spare: he had not past ten
or twelve men, and knew both those countries well, yet he promised me the next
spring to meet me in New England, but the ship and he both perished in Virginia.

Plimoth, so disagreed, there went but one of two hundred tons, who stayed in
the Country about six weeks, which with eight and thirty men and boys had her
fraught, which she sold at the first penny for 2100. besides the Furs: so
that every poor Sailer that had but a single share had his charges and
sixteen pound ten shillings for his seven months work. Master Thomas
Di^m-ire an understanding and industrious Gentleman, that was also with m^
amongst the French men, having lived about a year in Newfoundland, returning
to Plimoth, went for New England in this ship, so much approved of this
Country, that he stayed there with five or six men in a little Boat, finding
two or three French men amongst the Saluages who had lost their ship, augmented
his company, with whom he ranged the Coast to Virginia, where he was kindly
welcomed and well refreshed, thence returned to New England again, where
having been a year, in his back return to Virginia he was so wounded by the
Saluages, he died upon it; let not men attribute these their great adventures,
and untimely deaths to vnfortunatenesse, but rather wonder how God did so long
preserve them with so small means to do so much, leaving the fruits of their
labors to be an encouragement to those our poor undertakings, and as warnings
for us not to undertake such great works with such small means, and this for
advantage as they writ unto me, that God had laid this Country open for us, and
slain the most part of the inhabitants by civil wars and a mortal disease,
for where I had seen one hundred or two hundred Saluages, there is scarce ten
to be found, and yet not any one of them touched with any sickness but one
poor French man that died;

They say this plague upon them thus sore fell,
It was because they pleased not Tantum well.
for wages any where. Now although these former ships have not made such good
voiages as they expected, by sending opinionated unskillful men, that had not
experienced diligence to save that they took, nor take that there was, which
now patience and practice has brought to a reasonable kind of perfection; in
despite of all detractors and calumniations the Country yet has satisfied
all, the defect has been in their using or abusing it, not in it self nor
me: But,

Adue desert, for fortune makes provision
For Knaves and Fools, and men of base condition.
My suit to the City.
Now all these proofs and this relation I now called New-Englands trial. I
caused two or three thousand of them to be printed, one thousand with a great
many Maps both of Virginia and New England. I presented to thirty of the chief
Companies in London at their Halls, desiring either generally or particularly
(them that would) to embrace it, and by the use of a stock of five thousand
pound, to ease them of the superfluity of the most of their companies that had
but strength and health to labor; near a year I spent to understand their
resolutions, which was to me a greater toil and torment, then to have been in
New England about my business but with bread and water, and what I could get
there by my labor; but inconclusion, seeing nothing would be effected, I was
contented as well with this loss of time and charge as all the rest.

A Plantation in New England.
London and other places, provided two ships, the one or a hundred and
threescore tons* the other of threescore and ten, they left the Coast of
England the two and thirtieth of August, with about a hunred and twenty
persons, but the next day the lesser ship sprung a leake, that forced their
return to Plimoth, where discharging her and twenty passengers; with the
greater ship and one hundred passengers besides Sailers, they set sail again
the sixth of September, and the ninth of November fell with Cape James, but
being pestred nine weeks in this leaking unwholesome ship, lying wet in their
Cabins, most of them grew very weak and weary of the Sea; then for want of
experience, ranging two and again six weeks before they found a place they
liked to dwell on, forced to lie on the bare ground without couerture, forty of
them died, and threescore were left in very weak estate at the ships coming
away, about the fifth of April following, and arrived in England the sixth of
May. Though the Harbor be good, the shore is so shallow, they were forced to
wade a great way up to the knees in water, and used that that did them much
hurt; and little fish they found but Whailes, and a great kind of Muftell so
fat, that few did eat of them that were not sick: these miseries occasioned
some discord, and gave some appearance of faction, but all was so reconciled,
that they united themselves by common consent under their hands, to a kind of
combination of a body politic, by virtue whereof to inact and constitute laws
and ordinances, and Officers from time to time, as should be thought most
convenient for their general good.

Sixteen or seventeen days they could do little for want of their Shallop
which was amending, Their first iourny by land.
yet Captain Miles Standish, unto whom was joined in Council, William
Bradfor, Stephen Hopkins and Edward Tilly, went well armed a shore, and by that
time they had gone a mile, met five or six Indians that fled into the Woods: we
traced them by the footing eight or ten miles, then the night approaching we
made a fire, by which we lay that night, and the next morning followed the
Saluages by their tract, thinking to find their habitations, but by the way we
found a Dear amongst many fair springs of water, where we refreshed our
selves; then we went a shore and made a fire, that they at the ship might
perceive where we were, and so marched to a place where we supposed was a
River; by the way we saw many Vines, Saxefras, haunts of Dear and Foul, and
some fi^ty Acres of plain ground had been planted by the Indians, where were
some of their graves; from thence we followed a path that brought us through
three or four fields had been planted that year; in one grave we dug, we
found a basket or two of Indian Corn, so much as we could carry we took with
us, the rest we buried as we found it, and so proceeded to the place we
intended, but we found it not such a Harbor as we expected; and so we
returned, till the night caused us take up our lodging under a tree, where it
rained six or seven hours: the next morning as we wandered, we passed by a
tree, where a young sprig was bowed down over a bough, and some Acornes
strewed under it, which was one of their Gins to a catch a Dear, and as we
were looking at it, Bradford was suddenly caught by the leg in a noosed Rope,
made as artificially as ours; as we passed we see a lease of Bucks, sprung some
Partriges, and great flocks of wild Geese and Ducks, and so we returned well
wearied to our ship.

Master Jones our Master with four and thirty men, Their first iourny by
Shallop.
also went up and down in the frost and snow, two or three days in the
extremity of the cold, but could find no harbor; only among the old graves we
got some ten bushels of Corn, some Beans, and a bottle of Oil; and had we
not thus happily found it, we had had no Corn for seed, so that place we ever
called Corne-hill; the next day Master Jones with the Corn and our weakest men
returned to the Ship, but eighteen of us quartered there that night, and in
the morning following the paths, we found in the Snow in a field a greater
hill or grave then the rest, diging it we found first a Mat, under that a
board three quarters long, painted and carved with three Tyns at the top like a
Croner, between the Mats also were Bowls, Traies and Dishes and such trash,
at length we found a fair new Mat, and under that two bundles, the one biggar
the other less; in the greater we found a great quantity of fine red powder
like a kind of imbalmement, and yielded a strong but no offensive smell, with
the bones and skull of a man that had fine yellow hare still on it, and some of
the flesh unconsumed, a Knife, a Pack-needle, and two or three old Iron things
was bound up in a Sailers canuase Cassocke, also a pair of cloth Breeches; in
the less bundle we found likewise of the same powder, and the bones and head
of a little child; about the legs and other parts of it was bound strings and
braslets of white beads, there was also a little Bow, and some other odd
knacks, the prettiest we took, and covered again the corpse as they were: not
far from thence were two of their houses, where were a great deal of their
miserable household stuff, which we left as we found, and so returned to our
Boat, and lay aboard that night.

Many arguments we had to make here our Plantation or not; in the Intrim,
Accidents.
Mistress White was brought to bed of a young son, which was called Perigrine:
and a Sailer shooting at a Whale, his piece flew in pieces stock and all, yet
he had no hurt. A foolish boy discharging his fathers piece hard by half a
barrel of Powder, and many people by it, it pleased God it escaped firing, so
that no hurt was done.

But to make a more certain discovery where to seat our selves, Captain
Standish, Their second journey by water to find a place to plant in.
Master Caruer, William Branford, Edward Winsloe, John Tilly, Edward Tilly,
with diverse others to the number of seventeen, upon the sixth of December set
sail, and having sailed six or seven leagues, we espied eight or ten Saluages
about a dead grampus: still following the shore we found two or three more cast
up by the ill weather, many we see in the water, therefore we called it Grampus
Bay: Ships may ride well in it, but all the shore is very shallow slats of
sand; at last seven or eight of us went a shore, many fields we saw where the
Saluages had inhabited, and a burial place encompassed with a Palizado, so we
returned to our Shallop, in the night we heard a hideous cry and howling of
Wolves and Foxes; in the morning as we were ready to go into our Shallop, one
of our men being in the woods, came running crying, Indians, Indians, and with
all their Arrows flying amongst us, some of our men being in the boat, and
their Arms a shore, so well it chanced, Their first fight with the Saluages.
Captain Standish with two or three more discharged their pieces till the rest
were ready, one Saluage more stout then the rest kept under a tree, till he had
shot three or four Arrows, and endured three or four Musket shot, but at
last they all fled, this was about break of day in the morning when they saw
us, and we not them.

The description of their place to plant in.
Having the wind fair, we sailed along the coast 8. or 10. leagues, thinking to
have got to a Harbor where one of our company had been, within 8. leagues of
Cape Cod* for neither cricke nor Harbor in this bay we could find; and the
wind so increased, our Rudder broke, and our Mast flew ouer-boord, that we were
in danger to be cast away, but at last it pleased God we were in a harbor we
knew not, thinking it one we were acquainted with, this we found to be an I Will
where we rid that night, and having well viewed the land about it, and founded
the Bay to be a good Harbor for our ship, compassed with good land, and in it
two fair Isles, where there is in their seasons innumerable store of all sorts
of fish and foul, good water, much plain land, which has been planted; with
this news we returned to our ship, and with the next fair wind brought her
thither, being but within the sight of Cape Cod; in the mean time Goodwife
Alderton was delivered of a son, Another Boy borne in New England. Their
first Plantation.
but dead borne. Upon the 28. of December, so many as could went to work upon
the hill, where we purposed to build our Platform for our ordnance, which does
command all the Plain and the Bay, and from whence we may see far into the
Sea, and be easily impailed, so in the afternoon we went to measure out the
grounds, and divided our company into 19 families, alotting to every person
half a poule in breadth and three in length, and so we cast lots where every
man should lie, which we staked out, thinking this proportion enough at the
first to impale for lodgings and gardens.

Two fair Lakes.
Francis Billington from the top of a tree seeing a great water some three
miles from us in the land, went with the Masters Mate, and found it two great
Lakes of fresh water, the bigger five or six miles in circuit, and an I Will in it
of a Cables length square; the other three miles in compass, full of fish and
foul, and two brooks issuing from it, which will be an excellent help in time
for us, where they saw seven or eight Indian houses, Two men lost themselves in
the woods.
but no people. Four being sent a mile or two from our plantation, two of them
straggling into the woods was left, for coming to a Lake of water they found a
great Dear, having a mastiue Bitch and a Spanell with them, they followed so
far they could not find the way back, that afternoon it rained, and did
freeze and snow at night; their apparel was very thin, and had no weapons but
two sickles, nor any victuals, nor could they find any of the Saluages
habitations; when the night came they were much perplexed that they had no
other bed then the earth, nor couerture then the skies, but that they heard, as
they thought, two Lions roaring a long time together very nigh them, so not
knowing what to do, they resolved to climb up into a tree, though that would
be an intolerable cold lodging, expecting their coming they stood at the
trees root, and the bitch they held fast by the neck, for she would have
been gone to the Lions or what they were, that as it chanced came not nigh
them, so they watched the tree that extreme cold night, and in the morning
traveling again, passing by many lakes, brooks and woods, and in one place
where the Saluages had burnt 4. or 5. miles in length, which is a fine champion
Country, in the afternoon they discovered the two Isles in their Bay, and so
that night near famished they got to their Plantation, from whence they had
sent out men every way to seek them; that night the house they had built and
thatched, where lay their arms, bedding, powder, etc. took fire and was
burnt, the Coast is so shoule, the ship rides more then a mile from the Fort,
but God be thanked no man was hurt though much was burnt.

All this time we could not have conference with a Saluage, Their first
conference with a Saluage.
though we had many times seen them and had many alarums, so that we drew a
Council, and appointed Captain Standish to have the command of all martial
actions, but even in the time of consultation the Saluages gave an alarm: the
next day also as we were agreeing upon his orders, came a tall Saluage boldly
amongst us, not fearing any thing, and kindly bad us welcome in English; he was
a Sagamo, toward the North, where the ships use to fish, and did know the
names of most of the Masters that used thither: such victual as we had we gave
him, being the first Saluage we yet could speak with, he told us this place
where we were was called Patuxet, and that all the people three or four years
ago there died on the plague: in a day or two we could not be rid of him, then
he returned to the Massasoyts from whence he came, where is some sixty people,
but the Nawsits are 100. strong, which were they encountered our people at the
first. Two days after this Samoset, The second conference.
for so was his name, came again, and brought five or six of the Massasoyts
with him, with certain skins, and certain tools they had got that we had
left in the woods at their alarums: much frie^-dship they promised, and so
departed, but Samoset would not leave us, but fained himself sick, yet at
last he went to entreat the Saluages come again to confirm a peace: now the
third time, as we were consulting of our Marshall orders, two Saluages
a^peared, but when we went to them they vanished: not long after came Samo^et,
and Squanto, a native of Patuxet where we dwell, and one of them carried into
Spain by Hunt, thence brought into England, where a good time he lived; and
now here signified unto us, their great Sachem of Massasoyt, with Quadaquina
his brother, and all their men, was there by to see us: not willing to send our
Governor, we sent Edward Wollisto with presents to them both, to know their
minds, making him to understand by his Interpreters how King James did salute
him and was his friend; after a little conference with twenty of his men, he
came over the brook to our Plantation, where we set him upon a rug, and then
brought our Governor to him with Drums and Trumpets; where after some
circumstances, for they use few complements, we treated of peace with them to
this effect.

That neither he nor any of his should injury or do hurt to any of us; Their
conditions of peace.
if they did, he should send us the offender, that we might punish him, and we
would do the like to him: if any did unjustly war against him, we would aid
him, as he should us against our enemies, and to send to his neighbor
confederats to certify them of this, that they might likewise be comprised in
these conditions, that when any of them came to us, they should leave their Bow
and Arrows behind them, as we would our pieces when we came to them, all
which the King seemed to like well of, and was applauded of his followers, in
his person he is a very lusty man, in his best years, an able body, grave of
countenance, and spare of speech: in his attire little differing from the rest;
after all was done, the Governor conducted him to the brook, but kept our
hostage till our messengers returned: in like manner we used Quaddaquina, so
all departed good friends.

Two of his people would have stayed with us, but we would not permit them,
only Sam^set and Squanto we entertained kindly; as yet we have found they
intend to keep promise, for they have not hurt our men they have found
straggling in the Woods, and are afraid of their powerful Adversaries the
Narrobiggansets, against whom he hopes to make use of our help. The next day
Squanto went a fishing for Eeles, and in an hour he did tread as many out of
the Ose with his feet as he could lift with his hand, not having any other
instrument.

But that we might know their habitations so well as they ours, Stephen Hopkins
and Edward Winslo had Squa^tum for their guide and Interpreter; A journey to
Pakanoki.
to Packanoki, the habitation of the King of Massasoyt, with a red horsemans
coat for a present, to entreat him by reason we had not victual to entertain
them as we would, he would defend his people so much from visiting us; and if
he did send, he should always send with the Messenger a copper Chain they
gave him, that they might know he came from him, and also give them some of his
Corn for seed: that night they lodged at Namasoet, some fifteen miles off:
by the way we found ten or twelve women and children that still would pester us
till we were weary of them, perceiving it is the manner of them, where victual
is to be gotten with most ease, there they will live; but on that River of
Namasch^t have been many habitations of the Saluages that are dead, and the
land lies waste, and the River abounding with great plenty of fish, and has
been much frequented by the French.

A great courage of two old Saluages.
The next day traveling with six or seven Indians, where we were to wade over
the River, did dwell only two old men of that Nation then living, that
thinking us enemies, sought the best advantage they could to fight with us,
with a wonderful show of courage, but when they knew us their friends they
kindly welcomed us; after we came to a town of the Massasoits, but at
Pakanoki the King was not: How the King used them.
toward night he arrived and was very proud, both of our message and presents,
making a great oration to all his people, Was not he Massasint, Commander of
the country about him, was not such a town his, and the people of it, and 20.
towns more he named was his? and should they not bring their skins to us? to
which they answered, they were his and they would; victual they had none, nor
any lodging, but a poor planke or two, a foot high from the ground, whereon his
wife and he lay at the one end, we at the other, but a thin Mat upon them, two
more of his chief men pressed by and upon us, so that we were worse weary of
our lodging then of our journey. Although there is such plenty of fish and
foul and wild beasts, yet are they so lasie they will not take pains to catch
it till mere hunger constrain them, for in two or three days we had scarce a
meals meat, whereby we were so faint, we were glad to be at home: besides what
for the fleas, and their howling and singing in the night in their houses, and
the Musketas without doors, our heads were as light for want of sleep, as our
bellies empty for want of meat. A voyage to Nawsit.
The next voyage we made was in a Shallop with ten men to Nawsit, sixteen
miles from us, to fetch a Boy was lost in the Woods we heard was there, whom
Aspinet their King had bedecked like a saluage, but very kindly he brought him
to us, and so returned well to Patuyet.

Plimoth, and arrived in New England at New-Plimoth, now so called the 11. of
November, where they found all the people they left so ill, lusty and well for
all their pouerties, except six that died: a month they stayed ere they
returned to England, loaded with Clap-boord, Wainscot and Wallnut, with about
three hogs-heads of Beuer skins the 13. of December: and drawing near our
coast was set on by a French man set out by the Marquess of Cera, Governor of
I Will Deu, where they kept the ship, imprisoned the Master and company, took
from them to the value of 500* pound, and after 14. days sent them home with a
poor supply of victual, their own being devoured by the Marquess and his
hungry servants.

Now you are to understand this 37. brought nothing, but relied wholly on us to
make us more miserable then before, which the Sachem Couanacus no sooner
understood, but sent to Tusquantum our Interpreter, a bundle of new arrows in
a Snakes skin; Tusquantum being absent, the Messenger departed, but when we
understood it was a direct challenge, we returned the skin full of powder and
shot, with an absolute defiance, which caused us finish our fortification with
all expedition. Now betwixt our two Saluages, Tusquantum and Hobbamock, gre^^
such great emulation, we had much ado to know which best to trust. In a
journey we undertook, in our way we met a Saluage of Tusquantums, that had cut
his face fresh bleeding, to assure us Massasoyt our supposed friend, had drawn
his forces to Packanokick to assault us. Hobomak as confidently assured us it
was false, and sent his wife as an espy to see; but when she perceived all was
well, she told the King Massasoyt how Tusquantum had abused him, diverse
Saluages also he had caused to believe we would destroy them, but he would do
his best to appease us; this he did only to make his Countrymen believe what
great power he had with us to get bribes on both sides, to make peace or war
when he would, and the more to possess them with fear, he persuaded many we
had buried the plague in our store house, which we could send when we listed
whither we would, but at last all his knavery being discovered, Massasowat
sent his knife with Messengers for his head or him, being his subject; with
much ado we appeased the angry King and the rest of the Saluages, and freely
forgave Tusquantum, because he speaking our language we could not well be
without him.

A journey to the Town of Namaschet, in defense of the King of Massasoyt,
against the Narrohigganses, and the supposed death of Squantum.
A Great difference there was betwixt the Narrohigganses and the Massasoytes,
that had always a jealousy; Coubatant one of their petty Sachems was too
conversant with the Narrohigganses, this Coubatant lived much at Namas^het and
much stormed at our peace with his King and others; also at Squantum, and
Tokamahamon, and Hobomak our friends, and chief occasioners of our peace, for
which he sought to muther Hobomak; yet Tokamahamon went to him upon a rumor he
had taken Masasoyt prisoner, or forced him from his Country, but the other two
would not, but in private to see if they could hear what was become of their
King; lodging at Namaschet they were discovered to Coubatant, who surprised the
house and took Squantum, saying, if he were dead the English had lost their
tongue; Hobomak seeing that, and Coubatant held a knife at his breast, being a
strong lusty fellow, brake from them and came to New-Plimoth, full of sorrow
for Squantum, whom he thought was slain.

The next day we sent ten men with him armed to be revenged of Coubatant, They
surprise the Saluages.
who conducted us near Namaschet, where we rested and refreshed our selves til
midnight, and then we beset the house as we had resolved; those that entered the
house demanded for Coubatant, but the Saluages were half dead with fear, we
charged them not to stir, for we came to hurt none but Coubatant, for killing
Squantum, some of them seeking to escape was wounded, but at last perceiving
our ends, they told us Coubatant was gone and all his men, and Squantum was yet
living, and in the town; in this hurly burly we discharged two pieces at
random, which much terrified all the inhabitants except Squantum and
Tokamahamon, who though they knew not the end of our coming, yet assured
themselves of our honesties, that we would not hurt them; the women and
children hung about Hobomak* calling him friend, and when they saw we would
hurt no women, the young youths cried we are women; to be short, we kept them
all, and whilst we were searching the house for Coubatant, Hobomak had got to
the top, and called Squantum and Tokamahamon, which came unto us accompanied
with others, some armed, others naked, those that had bows we took them from
them, promising them again when it was day: the house we took for our
quarter that night and discharged the prisoners, and the next morning went to
breakfast to Squantums house; thither came all them that loved us to welcome
us, but all Coubatants faction was fled, then we made them plainly know the
cause of our coming, and if their King Massasoyt were not well, we would be
revenged upon the Narrohiggansets, or any that should do injury to Hobomak,
Squantum, or any of their friends; as for those were wounded we were sorry for
it, and offered out Surgion should heal them, of this offer a man and a woman
accepted, that went home with us, accompanied with Squantum, and many other
known friends, that offered us all the kindness they could.

From the West of England there is gone ten or twelve ships to fish, which were
all well fraughted: those that came first at Bilbow, made seventeen pound a
single share, besides Beuers, Otters, and Martins skins; but some of the rest
that came to the same ports, that were all ready furnished, so glutted the
market, that the price was abated, yet all returned so well contented, that
they are a preparing to go again.

London; the one of one hundred tons, the other of thirty, with some sixty
Passengers to supply the Plantation. Now though the Turk and French has been
somewhat too busy in taking our ships, would all the Christian Princes be
truly at unity, as his Royal Majesty our Sovereign King James desires,
seventy Sail of good ships were sufficient to fire the most of his Coasts in
the Leuant, and make such a guard in the Straights of Hellespont, as would make
the great Turk himself more afraid in Constantinople, then the smallest
Red-Crosse that crosses the Seas would be, either of any French Pickaroun, or
the Pirates of Algere.

An abstract of diverse Relations sent from the Colony in New England, July 16.
1622.
Notes and observations.
SInce the massacre in Virginia, though the Indians continue their wonted
friendship, yet we are more wary of them then before; for their hands has
been imbrued in much English blood, only by too much confidence, but not by
force, and we have had small supplies of any thing but men. Here I must entreat
a little your favors to digress, they did not kill the English in Virginia,
because they were Christians: but for their weapons and Copper, which were rare
novelties; but now they fear we may beat them out of their dens, which Lions
and Tigers will not admit but by force. But must this be an argument for an
English man, and discourage any in Virginia or New England: No, for I have
tried them both, as you may read at large in the History of Virginia;
notwithstanding since I came from thence, the Honorable Company has been
humble suitors to his Majesty, to get vagabonds and condemned men to go
thither; nay, so the business has been so abused, that so much scorned was
the name of Virginia, some did choose to be hanged ere they would go thither,
and were: Yet for all the worst of spite, detraction, and discouragement, and
this iamentable massacre, there is more honest men now suitors to go, then
ever has been constrained knaves. And it is not unknown to most men of
understanding, how happy many of those Collumners has thought themselves that
they might be admitted; and yet pay for their passage to go now to Virginia,
and I fear me there goes too many of those, that has shifted here till
they could no longer; and they will use that quality there till they hazard
all.

To range this Country of New England in like manner, I had but eight, as is
said, and amongst their bruit conditions, I met many of their silly encounters,
and I give God thanks, without any hurt at all to me, or any with me. When
your West-Countrey men were so wounded and tormented with the Saluages, though
they had all the Politic directions that had been gathered from all the
secret informations could be heard of, yet they found little, and returned with
nothing. I speak not this out of vainglory, as it may be some gleaners, or
some who were never there may censure me; but to let all men be assured by
those examples, what those Saluages are, that thus strangely do murder and
betray our Countrymen: but to the purpose;

The Paragon with thirty seven men sent to relieve them, miscarried twice upon
our English Coast, whereby they failed of their supplies. It is true, They
lived two years without supply.
there has been taken one thousand Bases at a draught; and in one night
twelve Hogsheads of Herrings: but when they wanted all necessaries both for
fishing and sustinance, but what they could get with their naked industry, they
endured most extreme wants, having been now near two years without any
supply to any purpose, it is a wonder how they should subsist, much less so to
resist the Saluages, fortify themselves, plant sixty acres of Corn, besides
their Gardens that were well replenished with many usual fruits. But in the
beginning of July came in two ships of Master Westons, though we much wanted
our selves, Westons Plantation.
yet we relieved them what we could: and to requite us, they destroyed our
Corn and Fruits then planted, and did what they could to have done the like to
us. At last they were transported to Wichaguscusset at the Massachusetts, where
they abused the Saluages worse then us. We having neither Trade, nor scarce any
thing remaining, God sent in one Master Jones, and a ship of Westons had been
at Monahigan amongst the Fishermen, that for Beuer skins and such
Merchandise as we had, very well refreshed us, though at dear rates. Weston
left also his men a small Bark, and much good provision, and so set sail for
England. Then we joined with them to trade to the Southward of Cape Cod, twice
or thrice we were forced to return; first by the death of their Governor;
then the sickness of Captain Standish. At last our Governor Master Bradford
undertook it himself to have found the passage betwixt the Shoules and the
Maine, The death of Tusquantum.
then Tusquantum our Pilot died, so that we returned to the Massachusetts, where
we found the trade spoiled, and nothing but complaints betwixt the Saluages and
the English. At Nawset we were kindly used and had good trade, though we lost
our Barge, the Saluages carefully kept both her wrack, and some ten Hosheads
of Corn three months, and so we returned some by land, some in the ship.

Captain Standish being recovered, went to fetch them both, Tusquantum at his
death desired the English to pray he might go dwell with the English men's God,
for theirs was a good God.
and traded at Namasket and Monomete, where the people had the plague, a place
much frequented with Dutch and French. Here the Sachem put a man to death for
killing his fellow at play, wherein they are so violent, they will play their
coats from their backs, and also their wives, though many miles from them. But
our provision decaying, Standish is sent to Mattachist, where they pretended
their wonted love; yet it plainly appeared they intended to kill him. Escaping
thence, we went to Monomete, where we found nothing but bad countenances.
Hear one Wittuwamat a notable villain, would boast how many French and
English he had slain: This Champion presenting a Dagger to the Sachem Canacum
he had got from the English, They contriue to murder all the English.
occasioned us to understand how they had contrived to murder all the English
in the Land, but having such a fair opportunity, they would begin here with
us. Their scornful usage made the Captain so passionate to appease his anger
and choler, their intent made many fair excuses for satisfaction: Scar a lusty
Saluage, always seeming the most to effect us, bestowed on us the best
presents he had without any recompense, saying; He was rich enough to bestow
such favors on his friends, yet had undertaken to kill the Captain himself,
but our vigilencies so prevented the advantage they expected, we safely
returned, little suspecting in him any such treachery.

During this time a Dutch ship was driven a shore at Massasowat, The sickness
of King Massasowat.
whose King lay very sick, now because it is a general custom then for all
their friends to visit them: Master Winslow, and Master Hamden, with Habamok
for their guide, were sent with such Cordialls as they had to salute him; by
the way they so often heard the King was dead, Habamok would break forth in
those words, My loving Sachem, my loving Sachem, many have I known, but never
any like thee, nor shall ever see the like amongst the Saluages; for he was no
lier, nor bloody and cruel like other Indians, in anger soon reclaimed, he
would be ruled by reason, not scorning the advice of mean men, and governed
his men better with a few strokes, then others with many: truly loving where he
loved, yea he feared we had not a faithful friend left amongst all his
Contrymen, showing how often he had restrained their malice, much more with
much passion he spoke to this purpose, till at last we arrived where we found
the Dutchmen but newly gone, and the house so full we could hardly get in. By
their charms they distempered us that were well, much more him that was sick,
women rubbing him to keep heat in him; but their charms ended, understanding
of us, though he had lost his sight, His cure by the English.
his understanding failed not; but taking Winslow by the hand, said, Art thou
Winslow, Oh Winslow, I shall never see thee again! Hobamock telling him what
restauratiues they had brought, he desired to taste them, with much ado they
got a little Confexion of many comfortable Conserues into his mouth, as it
desolued he swallowed it, then desoluing more of it in water, they scraped his
tongue, which was al furred and swollen, and washed his mouth, and then gave him
more of it to eat, and in his drink, that wrought such an alteration in him in
two or three hours, his eyes opened to our great contents; with this and such
brothes as they there provided for him, it pleased God he recovered: and thus
the manner of his sickness and cure caused no small admiration amongst them.

The Kings thankfulness.
During the time of their stay to see his recovery, they had sent to New Plimoth
for diverse good things for him, which he took so kindly, that he fully
revealed all the former conspiracies against us, to which he had often been
moved; and how that all the people of Powmet, Nawset, Succonet, Mattachist,
Manamet, Augawam, and Capawac, were joined to murder us; therefore as we
respected our lives, kill them of Massachuset that were the authors; for take
away the principals and the plot will cease, thus taking our leaves, and
arriving at our fort, we found our brave liberal friend of Pamet drawing
Standish to their Ambuscados, which being thus discovered, A bad example.
we sent him away, as though he knew not suspected any thing. Them at the
Massachusetts, some were so vilde they served the Saluages for victual, the
rest sent us word the Saluages were so insolent, they would assault them though
against their Commission, so fearful they were to break their Commission, so
much time was spent in consultations, they all were famished, till Wassapinewat
again came and told them the day of their execution was at hand.

Captain Standish sent to suppress the Saluages.
Then they appointed Standish with eight chosen men, under color of Trade to
catch them in their own trap at Massachuset, and acquaint it with the English
in the Town, where arriving he found none in the Bark, and most of the rest
without Arms, or scarce clothes, wandering abroad, all so sencelesly secure,
he more then wondered they were not all slain, with much ado he got the most
of them to their Town. The Saluages suspecting their plots discovered,
Pecksnot a great man, and of as great a spirit, came to Habamak, who was then
amongst them, saying; Tell Standish we know he is come to kill us, but let him
begin when he dare. Not long after many would come to the Fort and whet their
Knives before him, with many brauing speeches. One amongst the rest was by
Wittawamat bragging he had a Knife, that on the handle had the picture of a
woman's face, but at home I have one has killed both French and English, and
that has a man's face on it, and by and by these two must marry: but this
here, by and by shall see, and by and by eat, but not speak; Also Pecksnot
being of a greater stature then the Captain, told him, though he were a great
Captain he was but a little man, and I though no Sachem, yet I am of great
strength and courage. These things Standish bare patiently for the present; but
the next day seeing he could not get many of them together, but these two
Roarers, and two more being in a convenient room, Two desperate Saluages
slain.
and his company about him, Standish feased on Pecksnots Knife then hanging
about his neck, wherewith he slew him, and the rest slew Wittuwamat and the
other Saluage, but the youth they took, who being Brother to Wittuwamat, and
as villainous as himself, was hanged. It is incredible how many wounds they
endured, catching at their weapons without any fear or bruit, till the last
gasp. Habamack stood by all this time very silent, but all ended, he said,
Yesterday Pecksnot bragged of his strength and stature, but I see you are big
enough to lay him on the ground.

The Town he left to the guard of Westons people: The Saluages over co^^med.
three Saluages more were slain; upon which rumor they all fled from their
houses. The next day they met with a file of Saluages that let fly their
Arrows, shot for shot till Hobamack showed himself, and then they fled. For
all this, a Saluage Boy to show his innocence, came boldly unto us and told us:
Had the English Fugitives but finished the three Canowes they were a making, to
have taken the ship, they would have done as much to all the English, which was
only the cause they had forborne so long. But now consulting and considering
their estates, those that went in the Pinnace to Barty Isles to get passage for
England, the rest to New Plimoth, where they were kindly entertained. The
Sachem Obtak^est, and Powas, and diverse other were guilty, the three fugitives
in their fury there slew; but not long after so distracted were those poor
scattered people, they left their habitations, living in swamps, where wi^h
cold and infinite diseases they endured much mortality, suing for peace, and
crying the God of England is angry with them. Thus you see where God pleases,
as some flourish, others perish.

An extreme drought.
that in six weeks after the latter setting there scarce fell any rain; so
that the stalk was first set, began to care ere it came to half growth, and
the last not like to yield any thing at all. Our Beans also seemed so
withered, we judged all utterly dead, that now all our hopes were overthrown,
and our joy turned into mourning. And more to our sorrow, we heard of the twice
return of the Paragon* that now the third time was sent us three months ago,
but no news of her: only the signs of a wrack we saw on the Coast which we
judged her. This caused not every of us to enter into a private consideration
betwixt God and our consciences, but most solemnly to humble our selves before
the Lord by fasting and praying, to relieve our dejected spirits by the
comforts of his mercy. In the morning when we assembled all together, the
skies were as clear, and the drought as like to continue as ever; yet our
exercise continued eight or nine hours. Before our departure, the skies were
all ouer-cast, A wonderful blessing and sign of Gods love.
and on the next morning distilled such soft, sweet, moderate showers,
continuing fourteen days, mixed with such seasonable weather, as it was hard
to say, whether our withered Corn, or drooping affections were most quickened
and revived; such was the bounty and mercy of God. Of this the Indians by the
means of Hobamock took notice, who seeing us use this exercise in the midst
of the week, said; It was but three days since Sunday, and desired to know
the reason; which when he vnd^rstood, he and all of them admired the goodness
of God toward us, showing the difference betwixt their coniurations and our
prayers, and what storms and dangers they often receive thereby. To express our
thankfulness, we assembled together another day, as before, and either the
next morning, or not long after, came in two ships to supply us, and all their
Passengers well except one, and he presently recovered. For us, notwithstanding
all these wants, there was not a sick person amongst us. The greater ship we
returned fraught; the other we sent to the Southward, to trade under the
command of Captain Altom. So that God be thanked, we desire nothing, but what
we will return Commodities to the value.

Thus all men find our great God he,
That never wanted nature,
To teach his truth, that only he
Of every thing is Author.
For this year from England is gone about forty sail of ships, only to fish,
Forty sail sent to fish.
and as I am informed, have made a far better voyage then ever.

Now some new great obseruers will have this an Island, because I have writ it
is the Continent: others report, that the people are so bruit, they have no
religion, wherein surely they are deceived; for my part, I never heard of any
Nation in the world which had not a Religion, Their Religion.
dear, bows and arrows. They believe as do the Virginians, of many divine
powers, yet of one above all the rest, as the Southern Virginians call their
chief God Kewassa, and that we now inhabit Oak, but both their Kings
Werowance. The Masachusets call their great God Kiehtan, and their Kings there
abouts Sachems: The Penobscotes their greatest power Tantum, and their Kings
Sagomes. Those where is this Plantation, say Ki^htan made all the other Gods:
also one man and one woman, and of them all mankind, but how they became so
dispersed they know not. They say, at first there was no King but Kiehtan that
dwells far westerly above the heavens, whither all good men go when they
die, and have plenty of all things. The bad men go thither also and knock at
the door, but he bids them go wander in endless want and misery, for they
shall not stay there. They never saw Kiehtan, but they hold it a great charge
and duty, that one age teach another; and to him they make feasts, and cry and
sing for plenty and victory, or any thing is good. They have another Power
they call Hobam^ck, which we conceive the Devil, and upon him they call to
cure their wounds and diseases: when they are curable he persuades them he sent
them, because they have displeased him; but if they be mortal, then he says,
Kiehtan sent them, which makes them never call on him in their sickness. They
say this Hobamock appears to them sometimes like a Man, a Dear, or an Eagle,
but most commonly like a Snake; not to all, but only to their Powahs to cure
diseases, and V^deses, which is one of the chief next the King, and so bold in
the wars, that they think no weapon can kill them: and those are such as
conjure in Virginia, and cause the people to do what they list.

Their Government.
For their Government: every Sachem is not a King, but their great Sachems have
diverse Sachems under their protection, paying them tribute, and dare make no
wars without his knowledge; but every Sachem takes care for the Widows,
Orphans, the aged and maimed, nor will they take any to first wife, but them in
birth equal to themselves, although they have many inferior Wives and
Concubins that attend on the principal; from whom he never parts, but any of
the rest when they list, they inherit by succession, and every one knows their
own bounds. To his men, he gives them land, also bounded, and what Dear
they kill in that circuit, he has the sore-part; but it in the water, only
the skin: But they account none a man, till he has done some notable exploit:
the men are most employed in hunting, the women in slavery; the younger obey
the elders: their names are variable; they have harlots and honest women: the
harlots never marry, or else are widows. They use diuorcement, and the King
commonly punishes all offenders himself: when a maid is married, she cutteth
her hair, and keeps her head covered till it be grown again. Their arts,
games, music, attire, burials, and such like, differ very little from the
Virginians, only for their Chronicles they make holes in the ground, as the
others set up great stones. Out of the Relations of Master Edward Winslow.

An answer to Objections.
Now I know the common question is, For all those miseries, where is the wealth
they have got, or the Gold or Silver Mines? To such greedy unworthy minds I say
once again: The Sea is better then the richest Mine known, and of all the
fishing ships that went well provided, there is no complaint of loss nor
misery, but rather an admiration of wealth, profit, and health. As for the land
were it never so good, in two years so few of such small experience living
without supplies so well, and in health, it was an extraordinary blessing from
God. But that with such small means they should subsist, and do so much, to
any understanding judgment is a wonder. Notwithstanding, the vain expectation
of present gain in some, ambition in others, that to be great would have all
else slaves, and the carelessness in providing supplies, has caused those
defailements in all those Plantations, and how ever some bad conditions will
extol the actions of any Nation but their own: yet if we may give credit to
the Spaniards, Portugals, and French writings, they endured as many miseries,
and yet not in twenty years effected so much, nay scarce in forty.

Thus you may see plainly the yearly success from New England by Virginia,
The ordinary voyage to go to Virginia or New England.
which has been so costly to this Kingdom, and so dear to me, which either
to see perish, or but bleed; Pardon me though it passionate me beyond the
bounds of modesty, to have been sufficiently able to foresee their miseries,
and had neither power nor means to prevent it. By that acquaintance I have
with them, I call them my children, for they have been my Wife, my Hawks,
Hounds, my Cards, my Dice, and in total, my best content, as indifferent to my
heart, as my left hand to my right. And notwithstanding, all those miracles of
disasters have crossed both them and me, yet were there not an Englishman
remaining, as God be thanked notwithstanding the massacre there are some
thousands; I would yet begin again with as small means as I did at first, not
that I have any secret encouragement (I protest) more then lamentable
experience; for all their discoueries I have yet heard of, are but Pigs of my
own Sow, nor more strange to me, then to hear one tell me he has gone from
Billingsgate and discovered Grauesend, Tilbury, Quinborow, Lee, and Margit,
which to those did never hear of them, though they dwell in England, might be
made some rare secrets and great Countries unknown, except some few Relations
of Master Dirmer. In England, some are held great travelers that have seen
Venice, and Rome, Madrill, Toledo, Civil, Algere, Prague, or Ragonsa,
Constantinople, or Jerusalem, and the Piramides of Egypt; that think it
nothing to go to Summer Isles, or Virginia, which is as far as any of them; and
I hope in time will prove a more profitable and more laudable journey: as for
the danger, you see our Ladies and Gentlewomen account it nothing now to go
thither; and therefore I hope all good men will better apprehend it, and not
suffer them to languish in despair, whom God so wonderfully and often has
preserved.

What here I have writ by Relation, if it be not right I humbly entreat your
pardons, but I have not spared any diligence to learn the truth of them that
have been actors, or sharers in those voyages; In some particulars they might
deceive me, but in the substance they could not: for few could tell me any
thing, except where they fished. But seeing all those have lived there, do
confirm more then I have writ, I doubt not but all those testimonies with
these new begun examples of Plantation, will move both City and Country,
freely to adventure with me more then promises.

But because some Fortune Tellers say, I am unfortunate; The objections against
me.
had they spent their time as I have done, they would rather believe in God
then their calculations, and peradventure have given as bad an account of their
actions, and therefore I entreat leave to answer those obiecters, that think
it strange, if this be true, I have made no more use of it, rest so long
without imploiment, nor have no more reward nor preferment: To which I say;

I think it more strange they should tax me, My answer.
before they have tried as much as I have, both by land and sea, as well in
Asia and Africa, as Europe and America, where my Commanders were actors or
spectators, they always so freely rewarded me, I never needed be importunate,
or could I ever learn to beg: What there I got, I have spent; yet in Virginia
I stayed, till I left five hundred behind me better provided then ever I was,
from which blessed Virgin (ere I returned) sprung the fortunate habitation of
Summer Isles.

This Virgins Sister, now called New England, at my humble suit, by our most
gracious Prince Charles, has been near as chargeable to me and my friends:
for all which, although I never got shilling but it cost me a pound, yet I
would think my self happy could I see their prosperities.

But if it yet trouble a multitude to proceed upon these certainties,
Considerations.
what think you I undertook when nothing was known but that there was a vast
land? I never had power and means to do any thing, though more has been
spent in formal delays then would have done the business, but in such a
penurious and miserable manner, as if I had gone a begging to build an
University: where had men been as forward to adventure their purses, and
perform the conditions they promised me, as to crop the fruits of my labors,
thousands ere this had been bettered by these designs. Thus betwixt the spur
of desire and the bridle of reason, I am near ridden to death in a ring of
despair; the reins are in your hands, therefore I entreat you ease me, and
those that think I am either idle or unfortunate, may see the cause and know:
unless I did see better dealing, I have had warning enough not to be so
forward again at every motion upon their promises, unless I intended nothing
but to carry news; for now they dare adventure a ship, that when I went first
would not adventure a groat, so they may be at home again by Michaelmas, which
makes me remember and say with Master Hackluit; Oh incredulity the wit of
fools, that slouingly do spit at all things fair, a sluggards Cradle, a
Cowards Castle, how easy it is to be an Infidel. But to the matter: By this
all men may perceive, the ordinary performance of this voyage in five or six
months, the plenty of fish is most certainly approved; and it is certain,
from Cannada and New England, within these six years has come near twenty
thousand Beuer skins: Now had each of these ships transported but some small
quantity of the most increasing Beasts, Fowls, Fruits, Plants, and Seeds, as
I proiected; by this time their increase might have been sufficient for more
then one thousand men: But the desire of present gain (in many) is so violent,
and the endeavors of many undertakers so negligent, every one so regarding
their private gain, that it is hard to effect any public good, and impossible
to bring them into a body, rule, or order, unless both honesty, as well as
authority and money, assist experience. But your homebred engrossing
Proiecters will at last find, there is a great difference betwixt saying and
doing, or those that thinks their directions can be as soon and easily
performed, as they can conceit them; or that their conceits are the fittest
things to be put in practice, or their countenances maintain Plantations. But
to conclude, the fishing will go forward w^ether you plant it or no; whereby a
Colony may be then transported with no great charge, that in short time might
provide such fraughts, to buy on us there dwelling, as I would hope no ship
should go or come empty from New England.

The charge.
The charge of this is only Salt, Nets, Hooks, Lines, Knives, Irish-rugges,
course cloth, Beads, Glass, and such trash, only for fishing and trade with
the Saluages, besides our own necessary provisions, whole endeavors would
quickly defray all this charge, and the Saluages did entreat me to inhabit
where I would. Now all those ships till these last two years, have been
fishing within a square of two or three leagues, and scarce any one yet will
go any further in the Port they fish in, where questionless five hundred may
have their fraught as well as elsewhere, and be in the market ere others can
have the fish in their ships, because New Englands fishing begins in February,
in Newfoundland not till the midst of May; the progression hereof tends much to
the advancement of Virginia and Summer Isles, whose empty ships may take in
their fraughts there, and would be also in time of need a good friend to the
Inhabitants of Newfoundland.

The order of the western men.
The returns made by the Western men, are commonly divided in three parts; one
for the owner of the ship; another for the Master and his Company; the third
for the victualers, which course being still permitted, will be no hinderance
to the Plantation as yet go there never so many, but a means of transporting
that yearly for little or nothing, which otherwise will cost many hundreds of
pounds. The gains.
If a ship can gain twenty, thirty, fifty in the hundred; nay three hundred
for one hundred in seven or ten months, as you see they have done, spending
twice so much time in coming and going as in staying there: were I there
planted, seeing the variety of the fishings serve the most part of the year,
and with a little labor we might make all the Salt we need use, as is formerly
said, and can conceive no reason to distrust of good success by Gods
assistance; besides for the building of ships, no place has more convenient
Harbors, ebb, nor flood, nor better timber; and no Commodity in Europe does
more decay then wood.

Master Dee his opinion for the building of ships.
MAster Dee records in his British Monarchy, The effects of shipping.
that King Edgar had a Navy of four thousand sail, with which he yearly made
his progress, about this famous Monarchy of Great Britain, largely declaring
the benefit thereof; whereupon he proiected to our most memorable Queen
Elizabeth, the erecting of a Fleet of sixty Sail, he called a little Navy
Royal: imitating that admired Pericles Prince of Athens, that could never
secure that tormented estate, until he was Lord and Captain of the Sea. At
this none need wonder, for who knows not her Royal Majesty during her life,
by the incredible adventures of her Royal Navy, and valiant Soldiers and
Seamen, notwithstanding all treacheries at home, the protecting and defending
France and Holland, and reconquering Ireland; yet all the world by Sea and Land
both feared or loved, and admired good Queen Elizabeth. Both to maintain and
increase that incomparable honor (God be thanked) to her incomparable
Successor, our most Royal Lord and Sovereign King James, this great
Philosopher has left this to his Majesty and his Kingdoms consideration:
that if the tenths of the earth be proper to God, it is also due by Sea. The
Kings high ways are common to pass, but not to dig for Mines or any thing: So
Englands Coasts are free to pass but not to fish, but by his Majesty's
Prerogative.

His Majesty of Spain permits none to pass the Popes order, The Popes order
for the East and West Indies.
for the East and West Indies but by his permission, or at their perils; if all
that world be so justly theirs, it is no injustice for England to make as much
use of her own shores as strangers do, that pay to their own Lords the
tenth, and not to the owner of those liberties any thing to speak of, whose
subjects may neither take nor sell any in their Teritories: which small tribute
would maintain this little Navy Royal, and not cost his Majesty a penny, and
yet maintain peace with all Forrainers, and allow them more courtesy then any
Nation in the world affords to England. It were ashame to allege, that Holla^d
is more worthy to enjoy our fishing as Lords thereof, because they have more
skill to handle it then we, as they can our wool and undressed Cloth,
notwithstanding all their wars and troublesome disorders.

To get money to build this Navy, he says, How to get money to build this
little Navy.
who would not spare the one hundredth penny of his rents, and the five hundredth
penny of his goods; each servant that takes forty shillings wages, four
pence; and every forrainer of seven years of age four pence, for seven
years; not any of these but they will spend three times so much in pride,
wantonness, or some superfluity: And do any men love the security of their
estates, that of themselves would not be humble suitors to his Majesty to do
this of free will as a voluntary benevolence, or but the one half of this (or
some such other course as I have prounded to diverse of the Companies) free from
any constraint, tax, lottery, or imposition; so it may be as honestly and truly
employed, as it is proiected, the poorest Mechanicke in this King-would gain
by it. Then you might build ships of any proportion and numbers you please,
five times cheaper then you can do here, and have good merchandise for their
fraught in this unknown Land, to the advancement of Gods glory, his Church and
Gospel, and the strengthening and relief of a great part of Christendom
without hurt to any, to the terror of Pirates, the amazement of enemies, the
assistance of friends, the securing Merchants, and so much increase of
Navigations, to make Englands trade and shipping as much as any Nations in the
world, besides a hundred other benefits, to the general good of all true
subjects, and would cause thousands yet unborn to bless the time, and all
them that first put it in practice.

Contention for New-Englands goods, not her good.
Now lest it should be obscured as it has been to private ends, or so weakly
undertaken by our ouerweening incredulity, that strangers may possess it
whilst we contend for New-Englands goods, but not Englands good; I have
presented it as I have said, to the Prince and Nobility, the Gentry and
Commonalty, hoping at last it will move the whole land to know it and consider
of it; since I can find them wood and half victual, with the foresaid
advantages: were this Country planted, with what facility they may build and
maintain this little Navy Royal, both with honor, profit and content, and
inhabit as good a Country as any in the world within that parallel, which with
my life and what I have, I will endeavor to effect, if God please and you
permit. But no man will go from hence to have less freedom there then here,
nor adventure all they have to prepare the way for them will scarce thank them
for it; and it is too well known there have been so many undertakers of
Patents, and such sharing of them, as has bred no less discouragement then
wonder, to hear such great promises and so little performance; in the Interim,
you see the French and Dutch already frequent it, and God forbid they in
Virginia, or any of his Majesty's subjects, should not have as free liberty as
they. To conclude, were it not for Master Cherley and a few private adventurers
with them, what have we there for all these inducements? The necessity of
martial power.
As for them whom pride or covetousness lulleth asleep in a Cradle of
slothful carelessness, would they but consider how all the great Monarchies of
the earth have been brought to confusion, or but remember the late lamentable
experiences of Constantinople, and how many Cities, Towns and Provinces, in
the fair rich Kingdoms of Hungaria, Transiluania, Wallachia and Moldauia, and
how many thousands of Princes, Earls, Barons, Knights, Merchants, and others,
have in one day lost goods, lives and honors, or sold for slaves like beasts
in a market place, their wives, children and servants slain, or wandering they
knew not whither, dying or living in all extremities of extreme miseries and
calamities, surely they would not only do this, but give all they have to
enjoy peace and liberty at home, or but adventure their persons abroad; to
prevent the conclusions of a conquering Foe, who commonly assaulteth and best
prevails where he finds wealth and plenty, most armed with ignorance and
security.

Though the true condition of war is only to suppress the proud and defend
the innocent, as did that most generous Prince Sigismundus, Prince of those
Countries, against them whom under the color of justice and piety, to
maintain their superfluity of ambitious pride, thought all the world too
little to maintain their vice, and undo them, or keep them from ability to
do any thing, that would not admire and adore their honors, fortunes,
covetousness, falsehood, bribery, cruelty, extortion, and ingratitude, which is
worse then cowardice or ignorance, and all manner of vildnesse, clean contrary
to all honor, virtue, and nobleness. John Smith writ this with his own hand.

Here follow certain notes and observations of Captain Charles Whitbourne
concerning Newfound land, which although every master trained up in fishing,
can make their proportions of necessaries according to their custom, yet it is
not much amiss here to insert them, that every one which desires the good of
those actions know them also. Besides in his Book entitled, A discovery of
Newfound land, and the commodities thereof, you shall find many excellent
good aduertisements for a Plantation; and how that most years this Coast has
been frequented with 250. sail of his Majesty's subjects, which supposing but
60. tons a piece, one with another, they amount to 15000. tons, and
allowing 25 men and boys to every Bark, they will make 5000. persons, whose
labors return yearly to about 135000. pound sterling, besides the great
numbers of Brewers, Bakers, Coupers, Ship-Carpenters, Net-makers, Rope-makers,
Hooke-makers, and the most of all other mecanicall trades in England.

The charge of letting forth a ship of 100. tuns with 40. persons, both to make
a fishing voyage, and increase the Plantation.
l. s. d. INprimis, 10000. weight of Biscuit at 15. s. a 100. weight. 82. 10. 26
Tun of Beer and Sider at 53. s. 4. d. a Tun. 69. 7. 2 Hogsheads of English
Beef. 10. 2 Hogsheads of Irish Beef. 5. 10 Fat Hogs salted with Salt and
Caske. 10. 10. 30 Bushels of Pease. 6 2 Ferkins of Butter. 3. 200 Weight of
Cheese. 2. 10. 1 Bushel of Mustard Seed. 6. 1 Hogshead of Vinegar. 1. 5. Wood
to dress meat withal. 1. 1 Great Copper Kettle. 2. 2 Small Kettles. 2. 2
Frying-Pans. 3. 4. Platters, Ladles and Cans. 1. a pair of Bellows for the
Cook. 2. 6. Taps, Boriers and Funnels. 2. L^cks for the Bread rooms. 2. 6.
100 weight of Candles. 2. 10. 1, 0 quarters of Salt at 2. s. the Rushell. 10.
4. Mats and dinnage to lie under it. 2. 10. Salt Shouels. 10 Particulars for
the 40. persons to keep 8. fishing boats at Sea, with 3. men in every boat,
imploies 24. and 500. foot of Elm boords of an inch thick, 8. s. each one. 2.
2000 Nails for the 8. Boats, at 13. s. 4. d. a 1000. 1. 6 8. 4000 Nails at 6.
s 8. d. 1000. 1. 6 8. 2000 Nails at 5. d. 100. 8. 500 weight of pitch at 8. s.
100. 2. 2000 of good orlop nails. 2. 5. More for other small necessaries. 3. A
barrel of Tar. 10. 200 weight of black Ocome. 1. Thrums for pitch Maps. 1. 6.
Bolls, Buckets and Pumps. 1. 2 brazen Crocks. 2. Canuas to make Boat sails and
small ropes, at 25. s. for each sail, 12. 10. 10 rode Ropes which contain
600. weight at 30 s the 100. 10. 12 dozen of fishing lines. 6. 24 d^z^n of
fishing hooks. 2. for Squid line. 3. For Pots and liver maunds. 18. Iron works
for the boats ruthers. 2. 10 Kipnet Irons. 10. Twine to make kipnets and
gagging hooks. 6. 10 good Nets at 26. s. a net. 13. 2 Saynes, a great and a
less. 12. 200 weight of Sow-lead. 1. 2 couple of ropes for the Saynes. 1.
Dry-fats to keep them in. 6. T^ine for store. 5. Flaskets and bread Baskets.
15. For hair cloth. 10. 3. Tuns of vinegar caske for water. 1. 6. 8. 1 do^zen
of Deal Bourds. 10. 2 Barrels of Oatmeale. 1. 6. 100 weight of Spikes. 2. 5. 2
good Axes, 4. hand Hatchets, 4. Drawers, 2. drawing Irons. 16. 3 yards of
wollencloth for cuffs. 10. 8 yards of good Cannasse. 10. A Grand-stone or two.
6. 1000 of poor John to spend in going. 6. 10. 1 Hogshead of Aquauitae. 4. 4
arm Sawes, 4. Handsawes, 4. thwart Sawes, 3. Augers, 2. Crows of Iron, 3.
Sledges, 4. shod Shouels, 2. Picaxes, 4. Matocks; and 4. Hammers. 5. The total
sum is 410. 11. 0.

All these provisions the Master of Purser is to be accountable what is spent
and what is left, with those which shall continue there to plant, and of the
40. thus provided for the voyage, ten may well be spared to leave behind them,
with 500. weight of Biscuit, 5. hogsheads of Sider or beer, half a hogshead of
Beef, 4 sides of dry Bakon, 4. bushel of Pease, half a ferkin of Butter,
half 100. weight of Cheese, a pecke of Mustard Seed, a barrel of Vinegar, 12.
pound of Candles, 2. pecks of Oa^meale, half a hogshead of Aquauitae, 2.
copper Kettles, 1. brass Crock, 1. Drying Pan, a Grindstone, and all the
Hatchets, Woodhooks, Sawes, Augers, etc. and all other iron tools, with the 8.
Boats and their implements, and spare salt, and what else they use not in a
readiness from year to year, and in the mean time served them to help to
build their houses, cleanse land, and further their fishing whilst the ships
are wanting.

By his estimation and calculation these 8. Boats with 22. men in a Summer do
usually kill 25000. fish for every Boat, which may amount to 200000. allowing
120. fishes to the 100. sometimes they have taken above 35000. for a Boat, so
that they load not only their own ship, but provide great quantities for
sacks, or other spare ships which come thither only to buy the overplus: if
such ships come not, they give over taking any more, when sometimes there has
been great abundance, because there is no fit houses to lay them in till
another year, now most of those sacks goes empty thither, which might as well
transport men's provision and cattle at an easy rate as nothing, either to
New England or Newfound land, but either to transport them for nothing or pay
any great matter for their liberty to fish, will hardly effect so much as
freedom as yet; nor can this be put in practice as before I said, till there
be a power there well planted and settled to entertain and defend them, assist
and relieve them as occasion shall require, otherways those small divisions
will effect little, but such miserable conclusions as both the French and we
too long have tried to our costs. Now commonly 200000. fish will load a ship of
100. tons in Newfound land, but half so many will near do it in
New England, which carried to Toloune or Merselus, ^here the custom is small,
and the Kintall less then 90. English*pounds weight, and the prise when least,
12. shillings the Kintall, which at that rate amounts to 1320. l. starling; and
the ship may either there be discharged or employed as has been said to
refraught for England, so that the next year she may be ready to go her
fishing voyage again, at a far cheaper rate then before.

To this add but 12. tuns of train oil, which delivered in New found land,
is 10. l. the tun, makes 120. l. then it is hard if there be not 10000. of
Co^^fish, which also sold there at 5. l. the 1000. makes 50. l. which brought
to England, in somes places yields near half so much more; but ^f at Mers^lus
it be sold for 16. d. the Kentall, as commonly it is, and much dearer, it
amounts to 1760. l. and if the Boats follow the fishing ^ll the 15. of October,
they may take 80000. more, which with their train in N^w-found land at 4. l.
the 1000. will amount to 320. l. which added to 1320. l. with 120. l. for Oil,
and 10000. of Cor-fish 50. l. and the overplus at Merselus, which will be 440.
l. make the total 2250. l. which divided in three parts according to their
custom, the Victualer has for the former particulars, amounting to 420. l.
751. l. so all the charge defraied, he gains 331. l. 11. s. then for the
fraught of the ship there is 751. l. and so much for the Master and his
company, which comparing with the voiages has been made to New England, you
may easily find which is the better though both be good. But now experience
has taught them at New-Plimoth, The facility of the fishing lately observed.
that in April there is a fish much like a Herring that comes up into the
small Brooks to spawne, and where the water is not knee deep, they will
press up through your hands, yea though you beat at them with Cudgels, and in
such abundance as is incredible, which they take with that facility they manure
their land with them when they have occasion; after those the Cod also presses
in such plenty, even into the very Harbors, they have caught some in their
arms, and hook them so fast, three men often loadeth a Boat of two tuns in two
hours, where before they used most to fish in deep water.

The present estate of New-Plimoth.
AT New-Plimoth there is about 180 persons, some cattle and goats, The present
estate of the plantation at New-Plimoth. 1624.
but many swine and poultry, 32 dwelling houses, whereof 7 were burnt the last
winter, and the value of five hundred pounds in other goods; the Town is
impailed about half a mile compass. In the town upon a high Mount they have
a Fort well built with wood, lome, and stone, where is planted their Ordnance:
Also a fair Watchtower, partly framed for the Sentinel, the place it seems
is healthful, for in these last three years, notwithstanding their great want
of most necessaries, there has not one died of the first planters, they have
made a salt work, and with that salt preserve the fish they take, and this
year has fraughted a ship of 180. tons. The Governor is one Mr. William
Bradford, their Captain Miles Standish; a bred Soldier in Holland; the chief
men for their assistance is Master Isaak Alderton, and diverse others as
occasion serves; their Preachers are Master William Bruster and Master John
Layford.

The most of them live together as one family or household, Their order of
government.
yet every man follows his trade and profession both by sea and land, and all
for a general stock, out of which they have all their maintenance, until
there be a diuident betwixt the Planters and the Adventurers. Those Planters
are not servants to the Adventurers here, but have only counsels of
directions from them, but no injunctions or command, and all the masters of
families are partners in land or whatsoever, setting their labors against the
stock, till certain years be expired for the division: they have young men
and boys for their Apprentises and servants, and some of them special
families, as Ship-carpenters, Salt-makers, Fish-masters, yet as servants upon
great wages. The Adventurers which raised the stock to begin and supply this
Plantation were about 70. some Gentlemen, some Merchants, some handy-crafts
men, some aduenturing great sums, some small, as their estates and affection
served. The general stock already employed is about 7000. l. by reason of
which charge and many crosses, many of them would adventure no more, but others
that knows, so great a design cannot be effected without both charge, loss
and crosses, are resolved to go forward with it to their powers; which deserve
no small commendations and encouragement. These dwell most about London, they
are not a corporation, but knit together by a voluntary combination in a
society without constraint or penalty, aiming to do good and to plant
Religion; they have a President and Treasurer, every year newly chosen by the
most voices, who orders the affairs of their Courts and meetings, and with
the assent of the most of them, undertakes all ordinary businesses, but in
more weighty affairs, the assent of the whole Company is required. There has
been a fishing this year upon the Coast about 50. English ships: and by Cape
Anne, there is a Plantation a beginning by the Dorchester men, which they hold
of those of New-Plimoth, who also by them have set up a fishing work; some
talk there is some other pretended Plantations, all whose good proceedings the
eternal God protect and preserve. And these have been the true proceedings and
accidents in thos^ Plantations.

Now to make a particular relation of all the acts and orders in the Courts
belonging unto them, of the anihilating old Patents and procuring new; with the
charge, pains and arguments, the reasons of such changes, all the treaties,
consultations, orations, and dissentions about the sharing and dividing those
large territories, confirming of Counsailers, electing all sorts of Officers,
directions, Letters of advice, and their answers, disputations about the
Magazines and Impositions, su^ers for Patents, positions for Freedoms, and
confirmations with complaints of injuries here, and also the mutinies,
examinations, arraignements, executions, and the cause of the so often revolt of
the Saluages at large, as many would have had, and it may be some do expect it
would make more quarrels then any of them would willingly answer, and such a
volume as would tire any wise man but to read the contents; for my own part I
rather fear the impartial Reader will think this rather more tedious then
necessary: but he that would be a practitioner in those affairs, I hope will
allow them not only needful but expedient: but how ever, if you please to
bear with those errors I have committed, if God please I live, my care and
pains shall endeavor to be thankful: if I die, accept my good will: If any
desire to be further satisfied, what defect is found in this, they shall find
supplied in me, that thus freely have thrown my self with my mite into the
Treasury of my Countries good, not doubting but God will stir up some noble
spirits to consider and examine if worthy Columbus could give the Spaniards any
such certainties for his design, when Queen Isabel of Spain set him forth
with 15. sail, and though I promise no Mines of gold, yet the warlike
Hollanders let us imitate but not hate, whose wealth and strength are good
testimonies of their treasury gotten by fishing; and New England has yielded
already by general computation one hundred thousand pounds at the least.
Therefore honorable and worthy Country men, let not the meannesse of the word
fish distaste you, for it will afford as good gold as the Mines of Guiana or
Pot^ssie, with less hazard and charge, and more certainty and facility. I. S.
I. S.

FINIS.
Errata
Page 1. line 7. for Quineth, read Guineth. page 153. li. 5. read from the
company. and li. 20. for 25000. pounds read 2500. pounds. page 164. li. 53.
for 1500. men, read 150. men, page 168. li. 11. for Goston read Gofton, and
Coranto Quowarranto, and li. 13 read before the Judges in Westminster hall,
for the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Counsel. There are many other errors,
which being but small I entreat the courteous reader to correct as he finds
them.


