A LEARNED AND GODLY SERMON, preached at Worcester, at an Assise: By THE
REVEREND and learned, MILES SMITH, Doctor of Divinity.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes, and are to be sold in Fleet Street at the
sign of the Turks head by John Barnes. 1602.

TO THE RIGHT REverend father in Christ, Gervase L. Bishop of Worcester, my
very good Lord, grace and peace be mult^plied.
MAny good Captains (Right Reverende and my very good Lord) think it, not
their duty, to fight themselves, but only to give command to others: and
Physicians without blame prescribe to others that which they apply not to
themselves: but of the preacher of the word of God it is justly required, no
less in life and practice, the^ in speech or writing, to express the soundnes
of doctrine, or, to speak it in Homers words, (...). as by his doctrine he
must preach to our cares, so by his example he must preach to our eyes: that
so by both he might lay hole of our hearts, as by the light of the one he must
direct us that we stray not, so by the footsteps of the other he must lead us
that we stumble not, and by the harmony of both affect us that we slack not.
Thus if he do, not only teaching, as Christ taught, but also (...) Mat. ^. 19.
living as he teaches others to live, he shall be called great in the
kingdom of heaven: he shall be ^eckoned among the her^s of the Christ^a^ common
wealth. By hid doctrine he shall win assent and obedience: by his example,
imitation and love: and by both admiration and reverence. That the author of
this learned and godly sermon is one of these, there is no need to prove: nor
how his life and practice, as if it had been the other twin of the same
mother, or the other hand of the same body, has always been answerable to the
doctrine of humility, which in this sermon is handled at large, although I envy
not that there are very many arguments to make this point plain: yet I could
wish there were not so many by one: and that, seeing his humble and modest
mind may and does otherwise so easily appear, he would spare to show it, by
his unwillingness to publish his learned labors: by which at this time others
are forced to publish some part of them for him without making him acquainted
therewith. As for the rest seeing it must be so, we are content (...)* even
until God shall put it into his mind, to stay for that for which he is in
debt to us ((...), Romans 1. 14.
every man that has received of God is a debtor to Christ in GOD and to the 1,
Cor. 3. 22. 23.
church in Christ) but for this little stream of the great river of his godly
learning we hope at length we shall not only obtain pardon, for publishing it
without giving him notice (for so heretofore it has happened to many learned
men, and as Possid^s reports, even to Augustine in many of his works) but
also deserve thanks of the whole Church of God, when the auctor by this
experience in the lesser, gessing how his greater pains will be accepted,
shall begin to dare to bring forth the ampler and more laborious fruits of
his learned and religious study.

As surely meet it is that he which is so well armed and provided should not
fear to venture: and that the less the certainety and the shorter the
continuance of the life of man is, the sooner the common wealth and Church
should enjoy the life and virtue of him that is excellent. If we will use
none but Pompey (says Catulus in a deliberation of heaping employments upon
none but Pompey) what if we loose Pompey, whom the^ shall we use? it is not
good (said the Lacedemonian captain that overthrew the Empire of the
Athenians) that Greece should have but one ^ie: and as the proverb tells us it
is good to have more ankers the^ oue for our ship to rest upon. For though it
be good if there be any (though but one) to say with than Amazon in Virg^l.

Audeo, et Aenead^ promitto occurrere turmae,
Solus: et intest as ac^es contra obvius ^re.
yet it is better, if there be another to reply out of the same place in the
Poet.

Mecum partire laborem Better I mean, not only because if one die the other
may succeed and fi^sh that which he leaves vuperfect: as Homer notes it as a
comfort to Protefilou^ his soldiers, after the death af their captain,

(...): But also that, if the one fall, the other, as it is in the 4. of
Ecclesiastes might help him up: that as Euryalus. and Nisus, they might be
mutual aid and comfort each to other:

His amor vnus era^, par^rque in bella rueba^t: That as the two brethren in
the same Poe^, Panda^us and B^as so they might stand forth the one on the one
side of the gate, the other on the other, jointly stopping the entrance and
irruption of the common enemy.

Daxtra et laeva pro turribus astent:
Arma^s ferro, et cr^stis capi^ alta corusci.
for, to say the truth neither can the quicksighted eye of the sun ((...)) be
thoroughly circumspect in all things: nay he is not able to see round about any
thing: whence it is said, Etiam capillus v^us ^abet vmbram suam. neither was
Hectors speech of Achilles emulation or envy, rather then truth, whene he told
his soldiers,

(...)
(...).
He must be greater then any Achilles (for it is proper to God alone) which
would be able to be alone. Even Adam in Paradise had need, and every
creature has need of a helper. I confess (the thanks be unto God) there are
many helpers in our church, joining hand with him upon who^ out eyes are
chiefly fixte: even more then those 9. Peers, of whom, when Achilles ceased
from war in his disconte, A^ax makes boast to Hector: that without the hardy
Achilles there was choice enough of one to encounter him (...).

Yea, if our Latona had but two to maintain her quarrel ^yet Latonaes two
would easily be sufficient against Niobes never so many:

(...). But if the best among us continue thus diffident of their own ability
(how confide^t of the cause soever they be) it i^ to be feared, least he
which as yet has, or may have many helpers, be at length either left alone,
or without a fit helper. Such a one as this author (to speak without the
dispr^ise of any) sure would be. As he that is not partial even in this his
godly Sermon may discern him: as he can know a I yon by his claw, and Hercules
by his singer. (...). as he that is not in turba may by feeling be found out
by him that is blind.

(...),
(...).
(...).
I speak even of the (...) which in this sermon appears: whether we consider
the directnes of his method, and distinct ordering and handling of so many
chief points of di^ine meditation and singular use, or his zeal in
affection, or his discreet moderation ^n applying, or delightful copiousnes in
(...). I speak the more sparingly of him because I speak as it were to his
face: and because I speak to you (Right Reverend) which have known him so
long* and ever since you knew him, have loved him so deatly. But I would his
modesty would not forget her self in one thing, nor make him in judging of
himself to attribute (almost against modesty) more to his own judgment, in
which he is too severe to himself, then to your ^ps. far more indifferent
estimation. whose intirenes of affection toward him, seeing it first arose
from judgment, cannot be any better argument against the soundness of the
judgment, then the sweetness of the fruit is against the soundness of the
root. For why should he suffer his learned papyrs to be like the hidden
riches of a covetous man, good for none until the owners death? as if it
were not with the works of learned men, that are published after the auctors
death, as with children which are borne after their fathers death ((...)) or as
if since falsehood now has gotten so strong a head, the shamefast modesty of
the learned were not to be content to s^cken her bridle, and to suffer zeal
to use the spur. It is not shamefastness nor her daughter silence, of which
they now have need. Both of which, as they are excuses for me diocrity, so
they are preiudices against excellency: as they are always the wisdom of
fools, so in such times as these are, they are the folly of the wise. Neither
is it much more excusable, in such times of ne^de, for the learned to hide
themselves with Achilles, then for the unlearned to th^st themselves forward
with Thersites. As much as the one kind overshoo^es by boldness, so much the
other falls short by fearfulnes, both of them are much amiss. And therefore
Xenopho^ in his third book of Memorables, makes Socrater to ^ke no less care
to dissuade Charmides, the uncle of Plato the Philosopher, from refraining
himself, then to dissuade Glauco, the brother to the same Plato, from
thrusting himself forwards, to meddle in the buisines of the public state.
The former of these was a man of very much worth, but of too little boldness:
the later was a man of very much boldness, but of too little wor^h. The fault of
the later was more odious but the fault of the former was more hurtful, more
reason to blame the later: but more need to blame the former. The later by too
much contemning others, and magnifying himself, made himself co^temtible: but
the former by too much regarding others and contemning himself made himself
unprofitable. The later by his boldness gained the dispraise which he might have
avoided* but the former by his shamefastnes avoided the commendation which he
might have ga^ed* as much as the one nee ded the bridle, so much the other
needed the spur: the one for his own sake, that he might leave drawing on
harm upon himself: the other for the common wealths sake: that he might
leave of with holding the public good. For so is every virtue and especially
the godly learning of the chieffest among us: the honestum is proper, but the
profit is common: it is (...) it is Thesaurus ecclesiae: I mean not for any In
dulgences after they are dead, but for present use while they live. By how much
the rather I hope, that every one which loves the truth (seeing himself also
has a part in every common good) will both by his grateful acceptance
encorage, and by his prayer to God aid and further the reverend auctor of this
godly sermon: that neither sickness, nor any other bar may hinder him from
performing, for the advancing of the truth, far greater things, then as yet
appear* for my self, as I could willingly, think of my self that I am (...):
So I will always pay him, and always owe him all the duties of love* for which
unto him ever since my childhood: and to you (right reverend) for these many
years, I am very deeply engaged. Of your Lp^. he could say, in his preface to
a ^n Gene^
most profitable work of yours* that he would be your reme^bra^cer (...). The
arguments which there he uses, with the whole co^pariso^, in which he prefers
writing before publik preachig by word of mouth may be returned upon himself:
with that which Pomponius in Plutarch, dehorting his son Numa from private
obscurity, tells him* that it is God which calls him, and suf^^rs not his
gifts to sleep in him: that the meanager of public buisines is as it were
the hand of God: that he must not (...), play the fugitive, or deny God such
service as in off^ng occasions and g^uing abilities he requires: nor abandon
the (...), the field and matter of good actions* But my purpose is not to tell
him what he should do, as indeed it beseemes me not, but only to signify our
desire co^^^^ing with your Lps. of whose desire, and (...) desire I am not
altogether ignorant: and by whose careful remembering him I hope at the length
he will show himself (...). that so we might be beholding to your Lp^. not
only for your own excellent labors; but in some sort also for his: as we are
not a little to S. Hilary, and to Ctesiphon, to the one for stirring up S.
Austine in the western countries, and to the other for stirring up S. Hieronym
in the Eastern countries; against the spreading infection of Pelagius. this I
hope hereafter to see. Mean while I have been bold to present this parcel
of his learned pains to your Lordship: to whom I know it shall be right
welcome, even for the auctors sake, as to all that know him.

(...). Thus commending your Lordship to the gracious goodness of the almighty,
that you may long continue a principal instrument of his glory, and of the
good of his church: I humbly take my leave.

from Corpus Christy College in Oxford Nov. 12. 1602. Your Lordships in all
love and duty most ready to be commanded ROBERT BVRHIL.

The chief points of matter severally and (...) order handled and illustrated
in the sermon following.
1. The words of the text* though spoken upon special occasion to the Jews,
have their use at all times, and among all nations. 2 Boasting is a very common
fault. 3. The baseness of man, and liberality of God is a chief reason against
all pride and boasting. 4. Pride hinders our knowledge and practice in
Christian religion 5. Pride is a confluence of many sins. 6. As pride, so
boasting as her daughter, is to be avoided. 7 Man's wisdom is not his own nor
of himself, and therefore not to be gloried in. 8. In matters of learning it
is very imperfect (God only being truly wise) and therefore also not to be
boasted of. 9. In matters of state it is very uncertain. 10. Policy falsely so
called, is not to be gloried in, but to be hated: as the cause of the corrupt
execution of the business of the common wealth and of neutrality in religion.
11. Strength and might by making us prosumptuous oppressors use to set God
against us* 12. Riches draw on enemies to spoil us. 13. There is no certainty
in riches. 14. Riches commonly make not men better, but worse* 15. True joy and
happiness is to know God a^ight.
A LEARNED SERMON preached at Worcester.
IER^MIAH CHAP. 9. 23. Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the
strong man glory in his strength, neither the rich man glory in his riches.
24. But let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands, and
knows me, etc.
THE Prophet ZACHARIH in his first Chap: has thus. Your fathers. Zach. 1. 5. 6.
Where are they? and do the Prophets live for ever? But did not my words, and
my statutes, which I commanded by my servants the Prophets, take hold of your
fathers? Meaning that they did take hold of their fathers, and would take hold
of them also: except they repented. So 1. Cor. 10. the Apostle says, 1. Cor.
10. 11
These things came to them for ensamples, but are written to admonish us, upon
whom the ends of the world are come: Signifying that the judgments of God
recorded in the word, and the whole word it self, was not ordained for the
instruction only of them, in whose days it was written, but to be for the use
of the Church in all succeeding ages. In a city of Egypt called Diospolis, in
a temple Cle. Alex. ^. 5. stromat
there called Pylon, there was pictured a little boy, to signify generation,
and an old man to signify corruption: also an hawk, a symbol of God (for the
quicknes of his sight) and a fish, a symbol of hatred (fish were an
abomination to the priests of Egypt, as witnesses Herodotus lo. 2o.) and
lastly a crocodile Herod. li. 2.
to signify impudency. The whole devise being laid together importing thus
much, and preaching thus much: (...): that is, O ye that are young and co^^ing
on, O ye that are old and going out of the world (O all together.) to you all
be it known, that God does hate impudency. This has Clemens Alexandrinus in
the 5. of his stromats. The like may be said of the present text, which I
have in hand, that, albeit it be a part of a sermon, that the Prophet Jeremy
made unto the children of Israel a little before their captivity into Babylon
(wherein he assures them, that piety only, and no carnal sleights, or
abilities, should be able to do them good in that fearful day) and so might
seem to be proper to that nation, and to that occasion: yet for all that, if we
will not mistake it, we are to take it for an everlasting sermon (there is
mention in the Revelation of an everlasting gospel) and even Rev. 14. 6.
for a general proclamation against all haughtines and vain confidence of me^,
whether they be Jews or Gentiles, young or old: eve^ against all those, that
do not set God before their eyes: making him their stay* but do boast
themselves of the sharpnes of their wit, or of the strength of their arm, or
of the greatness of their wealth, which the Lord does not account of. And that
this general use is to be made of this parcel of Scripture* the holy Ghost
himself, the best interpretour of his own meaning. does plainly declare. 1. 1.
Cor. 1. 31.
Cor. 1. 31. and 2 Cor. 10. 17. to the which 2. Cor. 10. 17
places for brevity sake I do refer you. And here that observation of
Tertullian Tertullian de spectaculis.
in his book de spectaculis has fit place: Specialiter quaedam pronuntiata
generaliter sapiunt. cum Deus Israelitas admonet disciplinae, vel obiurgat,
vtique adomnes habet. Certain things uttered (in the scriptures) for one
special purpose, or upon one specialloccasio^, have yet a general drift or
importment. when God admonishes the Israelites of their duty, or finds
fault with the^ for neglect thereof, it concerns all. So then as 3. ^un. 2.
the Apostle said to Timothy that he suffered trouble for the Gospel sake
unto ^o^ds, but the word of God was not bound: Heb. 11.
And as it is said of Abell Heb. 11. That he being dead yet speaks: so it may
be said in some sort of the prophet Jeremy, that though he were bound as
touching bodily presence to his countrymen the Jews, and though his bones are
rotten long since: yet for all that his words remain lively in operation even
to this day: and by the same he speaks, and preaches to us now here
assembled.

And what does he speak unto us in the words of my text? In sum, and in
gross thus much: to purge out the old leaven of arrogancy; and insolenci^,
that we may be a sweet lump of modesty and thankfulness unto the Lord. In
particular these two points. First that we would weane ourselves from all
carnal boasting, whether of our wit and cunning, or of our power and
authority, or of our wealth and other abilities: this in the former verse.
Secondly that we would entertain, and embrace a spiritual kind of reioicing
for Gods great mercies, and favor toward us, and ^amely for this, that he has
vouchsafed to reveal himself and his truth unto us: this in the later verse.

Touching the former: many are deceived (beloved) concerning this matter of
boasting. for neither is it proper to a few fools only, as some have imagined,
(for these fools are found every where) nether is it a fault of vanity only or
indiscretion, but even of iniquity, and sinnefulnes. If any doubt of the
general spreading of the infectio^, and whether it be Epidemicall, let him
think but of two sayings: the one of Solomon, Pro^. 20. 6.
the other of Seneca. In the 20. of the S^n ^p 47.
Proverbs Solomon says, Many men will boast, every one of his own goodness;
but who can find a faithful man? where he shows the fault to be general, or
as good as general. So Seneca epist. 47. speaks indefinitely, Regum nobis
induimus animos: every one of us hears the mind of an Emperor: then we will
not be far behind for boasting: this for sentences. As for examples: let me
produce unto you but two out of hundreds, namely of Cato the elder, and of
Tullie. What a notable man was Cat^ the elder? He had that commendation given
unto him by consent, which none in his time was thought to deserve, to be
optimus orator, optimus senator, and optimus imperator (as Pliny reports)
Plinius.
to wit, a most singular orator, a most singular senator, or statesman, and a
most singular general: and yet this so incomparable a man was so much given to
boast himself, that his veriest friends were ashamed of him. As for Tullie he
was so excellently qualisied, that none but a Tullie, that is, one admirably
eloquent, is sufficient to speak of his worthiness. And yet this is not left
vnreme^bred by them, that were willing to co^ceale a small blemish in him, that
his speech which flowed from him as sweet as honey, he made to taste as bitter
as wormewoode many times, by interlacing of his own praises. Thus as dead
Eccle. 10.
^ies corrupt the sweet ointment, as Saomon says: and as desperate steruelings,
that have nothing else to feed on, will fall to their own flesh, as Plutarch
says and Plutarch de ratione vel modo, quo quis se* ipsum laudet (...). 1.
ci^a invidia^.
eat the brawnes of their own arms: so for want of other boasters, many will
fall to boast themselves, and though they offend God, and be offensive to men,
yet they will do it.

That such do offend God (not only are displeasing to men) may appear
hereby. First for that God does expressly forbid it, as in my text, and in
diverse other places of the scripture. Secondly for that he has sharply
punished this sin, not only in his enemies, as in olde-Babel, for boasting, and
saying: I am, and none else, I shall be a Lady Esaie 47.
for ever: and in new Babel, for her proud names of blasphemy, whereof this
was one, as Hiero^ says, Roma aterna, Rome Hieromim. Algosiae. quaest. 11. 2.
Sam. 24.
shall flourish for ever: but also in his dearest children, as in David, for
numbering the people of a vain glorious mind: Esa. 37.
and in Ezechias, for showing his treasures to to the ambassadors of the king
of Babel, of the like bragging pride. Thirdly for that the saints of God have
greatly abhorred this vice, and refrained it, as much as might be: as S. Paul
to the Galath. God forbid, that I should Galat* 6.
glory, but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ: God for bid. And to the
Corinthians. 2. Cor. 11.
If I must needs glory, I will glory of mine infirmities: that is, I will be
far from carnail boasting. Lastly for that God has wrought this instinct,
or law of nature in the very heathen to co^ demne it. As namely Tullie, whom
I toulde you of even now, howsoever he fell in practice, yet when he spoke from
his book, he cold say: Deforme est de Offici. 1o.
s^ ipso praedicare, falsa praesertim. It is an evil favored thing to, make
vaunte of ones own doings* specially if he lie never so little. And the Greek
Orator Demosth. de co^ona.
says: to speak of my self, (that which may sound to mine own praise) I
take it to be (...), so odious nay so burdenous, and so yrke some, that every
necessity shall not enforce me to do it. These points might be enlarged by
amplifications, and set forth with variety ^ colors, and strengthened with
many reasons and proofs, you may easily gather. But as they that have a large
journey to make, and but a short time allowed them, must make but short
baits by the way, and cannot stand to take every acquaintance that they meet
by the hand: and as they that are to paint or to print a pitched field within
the compass of a sheet or two of papyr, can make but few soldiers whole, or
complete, but are feign to set down for the most their heads only or their
helmettes: So having many things to handle, and within the compass of a short
hour, I must be contented to touch only the heads of the greatest part of
them, and as for long discourses, I must let them alone.

We have seen dear Christians by many signs and tokens that the
vaineglorious man is no way gracious with God: but contrariwise very odious to
him: but why he should be so odious to him, and so far out of his books, we
have not seen. You shall understand therefore, that God hates pride and all
that pertaieneth to it, not of any emulation, for who can come near unto God,
within any degree of comparion, that he should be afraid of him? (emulation is
a kind of fear of the worth or rising of another, least he should top us)
but of pure justice, and for the due demerite of the sin. For shall the ax^,
or savve boast it self against him that uses the same? Esaie Chap. 10* shall
the Esaie 10*
pitcher exalt it self against the potter, or the thistle say I am not a
thistle? Who Act. 17.
made us of one blood to dvvell upon the face of the earth? Who took us up,
when Ezech. 16.
we lay polluted in our blood, even when we lay polluted in our blood, who
took us up, and said unto us, live? who delivered us from the power of
darkness, and translated us into the kingdom of his Coloss. 1.
dear son, in whom we ha^ redemption in his blood, even the forgivenes of
our sins? who paid our ransom for us, when we were not worth a groate, cast
his garment over us to cover us, when we lay starcke naked? and which is as
great a mercy or benefit, as any of the former, who passes by our
iniquities, and wincketh at our faults, whereby we trespass against him daiely,
and howrely? I say who has forgiven us, and given us so many things, and so
many more, who but the Lord? Now this being our condition, and none other, and
we being thus obnoxious to God, and defective in our selves, is it for any of
us to talk of his sufficiency, being over head and ears in debte? or to
please himself in his beauty being blacker ^ccles. 10.
then a black moore? Why the^ art thou proud earth and ashes? why do thou
boast as though thou had not received 1. Cor. 4.
that which thou have? nay why do thou not cover thy face for shame,
because of the manifold pollutions wherewith thou art distained? Yet foolish man
will be wise; naked man will be gaie, filthy man will be pure, though man newborn is like a vvilde asses colte, as Job Job. 11.
says. Now when the Lord sees this, namely, that for all the cost and charges
that he is at upon us, yet we remain vile and beggarly, and for all our
vileness and beggerlines, yet that we will not be acknowen of it, but
contrariwise stout it with him, and beard him, and take upon our selves stiff
necks, and proud looks: is it any mervaile, if the Lord hate pride which
works this strangenes, and breach betwixt him, and his creatures?

For but for pride which like the same albugo, or white spotte in the eye,
dimmeth our understanding, nay doubts it many times (the similitude is not
mine, but Gregori^ in his Pastorall^ and Greg. d^ cur. past. part^. 1.
but for self love the mother of pride, which makes us poreblinde at the
least ( Isidorus Pelusiota says of the affection Isidorus Pelusiota in epist.
that we bear to another that it is p^re blind, (...), how much more then is
it true of self affection) we should know God, and the height of his favor,
and the breadth of his love, and the worth of his pardon, and so be provoked to
greater thankefulnes toward him. Also we should know our selves and the sum
of our debte, and the depth of our misery, and so be stouped, and humbled, and
urged to make supplication to our God. ^o these two duties of humility, and
thankefulnes, the whole law and the Prophets, and Evangelistes, and Apostles,
and whatsoever is written in the book of God, and whatsoever thence is to be
collected may in some sort be referred: And therefore, for so much as pride is
such a special hin derance to the performance of these special duties, no
mervaile if the LORD have the same in special detestation.

Add hereunto, that, as Tertullian calls the commandment that God gave Adam
in Paradise, matricem omnium Tertullian coutra ^udaeos.
praeceptoru^ Dei: the very matrixe, or womb of all the commandments of God,
and as Theodorit calls Moses Theodo. 2. the rape^t.
(...), a very ocean of all divi^ty: and as some have called Rome epitome^
vniuersi, an epitome or abridge meant of the whole world: so it may be said
of pride, that it is the sum of al naughtines, and a very sea of it, and
there is no sin almost but pride does participate with it. It is a kind of
idolatry, it makes a man to bow to himself, and to burn incense to his own
yarne, as the Prophet Habakuk speaks. It is a Habak. 1. 1^
kind of sacrilege, it robs God of his honor, even of this honor of saving
us Esaias. 46. 9. and 26. 1^.
freely, and working al our works in us, as Esaie avoucheth. It is a kind of
dronkenes, it makes a man to err from a sound judgment, and to speak, and to
do things absurdely: The proud man is Habak. ^. ^
as he that transgresses by wine: says the Prophet. Fourthly it is a kind
of murder, it slays the soul, while it makes it to doat upon it self,
eve^ as the ape kills her young one by clipping it to hard. Fifthly it is a
very adultery, it coupleth us to another from the Lord, even to self conceit.
If we say Aug. in Ioha^. tract. 13.
(says S. Augustine) that we are any thing, and so not give the glory unto
God: adulteri sumus, nos amari volumus, non spon sum, we are plain adulterers,
we would have our selves to be loved, and not the bridegroom. Sixthly a false
witness, and a lying glass it is, making us believe that we are that, that we
are not: fairewhen we are foul. (...). Love Theocrit in Bucoliast. (...).
(and self love much more) makes those things, that are not fair to seem
fair: it so blndeth the eye. Lastly it is most covetous, and most envious,
hunting after ter praise, as after a pray, and not deining that others should
come near the^ within many Leagues. Stand a part, Esa. 65. 5.
come not near me, for I am holier then thou, said those proud Hypocrites
in Esaie. Thus as Aristotle says out of Aristotel. Ethi^
Theognis, that in justice all virtues are couched together ((...)) summarily:
so it may be said of pride, that in it all vices are lapte up together as it
were in a bundell. And therefore God hating every sin particularely, and by
it self, and by it self, he must needs abhor pride, which is a confluence,
and a collection of them al. Now as he hates pride, which is the daughter
of self love, as I told you: so he hates all the daughters of pride, whereof
boasting, and glotying seems to be one of the yo^gest and worst. Sorry crow
sorry egg, said Gell*
they that judged the controversy between Corax, and Tisias. Like mother,
Ezech*
like daughter says Ezechiel: and so hateful mother hateful daughter may we
say. When the Roman soldiers had Aurelius victor.
slain Maximinus the tyran they made search for his son and slew him also:
saying Epessimo genere ne catulum quide^ Genesis ^.
relinque^du^* of a vile litter not one whelpe was to be saved alive. When
Noah awoke from his wine and knew what his younger son Ham had done unto him
he cursed even Hams son for Hams offense: saying, Cursed be Canaan, a
servant of servants shall he be etc. Stasinus his verdite is remembered by
Clemens Clem A^ Strom. 6
Alexandrinus, (...). (...). He that kills the wicked parent, and spares
his ungracious brattes is a very fool. This justice appears to be in God
toward pride and her daughters* he hates both the one, and the other: yea he
hates al them, that be in love with either. I shall not need to prove that
vain glory is prides own daughter, for that were to prove a crab to come of a
crab tree, or a black berie of a brier, or dross of the corruption of metal,
or skumme of the uncleanness of the meat. What is choler else, say they, the^ the
froath of blood, spuma sanguinis? and so what is glorying else, but a very
froath of pride? they froath out their own shame, while they boil up with
their own praises: and if vaunting be in the branch, vanity is in the root,
that is certain. Al boasting therefore is to be avoided, and abhorred as bad,
fruit of a bad tree: and if al boasting, then boasting of wisdom, or
strength, or riches, as it follows in my text. Let not the wise glory in his
wisdom etc.

Of boasting in general we have spoken enough already, now let us see more
particularely, what be the things that he forbids us to boast of* The
prophet sets down. 3. the first wisdom: the second strength, the third
riches. Of these I am to speak in order. Quod gene ri attributum est etiam in
species redu^dat, says Tertullian. That which is true in the general, will
be found true in the special, or particular with advantage. For as much
therefore as I have proved already that boasting in general is unlawful, I shall
not need to prove seriously or amply, that it is unlawful to boast of these
particulars, wisdom, strength, or riches: only a fleight skimming over the
points may serve the turn.

Of wisdom first this I have to say: that of all the gifts, wherewith the Lord
does beautify the soul of man, none seems to be co^parable to it: sure I am
none ought to be preferred before it. For it is the very stern of our vessel,
the very sun of our firmament, the very eye of our head, the very heart of
our bo die. Where wisdom sittteth at the stern there matters are ordered in a
probable course to a laudable end. But where wisdom is wanting, there the
sun goes down at noone day (to use the Prophets words) there the light,
that is in us is turned into darkness, as Christ speaks, and then how great
is the darkness? So thought Lactantius. Vt sol Lact. l. 2. c. 8
oculorum, sic sapienti^ lume^ est cordis humani. As the sun is the light of
our eyes, so the light of our heart is wisdom: So thought the Poet. (...).
Phocylid
Fields, towns, ships are all managed and governed by wisdom. Wisdom
therefore is a most precious thing: that is certain: and the mercha^dise Pro. 3.
thereof is better then silver, and the gain thereof is better then gold, as
Solomon says: but not to be boasted of for all that.

And why? First because it is not our own, or of our selves: as Cyprian says:
Cypriam.
De nullo gloriandum, quia nostrum nihil est. We are to boast of nothing
because nothing is our own, or of our selves. And Augustine upon John says:
Christ said not, without me ye can do little, but with out me ye can do
nothing. Where then is glorying? is it not excluded? For if it were lawful to
boast of that, which is not our own, then the crow might have been justified
for brauing it with her borrowed or stolen feathers ( furtivis coloribus) and
the ass for ietting with the Lions skin about him, and the ape for skipping
up and down in his masters iacket. But now these were ridiculous in so doing,
therefore we cannot reasonably boast of that which is not our own: except we
will be like to these unreasonable beasts. Let this be the first reason against
glorying in wisdom.

The second this: Our wisdom is many ways imperfect, therefore, if we be
wise, we will not brag of it. For will any brag of his lame leg, or his
one cie? Indeed now I remember Agesilaus Plutarch. in Ages. et Sert.
bragged of his club-foote, and had never done bragging of it. Also Sertorius
brag ged of his one eye, and had never done bragging of it but by their leave I
think this their bragging was but from the teeth outward, and rather to
prevent, and forestall others from gibing, then of any delighte they took
there in themselves (bragging lightly breaks not fourth, but some inward joy,
or tickling helps it forward) and therefore it was like to the same
Sardonius risus. And notwithstanding that exception, the proposition remains
firm, that we boast not naturally or usually of our infirmities, or
imperfections. But now our wisdom is imperfect, and very imperfect, why the^
should any boast of it? That it is imperfect S. Paul shows. 1. Cor 13 We
know in 1. Cor 13.
part, and we prophecy in part. Again, Now we see in a glass darkely. Yea
and that which an Aegyptia^ priest said to a Grecia^ by the report of Plato, ye
Grecia^s Plato in Timaeo.
are always children: the same will be found true not only of the Grecians,
but of the Egyptians themselves, and of the English and al; for understanding
we are but children. I grant that in all ages, and in all nations some have gone
away with the name of wisdom, as that Roman that was called Corculum ( Nosica
was so called) that Grecia^ that was called (...) (not (...) but (...))
Democritus Abderita was so called: that Jew that was surnamed Hechacha^, Aben
Ezra was so surnamed: the Britane that was called the sage, Gildas was so
called, Gildas sapiens, etc. Yet for all that to talk of wisdom indeed, The
depth Job. 28. 14.
says it is not in me, the sea also says it is not with me, as Job says. Who
ever satisfied others or himself, in delivering the cause of the overflowing
of Nilus in the summer time? who ever could give any sound reason, why the
lodestone should draw the iron to it as it does, or direct or turn to the
pole star so as it does? who ever went about to give a probable reason why
or how the little fish called (...) should be able to stay or to stop, so
great a vessel as it is reported to stay, and that being under sail too? And
to omi^ these secrets of nature, who ever attained to that perfection in any
art, but he left much for them that should come after both to invent better,
and to devise a new? And as for points of divinity, (wherein I confess we
have the greatest help through the benefit of the word of God, which is a
light unto our Psalm 119.
feet, and a lantern to our steps) touching the same also it is a most
certain truth, that the most acute and judicious divines have both
acknowledged their ignorance (in some matters not so necessary to be
understood) and deplored their oversight. What a good speech is that of
Irenaeus? Some things in the Irenzus.
scripture by Gods providence are hard to be comprehended in this life (vt
semper quide^ Deus doceat, homo aute^ se^per discat quae sunt a Deo) that God
might have always somewhat to teach us, and that man might have to learn
always those things that are of God. What a modest speech is that of Augustine?
Quo Aug. co^tra Origenist. and Priscilia^.
me contemn as, quem magnum put as esse doct^rem, etc. That thou may (no
longer have me in admiration, but) conte^ne me whom thou take to be so great
a Doctor: I cannot tell what these same thro^es, and dominions and
principalitie^, and powers do mean, nor wherein they differ. I will not
trouble you with more quotations to this purpose. So then as Moses Exodus 39. 30.
caused it to be superscribed or grave^ upon the plate for the holy crown,
Holiness to the Lord, meaning to the Lord only: and as S. Paul to Timothy
asscribeth 1. Tim. 6. 1^
immortality to the Lord, to the Lord only ( who only has immortality) and
as a king of this land contended, that the name of king was due only to the
Canu^us.
king crucified Jesus Christ: so surely the name of wisdom is due, and to be
asscribed to God only, as being only wise. Why? it is so ascribed by S. Paul
in express words in the forenamed epistle, unto the king immortal, invisible
1. Tim. 1. 17
unto God only wise, etc. Yea what say you if heathen men themselves, as
arrogant as they were, have acknowledged no less. Laertius writes that
certain Laertius in Thal^c.
young men of Ionia standing upon the sea shore and beholding fisherme^ making
of a draught* agreed with the^ a great for their draught, that what they should
hale up to land in their net should be theirs. Now it was so by Gods
providence, that together with certain fish, they encloased a certain piece
of plate (which no man knew when it was suncke there) and dragged tho same to
land in their net. The same being claimed and seized upon by the young men, by
virtue of their bargain, they cast between them how to dispose of it. But
when they could not agree about the sharing of it, they sent to the Oracle for
resolution from thence. They were returned answer from the Oracle to send it
to the wisest. They send it therefore to Thales their cuntryman: a man of
great note in those days for wisdom. But when it was brought to him, he
disabled himself, and disclamed the name of wise: and sent it to an other as
being more wise then he was. The second also he would none of it, but sent it
to a third, and the third to a fourth, etc and so they posted it of from one to
an other, until seve^ had it. The seventh and last Solon, he made no more a
do but sent it to the temple at Delphi for a present to God, as acknowledging
him only to be wise. A mervailous confession for heathen men to make touching
the alone wisdom of God. And thus God, that ordains his praise out of the
Psalm. 8.
mouths of babes and sucklings as it is in the Psalm, and made the domb beast
speaking 2. Pet 2.
with ma^s voice to rebuke the madness of the prophet, as it is in the Apostle,
made these me^, which were but babes in Christ, nay eve^ as beasts before him,
being without God in this world, to set forth his honor and praise, and even to
rebuke the mad arrogance of many Christians in our days, Man's wisdom
therefore touching matters of learning is imperfect, you hear by the confession
of the wisest, and therefore not to be boasted of.

So is it uncertain concerning matters of policy, and therefore this a third
reason why it ought not to be gloried in. Prudens futuri tempo^ exitum
caligino Horatius.
sa nocte premit Deus, says one. (...) Pindaius.
says an other. Thus it is, future things they are to be, they are not yet:
therefore we cannot see them: they may fall out another way as well, as that way
which we imagine: they be futura contingentia, therefore we may be deceived in
them. The chirurgian that deals with an outward wound sees what he does,
and can tell whether he can heal it or no, and in what time: but he that is
to make an incision within the Body, be it for the stone, or the like disease,
he does but grope in the dark as it were, and may as well take hoult of that
which he should not, as of that, which he would. So the arti^an, that works
in his shop, and has his tools about him, can promise to make up his days
work to his best advantage: but the merchant venturer, that is to cut the
seas, and had need of one wind to bring him out of the have^, an other to
bring him about to the lands end, another peradve^ture to bring him to the
place of traffic, where he would be, he can promise nothing neither touching
his return, neither touching his making of his commodity, but as the wind,
and the weather, and the me^ of war by the way, and as the honesty, and skill
of them, whom he tradeth with, shall give him leave. Just so fares it in these
matters of prudence, and policy, they are co^iectural, they are not demo^
stratiue, therefore there is no science of the^: they have need of the
co^currence of many causes that are casual, of many men's minds that are
mutable, therefore we cannot build upon them. Yea they are built many times upon
the errors and negligence of our enemies, and they peradventure be awake as
well as our selves. Antigonus that wise Prince (he is reckoned among the^, that
having but one eye, were exceeding politic, and crafty) thought, and made
certain account of it, to come upon his enemy Eumenes at vnawa^es, and to
take him napping, but he found ^umenes as vigilant as himself, and so was
feign to retire with a slay in his ear as wise as he came. This for matters of
war So for matters of peace. Solomon the vvisest of al thought that, if he
might ioin in affinity with his neighbor princes, and take many of their
daughters to be his wives and women, he should not only strengthen the kingdom
in his own hand: but also stablish it in his house long, and long: also he
thought peradventure, that by occasion of his marriages, and affinities being
great, many of the vplandish people would be trained, and won to the
knowledging, and worshipping of the true God of Israel: but how was he
deceived? His wives, and women turned his heart from the Lord: he could do
little or no good upon them, or theirs; and as for the secret underminers of
Salomons state, and succession, where found they entertainment, but among
Salomons allies? Let 1. King. 11.
me instance this point in one or two examples more. Constantine the great,
that worthy christian, and great politician, thought, that, if he might build
a city in the confines of Europe and Asia, that might be aemula Romae, a
match to Rome, and place one of his so^s there to keep his court, he should
not only eternize his name, but also fortify the Empire no less then if he
had invir^ned it with a wall of brass. Also Phocas, and Pipinus thought, the
one if he might dignifie the Bishop of Rome with an extravagant title to be
called universal bishop: the other, if he might lade the church of Rome with
principalities, even with principality upon principality, they should deserve
immortally well, not only of that sea, but also of the whole house of God. But
the way of man is not in him self as Jeremy Ier. 10 23.
says: neither is it in man to foresee, what will fall out luckely, or cross.
The building of new Rome was the decay of old Rome, so it proved, and the
dividing of the Empire was the destruction of the Empire, and no less, as wise
men know. Also the lifting up of the man of Rome, was the hoysting up of the
man of sin, and the locking of him in the chair, even in the chair of
pestilence. Thus there is no policy so provident, no providence so
circumspect, but the same is subject to errors, and crosses: and therefore no
cause why it should be trusted to: and therefore no cause why it should be
glorified in. Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, etc,

If any wisdom might be boasted of, surely one of those kinds of wisdom that
^ erst reckoned up unto you, to wit, wisdom or skill in the arts, wisdom
or knowledge in divinity, wisdom or policy touching matters of state but
these, you have heard, are not to be relied upon, because they are uncertain,
because they are imperfect etc. therefore much less are we to rely upon any
such as is worse, or inferior to these* But yet the world is the world, it
has done so and does so, yea and blesses it self for so doing; therefore
this wound had need to be searched and ransacked a little deeper. Homer I
remember Home^.
cries out against Eris or Discord (...). O I would it were perished and
thrown out of the company of the gods and men. So Cyprian against
covetousnes, o dete Cyprian.
stabilis caecit as mentium* etc o this same Hieronym.
detestable blindness of men's minds. Hieronym against luxury, or lechery, o
ignis inf ernalis luxuria, o Lechery a very hellish fire. Augustine against
error or Augustine.
mistaking, o errare, o delirare: o what a vile thing it is to be blinded with
error etc. thus every one cried out against the sins wherewith their times
were most pestered and po^soned. Surely if I were appointed to touch the soar
of the daughter of our people (we have many soars* from the crown of our head
to the soale of our foot* we are little else but soars* and botches and
biles) but yet if I were to touch that which does most of al apostemate, and
ranckle, then I ought to cry out o policy, policy. Policy I mean falsely
so called, but indeed cunning, and cudgeling. This lets that the prince,
and the ^ealme many times cannot be so served, as they should be: nor justice
administered in many places, as it ought to be* nor the Gospel of the son of
God so propagated, as were to be wished many cold wish that in musters and
presses, the likeliest men to do service, and not the weakest of friends,
should be appointed: also that they were helped to their right, that suffer
wrong: also that the incorrigible were cut of by the sword of justice: also
that these same deceitful workers crafti ly crept in, in pretense to adva^ce
the Romish faith, but indeed to suppla^t English loialty, and faithfulness, that
I sai^e their goings out, and their co^mings in, and their haunts were better
marked: and so the danger, that is threatened by them, preve^ted* but yet, to
put our hand to the work, every one to do some service in his place: as for
example, conestables to precept the hablest and fittest persons for the wars:
shirif* to make returns of indifferente ^uries for the trial of rights:
jurors to have God, and a good conscience before their eyes, and not to turn
aside to by respects. etc. This we will not be induced to do: what letteh us?
Policy* For we say if we shall be precise in our office this year, or in this
action at this time, others will be as precise against us or ours another time,
and then what shall we gain by it? and if we should not lean somewhat to such a
person, and to such a cause, we should offend such a great one, and he will sit
on our skirtes. Thus policy overthrows polity, that is the common weal: and
thus the fear of man casts out the fear of God, as the wise man
co^plaineth. Another vanity, nay wickedness, I have noted under the su^, that is
this: there be that have the door of faith opened to the^, and have opportunity
to hear words whereby they and their household might be saved: and the same also
do consent in the inward man to the doctrine taught, and published by authority
among us, that the same is the truth, and the contrary falshoode: and yet to
give their names to the gospel sou^dly, or to protest against popery and super
stitio^ zealously they will not be drawn. what withholdeth the^? policy, for
they think continuing doubtful, nay though they should be enemies, if but
secret ones, they shall loose nothing, the state holding as it does. These be
the times of mercy (though certain ungrateful me^ cry out against the^ as
though they were bloody, for no other cause, but for that they are restrained
from sheding innocent blood, as they were wont in the days of their tira^ny)
and if there should be a change, the^ their very doubtfulness and staggering
would be remembered, and they adva^ced thereby. Thus as Demades said Plutarch.
to his cuntryme^ of Athens, when they paused to decree divine honors to king
Demetrius, Take heed my masters least while you be so scrupulous for heaven,
and heavenly matters, you loose the earth in the mean time, etc. So some seem
to make no reckoning at al of their heave^ly inheritance, so that they may
uphold or better their state on earth. Call you this wisdom, policy, providence
or the lik? The^ Achitophel was a wise man to prefer the expectancy of honor at
the traitor Absalons hands, before the present enjoying of favor from king
David, his anointed sovereign. The^ Esau was politic Heb. 11.
to esteem more of a mess of pottage, then of the blessing, which afterward he
could not recover, though he sought it with tears. Yea briefly then that
Emperor was provident (were it Nero, or whosoever else) that fished for menise
and gudgeons with nets of silk and hooks of gold. What is the chafe to the
wheat? says the Lord what is the shadow to the body, the body to the soul,
Ierem. 23.
frailty to eternity? What shall it advantage Matthew. 19.
a man to win* etc. or ca^ any man save his soul that has God his enemy? or
can any man have God to be his friend, that does stout with him? Be not decei
ved: as God is called Ame^ or true, in the revelation, and calls himself
truth in Revel. 3.
the 14 of John: so he loves truth, and sincerity in the inward parts Ps. 51.
and with Psalm. 51.
out truth he loves nothing that he Jacob. 1.
does love A doubling man, or a man with a double heart ((...)) says S. Iams is
unstable in all his ways, and can such a one look for any thing at Gods
hands? Let the^ look to it whosoever among us play fast and loose, and blow
hot and cold with the Lord, making bridges in the aier, as the comicall Poet
says, and making Ier. 17. 5.
flesh their arm, but in their heart depar^ from the Lord, which the Prophet
does so much cry out against. Surely such wisdom is not from above, but is
earthly sensual, and divelish. And as Jacob. 3.
truly, as the reproach delivered by the Esai. ^4. 20.
Prophet Esaias 44. in respect of their corrupt judgment is verified in them: He
feeds of ashes: a seduced heart has deceived him, that he cannot deliver his
soul? and say, may not I err? so the judgment denounced by the same prophet
in an other place in respect of their worldly policy shall take hoult of them.
Behold says he you all kindle a fire, and Esa. 50. 11.
are all compassed about with sparks: walk in the light of your fire, and in
the sparks that ye have kindled. This shallye have of mine hand, ye shall lie
down in sorrow. As if he said, your turning of devises, shall it not be as
the potters clay? shall it not break, and crumble between your fingers? Take
counsel as long as you will, it shall not stand, make a decree, it shall Evil
courses will not prosper. ^om Odys.
not prosper says the Lord almighty. (...) says the heathen man. He that
sows the wind shall reap the whirle wind* let him be sure of it. And let
so much be spoken against glorying in wisdom, either rightly so called, or
falsely so termed. Let us consider now of the second thing that we are
forbidden to boast of, to wit strength. Nor the strong man in his strength.

There have been many strong men C^l. Rodig. l. ^ cap. 57.
in all ages: strong of arm, as that Polydamas, that caught a wild bull by one
of his hinder legs, and held him by force of his arm for all that the bull
could do: and that Pulio (mentioned by Dio) that Dio in Augusto.
threw a stone at a town wall, beseidged by Germanicus, with such might, that
the batlement which he hitte, and he which was on it came tombling down, which
made them* that held the town through wonderment at his strength to yield it
up. Strong of hand, as that Trebell. ^ Pollio.
Marius (one of the 30. Tyrans) that would turn a side a waine with one of his
singers: and that Polonian of late in the days of Stephan Buther, that would
knappe an horseshee a sunder, were it never so hard between his hands. Strong
of arm and head and body, and heart and al, as that Aristomenes mentioned by
Pliny, who slew 300. Lacedaemonians Pliny.
in fight in one day: and that Aurelian then or shortly after Emperor:
Vopiscus
of who^ they made that song: mill mill mill viuat: qui mill mill occidit.
Let him live thousands (of years or months) who stewae thousands of
enemies. These were famous men in their generations, for strength and no doubt
they were mervailously admired at by the^, that lived in their times: Yet for all that nether wereothers to have gloried in the^, nor they in themselves. Not
others to glory in the^: because Paul says Let 1. Cor. 3.
no man rejoice or glory in me^ ((...)) And again Let him that glories glory
in the Lord. 1 Cor. 10. Not the^selus to glory in the^selus, because strength
is not to be compared to wisdo^e, and therefore wisdom being debarred from
boasting (as you heard already) strength ought much more. That strength comes
short of wis dome Solomon shows both by plain words and by an example. By
plain Eccles. 9. 14. 16.
words as when he says Eccles. 9. 16. The^ said I, better is wisdom the^
strength. By an example: as in the same chapter, ver. 14. A little city, and
few men in it, and a great king came against it, and compassed it about, and
builded fortes against it. And there was found therein a poor and wise man,
and he delivered the city by his wisdom. Thus Solomon. Nature also has
taught as much, both in plain words: and by examples. In plain words, as
Musaeus: (...). Mus^.
Wisdom or slight is always better then strength. By an example as Sertorius
for example. He caused a couple of horses to be brought before him, the one
fat and fleshy, the other a lean carrion jade: also a couple of soldiers the
one strong, and lusty the other a silly sickely fellow: to the lean horse he
put the strong man, and he going roughly to work, and thinking to do the deed
with dead strength, haled, and pulled, and tired himself, and was a laughing
stock to the beholders: but the weak fellow using some cunning, for all his
weakness did the feat, and went his way with the applause. Wisdom therefore is
better then strength: and therefore this is one strong reason why strength
should not be boasted of since wisdom is denied. An other reason may be this:
strength or force, be it equal to the strength of a Lion or Elephant, yet it is
but the strength of flesh, never the less: and al flesh is frail, and subject
to foil. When one cannot overcome, many may. Whom sword cannot pearce, shot
will: whom shot does not hit, sickness may arrest, time surely, and death wi be
sure to make an end of. Now should a man be proud of grass, of vapor, of
smoke, of a shadow, of a tale that is told, etc. whereto the whole life of
man, and his glory, and consequently his strength and vigor, are compared? An
horse is but a race, they say, and so the strongest man upon earth is but the
push of a pike, or the clappe of a pistol. Were not Abimelech and Pyrrhus, two
Judge. 9.
most valiant princes, either of them killed by the hand of a woman? was not
Totilas that noble conqueror, that had vanquished Rome, which had vanquished
the whole world, was not he I say overcome, and slain by Narses an eununch,
a semivir? what should I stand any longer upon this? God has 1* Cor* 1.
chose^, as the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, so the weak
things of the world many times to confound the strong. And this may be a third
rea son against glorying in strength, because God himself does many times set
himself against the mighty.

Xenophon saw so much and faith thus. Xenoph. (...) 1. 6.
God as it would seem takes a pleasure (...). That is, to exalt the base, and
to pull down the mighty. And why so? Truly not of envy to their greatness
(as it is written of Tiberius or Caligula) that he caused a goodly tall man
called Colossus for his stature, and strength, of mere en vy to fight, after
he had done his law, til he was tired, and slain: And as it is likewise
recorded of Soliman in our fathers memory, that having a great Germane brought
prisoner to him, of very envy to the German nation, he caused his dwarf a
very Pygmey to take this German in hand (being a giant to look to) and to hack
him and hew him being bound to his hand, and to have many courses at him (as if
a child were set to thwite a tree a sunder) and at length with much a do to
get him down, and so to potch him in and kill him. Oh no, God is of no such
Esaie.
nature: as he says himself in Esaias Anger is not in me. So it may be said
most truly of him, envy is not in him. No he envieth no good quality in man,
which is his own gift, nether hates he any that he has made, and redeemed:
but loves al, and would have us to love one another. Nether are the great, and
mighty ones confounded, and brought down by reason of their folly, or for want
of judgment, whereby they give advauntage oftentimes to their enemies: albeit I
am not Synesius epist 103.
ignorant, that Synesius, that ancient, and learned Bishop says, that
strength and prudence seldom vvhiles concur: but he understands, I think,
enormous strength in an huge vast body: otherwise his speech is not
justifiable. for many strong have been exceeding crafty with all, as
Aristor^nes of old, of who^ I spoke erewhile, and George Castriot of late (in
comparison) of who^ it is written, that they had the strength of a Lion, and
wilines of a fox. But here is the quarrel, and this makes God an enemy very
often to the strong and mighty, because by their strength and power they think
to bear out, and maintain whatsoever bad person, and whatsoever bad cause:
and to break down, and to crush, and tread under foot the most righteous of
the land, that stand in their way. This does nettle God, and provoke him to
displeasure. Id in summa fortuna Tacit. l. 15.
aequius, quod validius. Let me have might, and I have right enough. Sua
retinere priuatae domus (says Tiridates in the same place of Tacitus) de
alienis certare regialaus. You would have me be contented with mine own: why?
it is for base spirited men, for peasantes, for boores, to seek but their own,
gentlemen and mighty men they will law, and fight for that which is an other
man's. Iuven. sa^* 6
O de men's, it a servus homoest? says one in ^uvenal. You would have me use my
servant well: ah fool, is my man a man? is my tenant my neighbor? is my neigh
bor my brother? Does Naboth refuse to 1. Kings.
sell his vineyard to Achab, to king Achab? I will help thee to it for nothing,
says Iezabel. Does the senate deny my Master the consulship? Hic ensis dabit.
This sword shall help him to it said Cesars soldier. These be the same (...),
He^iod.
(as the Poet calls the^) which will have the law in their own hands: They
lean upon their swords, and their right hand must right them, whether it be
Ovid. 5. (...)*
right, or no. Nec leges metuunt, sed cedit vi^ibus aquum. Maestaque victrici
iu^a su^ ense iace^t. Thus they covet fields, and take them by violence, and
houses and take them away, so they oppress a man* and his house, even man, and
his heritage Mich 2. And thus as the wild ass is the Lions pray in the
wilderness Sirach. 13. and as Basil says upon Hexaemeron ^asil. Hom. 7 in
Hexaem.
(...): most fishes do eat one another, and the lesser is the food of the
greater. So it is too true, that in too many places the weaker, and the simpler
sort of men are a pray unto the great and mighty ones, and these eat up Gods
people, as a man would eat bread, as it is in the Psalm. But what says Basil
Psalm 14.
in the same place? Take heed says he thou oppressor, thou cruel hearted man,
lest the same end betide thee, that does befall those great devouring fishes:
namely to be caught thy self by the hook, or in the net. Indeed as for
the comfort of the needy, and the deep sighing of the Psalm. 12.
poor: the lord says that he will up himself and set at liberty him, who^
the wicked has snared: So for the confusion of the unmerciful cormorant, he
threatens thus by Job: He has devoured substance, Job. 20. 5.
and he shall vomit it: for God shall draw it out of his belly. And by the
Prophet Esaias. VVo unto thee that spoilest, and wast not spoiled, etc. When
thou ceasest Esaias 33.
to spoil, thou shall be spoiled. There is no prince that can be saved by
the multitude of an host, nether any mighty man delivered by much strength. Be
you never so strong o ye mighty, yet he that dwells in the heavens is
stronger then you, be you never so well lined or backed, or guarded, yet he,
that sits between the Cherubim is better appointed. Therefore trust not in
your own strength, much less in wrong, and robbery, make not your selves
horns by your own power. There is no power, no force, no puissance that can
deliver from wrath in the day of wrath, the children of wrath, that is to
say them, that hale down Gods vengance upon them by their unmercifulness.
This might be easily vouched by sundry examples, but that the time being so
far spent, it is time to come to the third special thing, that we are
forbidden, to glory in, to wit riches. Nor the rich man glory in his riches.

As I gave this for one reason, why strength should not be gloried in,
because it is not to be compared to wisedo^e, which I had proved before might
not be allowed to boaste: so I may assign this for one cause why riches
should not be boasted of, because they are not comparable to strength, which
even now I excluded from glorying. For if the more excellent cannot be allowed
his liberty, the inferior cannot require it by any reason: and the prophet
seems to use the method of (...) and to exclude the better at the first, that
that which is worse, might with less a do be removed, or rather with none at
all. If you doubt whether riches be worse, or less to be esteemed then
strength, you may be persuaded hereby, for that riches do toll-in enemies: but
strength does repel them from entering, and also expel them, if happily they
be entered: also riches make the theife more ven^nrous, but very seldom do
they make the true man more hardy. That riches do tol, and draw in enemies, it
is evide^t by all stories. For what brought the first conqueror into this Hand
of Britain, but the pearls Suetoniue.
of Britain as Suetonius reports? what brought the Galls into Italy at the
first, but the wines of Italy, as Plutarch Plutarch in Camill.
witnesses? So what brought the Carthaginians into Spain, the Grecians and
Romans, one after another into Asia the lesser, but the riches of Asia, the
gold and silver of Spain? So what brought the Turks over into Thracia, and
after into Hungary, but the fertility of Thracia, the golden, and silver mines
of Hungary? On the contrary side what makes the Tartars ever to invade, and
never to be invaded, but because they have no wealth, that others should cover
after, and their neighbors have wealth, which their teeth do (...) watering
for. This for public invasions, and robberies, as for private spoilinges, and
pillage the learned know what Q. ^urelius gatte in the days of Syllae by his
gra^ge, that lay commodious to some great one, for love of the same he was
attainted* and billed among them, that were to be put to death, whereupon he
cried out when he saw his name in the papyr, Fundus Albanus me perdidit: out
alas it is my land that I have at Alba, and not any offense; that I have done,
that is the cause of my death. So Pliny writes of one N^nius Plin. l. 37.
cap. 6.
a senator, that he was likewise proscribed, and condemned to die by Antonie
the Triumuir, for no other crime, but because he had a precious stone of a
very great value, which Antonie, or some of his followers had a great mind to.
So Isocrates speaking of the times, when the Athenians were oppressed by Tyrans
(the officers that the Lacedaemonians had set over them) as I remember in his
oration against Euthunus says, that in those days (...): It was more
dangerous to have any wealth, the^ to commit any offense. I have toulde you
already what Naboth got by his vineyard, and could tell you what one Taurus
mentioned by Tacitus got by his garden, eve^ Tacit. l. 12.
an vntime lie and a bloody death. Pernicious therefore you see riches are
many times to the owners, and therefore small cause why they should be boasted
of: let this be one reason.

Another this: they be not lasting nor permane^t, but soon fleet away, and
are gone. They may be campared to Maieflowers, which yield a pleasant savor
for a few weeks, and then before we are Jonah. 4.
ware their beauty is gone. Nay like to Io nah his gourd, which yielded him
co^te^t, and delight as it were this morning, and by the next day it was
worme-bitt^ and withered. Nay like the same small creatures called (...), which
in one and the same day are engendered, grow operfection, decaie and die.
Indeed Furipides says (...). Riches be not lasting, but epheme^all, they last
but for a day. And Salomo^ before him, Riches take the^selus to their Prove. 23.
wings as an ^gle, and ^lie into the aier. Who ever could have thought that
Job from such wealth could have fallen upon the sudden into such misery? who
ever would have thought that the king Dionysius must be feign to play the
schoolmasters, and to teach petties before he die, to get his living? Who ever
would have thought that king Perses son, and heir must be glad to learn an
occupation, and to play the black smith to relieve his necessity? Who ever
would have thought that the Emperor Charles the gross could want necessaries
before he died? That the Emperor Henry the fourth (that victorious Emperor,
that had fought 52. pitched ^tailes) could fall into that ex^emity as to be a
petitioner for a (...).
(...) in the church of Spira to maintain him in his old age? Briefly that
king Geliner (before him) that potent king of the Vandales could be so low
brought, as to be forced to entreat his friend to send him an harp, a sponge,
and a loaf of bread (as Procopius writes) Procopius.
an harp to solace himself somewhat in his misery, a sponge to help to dry
up his tears, and a loaf of bread to satisfy his hungry soul? What
certainty then is there in worldly wealth, when kings, and potentates be so
easily stripped of it, and left as naked as my nail? Yet for all that earthly
minded men, as we are, we will still be miring of our selves in the mucke and
pelf of this world, though we be no better the^ battles in so doing, as Basil
says: and we will trust in uncertain riches, and not in the living God, though
S. Paul charge 1. Tim. 6.
us not to do so: and if riches increase, we will set our hearts upon them
though the Psalmist forbids us to do so: and Psalm. 62. 11.
lastly we will be brag of that which we have and make our boast thereof,
though the Prophet in my text does expressly disalowe it, and though my self
have proved, that we have no more hold of our wealth, then if we had an
eele by the tail.

Well, as these be strong reasons why the rich should not glory in his
riches, because they tempt thieves, and enemies: and because they are of no
certainety: so there is a third reason, as weighty as any of those, and that
is, because they do not make us any whitte the better. For can any man boast
with any probability of that, which he cannot sa^e, that he is the better
for? Now thus it is, Talibus bonis non siunt homines boni, sed a liunde boni
facti been vtendo saciunt, vt is it a sint bona, as Augustine says. You call
them goods, Augustine. ad prob^m.
but I tell you says he by such goods men be not made good, but being made
good otherwise, by using them well they usake them to be good, so Augustine.
And as for bettering of men, it is too true, Livius
that Asdrubal Haedus says in Livie: R^ro simul hominibus bona fortuna,
bonaque men's datur: Goods and goodness do seldom times meet together. For
who is there, except it be one among a thousand cui praesens faelicitas
siarrisit non irrisit, (as Bernard speaks) but if Bernard 2. de considerat.
the world come upon him, he will be besotted by the world. Therefore
Thucydides records as a strange thing in the men of Chius, that they were
Thucyd. l. ^
sober for all their prosperity: (...). And Evagrius ascribes this as an
especial praise to Mauritius the Emperor, that in his Evagrius.
prosperity he retained his ancient piety. In our natural bodies it is thus:
the more fat the lesser blood in the veins, and consequently the fewer
spirits: and so in our fields abundance of vvette breeds abundance of
tares, and consequently great scarcity of corn. And is it not so with our
souls? The more of GODS blessinge, and wealth, the more vveedes of vanity,
and carnalitie: and the more rich to the vvo^lde the less righteous to GOD
commonly. What meant Apuleius to say that vbi Apuleius.
uber, i^i tuber? but to signify that pride and arrogancy are companions to
plenty. And what made Salomo^ to pray against Pro. 30.
fulness? but to show, that as they must have good brains, that will carry much
drink, so they must have extraordinary souls, that will not be overcome of
the world. Did not David in his prosperity Psalm. 30.
say that he should never be removed? did he not say or speak unadvisedly? nay
did he not do lewdly and wickedly, defiling himself with his neighbors wife:
and embrewing his hands in his servitors blood, thus adding mur there to
adultrie? Did he attempt any such thing in the days of want, and adversity?
No no, in his necessity he sought the Lord, and got himself unto his God
right early: and offered to him the sacrifice of righteousness. And yet we
grudge and repine, when we do not swim in wealth, when wealth through the
corruption of our nature does dull us, and tainte us, and make us unapt to every
good work. Again we shun poverty, as we would do a serpent, nay as the gates of
hell, when yet poverty through the blessing of God does kindle devotion, and
kill sin in us, even as wormwood, or the like bitter things kill moathes, or
worms. This the time will not permit me to stand any longer upon: and therefore
I come at once to the second verse, and will end the same in a word or two.

Let him that glories glory in this, that he understands, and knows me.
Man's wisdom, strength, and riches are vain, and not to be boasted of, thus
much Jeremy has told us already, and I have proved to you by many reasons:
but now if you would know; what is the thing, wherein we may take true comfort,
and whereof we may safely glory, the same is no other thing but piety, and
godliness, the true knowledge of God, 1. Tim. 4.
the true service of God: this has the promise of this life and of the lif to
come. this we ought to labor for, day, and night that we may attain it, and
having attained it, we may rejoice with joy unspeakable, and glorious. This
our Savior Christ does warrant us to do by his own Luke 10. 21.
example, Luke 10. Who there is said to have reioiced in the spirit on our
behalf, because we had our minds illuminate to understand those things, that
belong to the kingdom of God, and our salvation. Even as elsewhere he defines
the happiness of man to consist herein, namely to know God the only true God,
Ioh. 17.
and whom he has sent Jesus Christ. Agreeable Aug. ^. confess cap. 3.
whereunto Augustine says. In foelix homo, qui scit illa omnia, te autem
nescit: beat us aute^ quite scit, etia^si illa nesciat, etc. Unhappy is the
man, that knows all those things (al secular learning) if he know not thee,
but happy is he that knows thee, although he be ignorant of the rest. But he
that knows thee, and the rest to, is never a whit the more blessed for the
other things sake, but for thee only, if knowing thee he glorify thee as God:
so Augustine. The knowledge of God therefore, that is the one thing, that is
necessary, that makes a man a Christian, that lifts us up unto God, that
coupleth us unto him, that justifies, that saves, that works al in all. Now
by knowledge I understand, and the prophet in my text understands, not a
bare apprehensio^ or sense of the mind, that there is a divine power greater,
and mightier then al, for so much the most barbarous hea then were not with
out. they could say Deus videt omnia. Deo commendo, Tertull de test* animae*
Jacob. 2.
etc. as Tertullian shows, yea as Saint James says the very Devils beleene,
and tremble (they have a kind of belief, therefore they have knowledge:) but
also a consent ((...), as Clemens 5. (...).
Alexandrinus calls it) and persuasion of the heart touching both the
providence of God, that he works all in all, and al for the best to them, that
love him: also and especially touching his mercy, that he will grant
pardon to the penitent, even to them, that crave it for his Sons sake, and
lastly touching his bounty, that he will everlastinglie reward as many, as
are his, even as many, as believe in his name. This is that saving knowledge,
which the world knows not, neither is it revealed by flesh, and blood, but
by the spirit of the father, which is in heaven. This is that knowledge
whereof the Prophet Esaie speaks: By his knoweledge shall my righteous
servant justify Esaias 53.
many, for he shall bear their iniquities. This is that knowledge, that
precious Mat. 13.
treasure which so soon as a wise man finds, for joy thereof he departs,
and sells all, that he has, and buyeth the field. Briefly this is that
knowledge, in Phil. 3.
comparison whereof S. Paul counted all things lost, even dunge, that he might
know Christ, and the virtue of his resurrection, and the virtue of his
afflictions, and be made conformable to his death. To conclude this is that
knowledge, which whosoever seeks is wise, whosoever gets is rich,
whosoever keeps is strong, nay virtuous, nay happy, nay twice happy: happy
he is in this world by faith, and happy in the world to come he shall be by
fruition. This knowledge the Lord vouchsafe to engraffe in them, that want it,
and increase it in the^, that have it, and make it fruitful in all: to the
purging of our co^ sciences in this life, and the saving of our souls in the
day of our Lord Jesus: to whom with the Father, and the blessed Spirit be al
honor, and glory. Amen.

FINIS.

