A Confutation of a Certain BOOK, CALLED a defense of the true, and Catholic
doctrine of the sacrament, etc. set fourth of late in the name of Thomas
Archebysshoppe of Canterburye. By Richard Smyth, Docter of divinity, and some
time reader of the same in Oxforde.

TAke this book I heartily beseech the, christian reader, in good worth,
co^siderynge hou that Iam in a strange country, without quietness, books, help
of learned men, sufficient loiser and time, and without also many other
necessaries, that are required unto such an interprise, as this is. If any
thing be amysse, it shall be hereafter amended, by gods grace. Our lord
Jesus Christ keep the in his true faith, and religion. Amen.

I have put, good reader, both the leaf and the page also of the bysshoppes
book, in the margen of my confutation, that thowe may the better compare my
confutation with his sainges, and perceive also the matter with less labors,
and peynes.

Multo melius est vera rustice, quam falsa diserte, proferre. Hieronymus in
expositione primae visionis Esaiae.

The preface to the christen reader, with an exhortation, to move al men to
leave disputinge, and reasonynge upon the high and unsearchable mystery of
te sacrament of the altar, geuynge ever fyrme credence unto christ's catholic
church therein, which never errethe in our faith wholly.
THe first consel, good reader, holden at Ephesus, above M. C. years passed, in
which S. Cyril was president, wrote thus in an epistle unto one Nestorius an
heretic, which theryn was condemned for his heresy.

We do offer an unbloody wourshipinge of a sacrifice, and so we do also come
unto the holy sacrament, and are made holy, being partakers of the holy
body, and precious blood of Christ, which was made the redeamer of us al, not
receauinge it as common flesh, (god forbid that), nor as the fleash of a man
made holy, and joined unto the son of god, by an unite of worthynes, or else
as being a mansion of god, but as that, which verily gives life (to man's
soul), and was made propre unto gods own son him self. Hitherto this
ancient and great council, in which were assembled. cc. bysshoppes, and which
is one of the four general concels, that S. Gregory said that he esteamed no
less then the four gospelles. Wherefore Lib. 1. 24.
saying that this counsel has so plainly set fourth botb the holy sacrifice
of the mass, and also declared by the i^spiratio^ of the holy ghost, the
au^th^^ and governor, of such leful, and godly conseylles, that we do receive
in the sacrament that flesh, which is adjoined to gods owone son, and wbich
gives life to them, that do worthily receive it, what wisdom were it to
believe the bisshoppe of Canterburies doctrine, which denies both of these
two? Is it not much meter to believe al those fathers, rather then this
bisshoppes teaching the contrary? Promised not Christ, that he would be in the
mids of. ij. or. Matthew. 18.
iij. assembled in his name? Hou then was he not with these. cc. learned men,
that they erred not in their judgments? Wherefore let us believe steadfastly,
(as this council teaches us plaineie) that christ's own very natural body is
in this sacrament, although this bishop, and such other carnal preachers,
and writers, do bark never so much against that our belefe, and do make never
so many arguments, and natural reasons to subvert it, for as strong and much
stronger reasons may and heretofore has been made of heretics, against all the
articles of our faith, as it appreareth in diverse old, and late writers books.
Let us Cease thy reasonynge upon the holy sacrament
not dispute, and reason upon this matter, which can not be compased, nor
perceived by any natural reason, or wit of man, but by faith only, as S.
Damascene, and many other holy Lib. 4. c. 14.
doctors do testify, but let us steadfastly believe christ's words, which
says, this is my body, that shall be given to death for you, which words no
ma can truly understand of bread, Matthew. 25.
because that it was not crucyfied for us, as that body which he gave his
apostles to eat, was. To these words Hom. 93 in Matthaeum
(says holy chrysostom.) let us give fyrme credence, yea though our
se^ses, natural wit, understanding, and reason be clearly al against yt, for
christ's words can not be false, nor disceaue us, but our senses are easy to
be disceaued. The carnal jews Note reader Lib. 4. in 10.
(as witnesses S. Cyril) lacking faith, (as this bishop, I (...) hoper,
Ridley, ponete* and such other do), and leanyng only to natural arguments, and
reasons, asked hou christ could give them his fleash to eat.

They remembered not (says he) that Lucae. 1.
nothing is impossible to god, and therefore they judged that this mystery was
but mere follye, and that it was but manifest madness to believe, that Christ
would, or could give them his oune flesh to eat bodily with their mouths, as
my lord of Canterburye, hoper, ponete, Ridley, coxe, and many such other, do
now think, and also teach, to their own damnation, and many others besides,
our lord amend the^ in time, for his blessed names sake.

These men do now even as the unfaithful jews did in christ's time, when he
entreated of this matter. For they measured it by natural reason, and wit,
and would not believe that christ's very body was in this sacrament reallie, and
bodily, because they could not perceive hou it so might be by any natural
reason, and because the senses of man do judge the contrary. They do
forgaette, that the prophet Esaie Isaiae. 7.
says, Except ye believe, ye shall not understand. They set the carte (as
they say) before the horses, when they, put reason before, and faith after.
For is not faith the fundation of our 1. cor. 3.
religion? Why do they not remember that reasoninge, and faith agree not Cicero
well together? Cotta said to Lucilius, why do thou require a reason, if
thou do believe? for if thou do be leave, thou do ask no reason, which
may cause, that thou should not believe. Says not also S. Paul, that
Lactantius Heb. 11.
faith is the fundatio^, and thing that holds up the thing that appears
not, and is the proof of things not seane? What folly is it then to labor
and stud^ for to try out by reason the truth in this contro^ersye of this
holy sacrament, which is unsearchable, and appertains only to our faith,
exceeding al man's wit, and reason? Are there not a thousand things and moo,
which god has Damasce. 4. lib. ca. 14
done, that no reason of man can perceive by what means they were done but
only by faith? Also cannest thou, I pray the, tell me hou god made Gene. 1.
by his word al things of nothing? Did not the natural reasoners, and
students, deny this point of our faith, because they saw that yt was
directelie contrary unto al man's wit, and reason? Can thou by reason tell
me hou Adam was made of the earth, and Eve of his ^ybbe? Hou the busse of
thorns, which flamed with fire, burned Exodus 3.
not? Hou the rod was made a serpent? Hou the ryuers of Egypt were Exodus 4. 7.
turned in to blood? Hou Moses lived. xl. days and xl. nights without meat,
and drink? Hou the children Psalm. 77.
of Israel were fed with Manna? Hou their clot^es were not wore^ away the space
of xl. years? hou the jews passed Exodus 16.
thorou the red sea saflye? Hou water tes being yet closed? Are not these Note
this.
things, as impossible to man's reason, and wit, as that the same his body
to be at one time, both in heaven, and earth, and in every place, where the
sacrament is? Why then do not thou believe this, as well as the other two?
Does not gods word teach it the as plainly, as the other? Also, did Joan.
20. Act. 1. 10.
not Christ eat, and drink with his apostles, after his resurrection, and yet
no part of that meat, and drink was turned in to his bodily nourysheme^t,
for then he neaded no nourysheme^t? Was not this as ^trange a matter, and as
far about ^ans reason, as christ to be bodily ^n diverse places at one time?
Wherefore then do thou not cease disputinge upon this deape, and
unsearchable mystery, and give firm credence unto it, although thy reason
can not perceive it? Why do thou not remember also, that christ promised his
disciples to give them such bread, as should be his oune very natural fleash,
which he would give Joan. 6.
to death for the life of the woorld?

Can this his promise be veryfied of common bread? Was that given upon the
cross for the life of the woorld? Has not Christ, which is the troth it
self, and can not lie, performed yet this his promise? And when gave he that
Joan. 14. Heb. 6.
bread, which was his very fleash, that he gave for us to death, if he did it
not at his last soupper, when he said. Take, and eat, this is my body, that
Matthew. 26. 1. Cor. 11.
shall be given for you? Hou manifest are these words of our dear s^uiour
Christ? did he ever speak more plain words upon any article of our faith,
then these are? Were it not the^ mere madness, and a strange folyshenes, to
believe the bisshoppe of canterbury, coxe, hoper, Ridley, ponete, and such
other, that do teach contrary to this? S. Paul affirms, that he, 1. Cor. 12.
which receaueth this holy sacrament unworthily, is gyltie of christ's body
Mark.
and blood? Hou ca^ this be true, if there be nothing else in the sacrament,
but bread, and wine? Is a man gyltie of christ's body and blood, which eats,
and drinks nothing else but bare bread, and wine? Who, that wise is, will
say, that I am gyltie in eatinge to much moutton, and in drinking of wine,
when I eat nothing but milk, and drink only water?

Again, says not S. Paul, that he, 1. Cor. 11.
which receaueth this holy sacrament unworthily, eateh, and drinks it to his
oune damnation, because he discerns not our lords body, that is to say, he
does no^ believe that that thin ge is his bo^^e, or else he does not receive it
(...) greater devotion, and pureness of conscience, than other common meats?
Hou should this be true, if we did eat, and drink but only bread made of
corn, and mere wine of the grape, in the receauinge of the blessed sacrament?
Byddeth not us S. Paul to examyne, and prove our consciences, Mark.
before we receive this sacrament? And what neade we to do this, when we shall
eat but common bread and drink wine of the grape? Does he sin deadly, that
receive the those things in sin? Does not then this place of paul prove
sufficiently, that our savior Christ's body, and blood are present reallie
in this sacrament? This have al doctors of Christian church expounded the
scriptures, co^cerni^ge this matter, as it shall appear, by gods gra^e,
hereafter, though the bisshoppe (...), that they be altogether upon (...).
Therefore believe man this doctri^^, without al doubtyng thereof. Let no ma^s
persuasio^, nor reasonynge turn thy mind from this belefe. Beware that thou
trust not thy senses judgment in this matter. Remember that Isaac was
disceaued, Genesis 27.
because he trusted more to his feeli^ge of his son Jacobs hands, than he
did his uoice? Shall not thou be after like sort disceaued in this matter, if
thou do folou the judgment of thy senses, and not only the hearing, or
readinge of these christ's words, This is my body? It is sufficient for the
to believe that christ's body is both at ones in the holy sacrament, and also
in heaven, because the scripture teaches both indifferently, and teaches not
hou these two may stand together, but only by gods almyghtie pouer, to whom
nothing his impossible, as scripture witnesses plainly. Marci. 10. Luc. 1.
Peter Martyr recanted at oxford his first doctrine of the sacrament, and so did
also the bishop pe of Canturberie.


This taught peter Martyr, at his first coming to oxford, when he was but a
lutheran in this matter, whose words I, and may other mo wrate in the diuynite
schole, when he read lecture there, but when he came ones to the court, and
saw that that doctrine myslyked them, that might do him hurt in his lyui^ge,
he anon after turned his tipped, and sange an other song. The bishop also of
Canterbury in his catechysme did ones set forth the real presence of christ's
body Note.
in the sacrament, but he changed that doctrine, when he saw, that the world
served for him. O lord, what man is so mad to believe such mutable teachers
which change their doctrine at men's pleasir, as they see avantage, and
profit? They turn, and will turn, as the wind turns, but to return to my
matter. Tell me, why may not christ's body (as I said before) be as well in the
sacrament, and in heaven both at ones, as that his body was with the body of
the stone, that lay still upon his grave, when he rosevp again from death to
life, in one propre place, and as his body was in one propre place at ones,
with the body of Hierony. in Epitaphio Paulae. Joan. 20. Ampros. in lu. 24.
Aug.
the door, or gate, when he entered in to the house to his apostles, when the
gates were yet shitte, and closed? Christ went up out of this world in to
heaven, and sits there at the right hand of his father, and yet paul saw
him bodily upon earth after his ascension (as he testifies), and by that sight
he 1. cor. 9. 15.
proved that he was risen again bodily from death to life, which he could not
have done, if that saying of him, Lib. de passione petri apostoli.
had been but a spiritual vision. S. Linus which was in the apostles time, and
wrote saint peter's, and paul's passion, witnesses evidently, that saint peter
saw christ, and talked with him when he was going out of Rome for fear of
persecution, and that peter said to him, lord, whyther go thou? To whom
christ anusweared, I go to Rome to be Crucyfied again. Then anon after christ
departed away from peter, and peter understanding that Christment, he would be
crucyfied again, not in his oune body, but in him, returned to Rome, and
there was crucified, for christ's sake. Of this Lib. 5. co^me^
story wrote Egesippus, which was very Lib. 5. epist.
nighe to the apostles time, and also S. Ambrose. This story declares, that
Christ ascended in to heaven, and yet he is also i^ the blessed sacrament of
the altar bodily.
although christ departed hence at the time of his ascension in to heaven, and
sitte^h^ at the right hand of god his father, yet he may be also here in the
blessed sacrament of the altar This is the very catholic faith which christ's
church, that ca^ not wholly err in the faith, has ever taught, does and shall
ever until the worlds end. Wherefore leave reasoni^g, reader, upon this
matter, and give credence to this our mother the church, and than thou shall
never be disceaued in any point of thy faith, because she never The catholyke
church erreth not in the faith Matthew. 16.
erreth wholly theryn For promised not christ, that hell gates, which are
sin, and heresies, by which men do enter in to hell, should not prevail
against Matthew. vlt.
her? Said he not also, that he would be with the church until the worlds
end? Hou then could she err so shamefullie these. M. ccccc. years, and mo, as
to believe that christ was bodilye in the sacrament, and to honor him therein,
and yet he was not there, but bare bread, and wine? What call, ye Note.
my lord, this, if it be not hell gates to prevail against christ's church?

Hou could she be discea^ed so many years in this weighty matter of our faith,
with whom christ, the truth it self, ever was, as he promised to be? Did not
christ say, that he would be in the mids of two or three assembled in his
name? Was he not the^ emonge In concilio lateranensi.
the M. ccc. xv. fathers, which were gathered together out of al costs of
christendom, and determined that the Matthew. vlt.
bread and wine were in their natures and substances utterly turned in to
christ's very natural body, and blood, and that there remained only their
qualites, and properties? The apostles Act. 15.
with the elders were assembled together at jerusalem in a council for the
decysion of a question, touching the chargynge of the Gentyles with the keeping
of Moses law, and when they had done, and finyshed that their counsel,
Actorum. 15
S. James ponounced their sentence, and said, that it pleased the holy ghost,
and them, that the gentyles should not be burdened with that ceremonial law, by
which it appears plainly that the holy ghost rules and directs the
councels lefullye assembled, that they err not in the faith why then does he
not even so nou to Mark reader.
the councels, and has ever done?

Has now christ forsaken his dear Ioa^. 14 16.
spouse the church? Did he not promise to send his holy spirit to the church,
which should teach her al truth, and abide still with her for ever? Has he
not then yet performed this his promise, which he made to his apostles, and in
them to the whole church, at al times being? Of did he not fulfill it until
Berengarius came, Bere^gariu^
which about M. years, after that promise Was the first autour of this heresy,
which he did penytently abjure, and recante.
was made, first of al men taught and maynteyned this heresy, which says
that christ's very natural body is not reallye in the blessed sacrament of the
altar? Was this promise made only to him, and his scholars? Was it made to a
feu carnal, unlearned men in any one country, and not rather to all the whole
catholic church, and to al christen nations? Was berengarius, which was an
hereretike in many other points, (as stories do witness of him), and also a
man of a very il life, a meter man, and more worthy to receive the performance
of that high promise, than any of the apostles were, or than any other parso^,
which then lived, or else sense, yea tha^ all the church of christ? But let us
grant, that this promise was not fulfillyd nor the truth in this matter
declared until Bere^garius came, and that the Mark well reader this.
holy ghoost, the spirit of the truth, was given unto him, and first did
set forth by him this verite. Tell me then, hou it chanced, that the holy
ghost forsook him, suffered him to recante, to abjure, and forswaere for ever
that opinion, departinge out of this world with great repentance for that his
heresy? Did not Christ say, that the holy ghost should ever abide with them,
to who^ he was promised? Did not Berengarius, which first wrote against this
our faith of the sacrament, Li. de gestis regum f^a^ little in vita Henrici
Regis Franciae.
reca^te his heresy wyllyngly (as Gagwinus testifies) and dyed with great
repentance for yt? For this was his last recantation. I Berengarius do believe
Bere^garius later recantation.
wyih my heart, and confess with my mouth, that the bread, and wine, which are
set upon the altar, are through prayer, and the words of christ in substance
turned in to our saviors body and blood, which he took of his mother, offered
upon the cross, and that now does sit in heaven at the fathers right hand,
and that this is not done only by a sign, and the virtue of the sacrament, but
in the propriete of nature, and the veryte of substance. This was his
confession, and belief even until his death. Our lord give al the^, that have
foloued his error in this matter, grace to forsake it, by his example, and to
dye in the true faith of christ, as he did. After this man's death by the space
of c years, and more, no man wrote against the very real presence of Christ's
natural body in the sacrament. Then at the length came Almericus heresy.
one Almericus, a wicked man, which said, that christ's body was as well in all
manier of bread, and in every other thing else, as in the blessed sacrament of
the altar. After him noman spoke (as much as we can find in writing) against
the catholic faith of this matter the space of more then a hundred years. Then
rose up one Ihon wyclefe our country man, which of mere malice, that he could
not obtain the bysshoprych of worcetur, and because he Wyclefes heresy.
was excommunycated and banyshed out of oxford, sowed many heresies in England,
among which this, that my lord defends in his book, was one, but he was
condemned in a council kept at Constantia about. c. xxxiiij. years sense, and
his heresy was then abhorred of al chrystendome. After him came Carolostadius,
Aecola^padius, Aecolampadius. Swinglius.
and Swynglius, which when they had of long time set forth (as their master
luther had taught them) that christ's very natural body was really in the
sacrament, and not only a sign of them, at the length (as heresy creapeth 2.
timot. 2.
like unto a canker (paul being witness they forsook that opinion, and denied
utterly (as my lord does) the bodily presence of christ in this holy My
lords opinion began of late.
sacrament. May we then not now see good christian reader, that this doctrine
can not be true, which began first of al wythyn the space of five hundred years
passed, and has been ever convicted from time to time, not rising again the
space of c. years, where the true faith of christ has ever continued and was
never wholly suppressed from the first beginning of it, nor never shall be until
the worlds end? For the church can not wholly err (as it is declared before)
and as saint Paul affirms calling her the pyller of the truth. For hou can
the pyller of the 1. tim^t. 3.
truth sustain, and support heresy, and idolatrye? S. Austen said, that
christ's Ianuario. Bpist. 119.
church approves nothing, nor does any thing either against the faith, or else
against good meaners. Does not my lord then err abomynablye, when he says
that the church has committed blasphemy, heresy, and idolatry, at the least
four hundred years? Is this the church not to do any thing against the faith,
and good life? Wherefore let us believe the catholic churches doctrine, no less
then the holy scripture, which the church teaches us to believe, or else we would
not believe it. For said not Austen, that he would Contra epistol fundamenti.
ca. 5.
not believe the gospel except the authorite of the church had moved him? Says
not also Tertulian, against Marcion, that we do know, receive, and believe all the gospels of christ by the Aduersus vigilantiu^.
church, and not other wise? Says not hierom like wise, I reprove al opinions
against the church, and openly condemn them? Moreover the ancient docter
Vincentius lyrinensis, above Aduersus prophattones etc.
M c. years sense, described a uery true christien man, saying, he is a good
catholic man, that loves gods tr^eth, and the church, preferryng nothing
utterly before the catholic faith, no man's authorite, no man's love, no ma^s
reason, no man's wit, no man's eloquence, nor nothing else, but abydyng suerly in
the faith, he determyneth to believe, and keep steadfastly every such thing,
that the catholic church has of old time universally believed, and holden, and
what so ever should be set forth against that doctrine, he judges yt not to
pertayne any thing unto christ's religion, but to tentation. And if it do
chance any thing to be taught, and defended contrary to that doctrine, and the
scriptures to be alleged therefore, then he must (says he) nead^s folou those
doctors exposition, which agree together theryn in one sense, and Note this.
set nothing by all other men's judgments, be they never so well learned, and
godly. And if any man shall ask (says he) of me, what neade is it to fo lou
the authorite of christ's church and her understanding of the scriptures,
seeing the scripture is perfect of it self, and sufficient? I answer to him,
that we must neade so do, because al men do not expound the scripture in one
sense, but every man after his oune wit, and fantasy, and so there should arise
much dissension, debate, confusion, and many heresies spring up, and Mark
reader.
be defended in christ's church, except her exposition should be admitted At the
length he gives unto us a godly lesson, which if men would follow they should
not so much err, as they now do. In ipsa catholica ecclesia A godly lesson,
to avoid heresies.
magnopere curandum est, vt id teneamus, quod vbique, quod semper, quod ab
omnibus creditum est. Seque^ da est nobis antiquitas, vniuersitas, and
consensus. We must (says he) take great head, that in that same catholic
church, we do hold that thing, which has been believed in all places, ever, and
of al me^. We must folou the ancye^te, the generalite, and the consent. By
these three notes, or else by one of them at the lest we may sone know heresy,
and al false doctrine from the true and godly doctrine. For either it is newely
invented, and not old (as my lords doctrine is, which began first by
Berengarius about, ccccc. years passed) or else it is but particularly received
of one country, and of a few of them (as is also my lords opinion) or
finally, the authors of it do not agree among the^ selfs in the teaching,
and setting forth of it, as in deed they do not, that write and teach, as my
lord does in this book, and therefore it appears plainly, that his doctrine
is not catholic, nor godly. For as touching the consent, and agreynge of
the^, that has taught it, who knows not, that Aecolampadius, Swinglius,
Carolastadius, my lord, peter Martyr, and their scholars dissent clean in yt
from their father, and master, Marten luther? For luther confessed and defended
the real presence of christ's body in the holy sacrament, even until his death,
which those other his disciples deny utterly, although they did of long time
teach no other wise, but they recanted, as they saw occasion, and advantage
serve. Were it not then a great madness to forsake the old catholic faith,
which has been ever believed of al nations, and in the teaching thereof the
fathers never dissented, and to follow my lords doctrine? Moreover, what
arroga^t blyndnes, and blind arrogancye is it, to say, that al christien
nations have erred in the belief of this matiere, so many hundred years, as
they say, that they have done, and that a very small nombre of men, but
sclenderly learned, should only know the truth thereof? What is this, good
reader, if it be not a merueilous blyndnes, and these men to lean, against
Salomons counsel, unto their oune wysdom? Are they not a frayed Proverb. 3.
Esaiae. 5.
of this gods curse? Woo to you, that seame unto your selfs wise? Who may
much merueile, if such men be shamefullie disceaued in their judgments, that
so proudly proceed? For says not christ, that his father has hidden the
knowlage of his word from proud men, and opened it unto humble Matthew. 11.
persons? Witnesses not also Saint Iacobi. 4. 1. petri. 5.
James, that god does give grace unto the humble, and resists the proud? Is
it the^ like, that he gives so great grace to them, to see only the truth,
sufferynge the humble, that mystrust their oune wits, judgment, and
learning, and do follow meakely the churches decrees, and ordonnaunces, her
understanding of the scriptures, the general conciles, and the docteurs
expositions of gods word, to be so much blinded, and so long a time? But pride
will have a fall, as it has ever had heretofore, and espacially in the^, that
have matched them selfs in matieres of religion against his dear espouse the
church, against whom hell gates, that is to say, sin, and heresy, never could
nor never shall prevail. For did not Matthew. 16.
christ, which ever was hard in his prayers (as he says him self), pray for
Peter, that his faith, that is to say, the faith of the catholic church, which
Lucae. 20. Joan. 11. Heb. 5.
he had received, and confessed, should not decay? Again, does not paul
affirm Ephesians. 5.
that christ loved his spouse the church so dearly that he gave himself for her
to death, for to cleanse her from al fylthynes of sin, that she should not
have one spotte thereof? Houe can these sainges of christ, and paul stand with
their opinion, that say (as my lord does) that the church has erred in the
faith, and has committed idolatry so many hundred years, even se^ce the
beginning of it? Is this christ dearly to love her? Is this the office of To
12. 1. Cor. 11. 12 Coloss. 1.
a good husband toward his wife? Is this to purge her from every spot of
sin? Would christ, which is head of the church, and the church his body,
suffer that his oune hody run in to heresy, superstition, blasphemye, and
Mark. 1. paril. 9. Psalm. 136
such other abymynable crimes, and to abide so long in them? He suffered the
Synagoge of the ieues to fall in to bodily captyuite, and to lie afflicted
theryn, but. lxx. years, and then he made her francke and free again, and would
he then suffer christ's church, which he loved much more, then he did the
Synagoge, to run in to such abomynations, and to continue still in them, at
the least (as my lord says in his book) four, or five hundredth years? Went
not (as christ says in Matthew. 20.
the parable) god forth in the morning early to call men to wourke in his
vyneyard? How is it then true, that he called not men unto the right faith of
this sacrament the space of M. years after this sacrament was instituted, until
berengarius came, and then called but a very few in nombre? Called not christ
his church the kyndome Matthaei. 13 Note.
of heaven? Why then do these men make her the kyndom of hell, by ascribinge
unto her heresy, blasphemye, and idolatry? What blind arrogancye, and
arrogant blyndnes is this? Who can abide it? What heart is so hard and stony,
that it can forbear weapyng, lamenting, and mournyng for them, that are this
blinded, and do daily make many other me^ so blind, that they do fall unawares
headlong in to the den of heresy, and damnation for ever? Call, and cry, good
reader, contynuallie, Psalm. 67.
night, and day, unto god, and say. Arise, o lord, arise, that thy ennymies
may be dispersed, and confounded. Say devoutly with tongue and Psalm. 43.
mind, Arise up, o lord, why do thou sleap? Arise up, expel us not from the
for ever. Why turnest thou thy face from us? Do thou forget our pouerte, and
trouble? Arise up, o lord, help us, o lord, and deliver us for thy names sake.
Pray, I say, Christian reader, and cease not, that thou be not led in to
tentation, and fall from the right belief of the holy church, but that thou
maest stand theryn ma^ly, and confess it until thy death, and thereby obtain
that infinite and endless joys, which god has promised unto all that continue
in his love, and the keeping of his commandments until their lyfes ends. The
which our lord Jesus Christ for his dear, and bitter passions sake, grant
unto us, to whom with the father, and the holy ghost, be honor, and praise
for ever. Amen.

That it pertayneth only unto the church of christ to expound the scripture,
and to discuss al doubts of our faith, Which shall at any time rise emonge us
And that also the general concils ought not to be despised, but much regarded,
obediently received, and foloued.
Now for as much as every man is (as David and Paul Psalm. 115
affirm) a lier of himself, and the holy spirit of god Romans 3.
was promised of Christ unto the church, to teach her al truth, and to abide
still with her for ever, for to rule, Joan. 14. 1^
direct, and lead her from time to time, that she should not err in the faith
and pure religion of Christ, who can justly deny, but that the authorite to
expound the scriptures, and to determyne controversies of the faith rising out
of the same, must neades pertayne unto her only, and not unto one particuliere
person, nor to any one country, or region? For as S. Augustine A verite
unwritten.
said, that he would not have believed the euangele, except christ's De
praescript. haereticorum.
church had moved him so to do, and again, as we know not which is scripture,
and which is not, but only, (as. Tertulian says) by the church, so hou can I
be certain of the right sense of scripture, and what I ought to believe, but by
the catholic church? If an heretic should now deny any part of the
scripture, as Manicbaeus and other refused all the old testament, as Marcio^
Holy scripture can not be proved to be scripture, but only by the church.
denied all the gospels, except lukes, as Ebion would not receive paul's epistles,
and as luther repealed S. James epistle and the Apocalypsis, what have we to
convict the^, but the churches authorite? Why then ought not the church to
expound scripture, and to be judge in al matters of trauerse in religion? For
how, tell me, can the scripture be theryn judge, which every man takes as he
lysteth, and expounds it (as lyrine^sis says, and also as experience does
teach) after his oune mind and fantasy? Did not al heretics, that ever have
been before our days, and that noue are, allege scripture for them as well as
the catholic men? May she then, Which is a wytnes, alleged upon both sides,
be judge between them? This moved Tertulian to say, that in De praescr.
matieres of doubt in our faith, we must not apeale unto the scripture, in
which there is either no victory, or uncertain, or else but little certain,
but unto the church of christ, which is ever governed, and ruled by the holy
ghost, and so erreth not wholly in our faith. Did not this thing also stere
the fathers even at the beginning of the church to call, and make assembles and
general concels, to discuss matters of controversy, and to suppress heresies
What else but that caused S. Austen Ianuario.
to affirm, that the authorite of general concils, was very wholesome, and good
for men's salvation, and that the judgment of then ought to be preferred
before any one bishops judgment, and the concel of any one region, or Lib. 2.
ca. 1. contrae Donatistas de bap.
country? Did not also the same thing move him to say, that he did well in
following the custom, establyshed after ward by a general counsel, yea
although the truth lay yet unknown, and hid? S. Cyprian with almost lxxx
Lib. 7. cap. 27. De bap. contra Donatistas.
bishops assembled in a council in Africa erred, and a general counsel
afterward corrected their error.

What folly then were it to believe the Lib. 1. ca. 18 de bapt. contra
Donatistas.
determynation and doctrine of any one region, before a general council?
Wherefore let us follow such councels (as al holy men have done before our days)
and not straight way deny the^, if they be against our opinions, for so did
ever al heretics. Arius said that Nicene concile erred, Nestorius affirmed
that the council of Ephesus was disceaued, Eutiches refused the counsel of
Chalcedon, and so did ever al other heretics say, that the councels erred,
which did condemn their opinions, but let us follow rather S. Athanasius,
Hilary, Cyprian, Austen, Cyril and such blessed fathers, and great learned men,
which both were at general councels, and also did ever regard much their
sentences, and determynations in matters of our faith. If we thus do, we shall
not be disceaued in our belief, but ever continue in it, that we may say whith
S. Hierom, I Ad oceanu^ and pamma chium.
will keep that faith in my age, in which I was borne a child, and also with
saint Paul. I have foughten a good battle, finyshed my course, and kept my
faith. There is a croune of ryghteousnes laid up for me, which our lord, a
just judge, shall render unto me at that 2. tim. 4.
day, and to all that love his coming Unto whom be al praise, world without
end. Amen.

The confutation of certain sentences, which are in the preface of the
Bysshoppes book.
But the Romysh Antichrist to deface The bishop
this great benefit of christ, has taught that christ's sacrifice made upon
the cross is not a sufficient, satisfaction and redemption for sin without
an other sacrifice devised by him, and made by a priest. etc.

Who says, my lord, that christ's The confutation.
sacrifice made upon the cross is not a sufficient satisfaction for the
remission of the sins of the whole world? Why do ye blame us in that, which
we defend not? Have not I declared in my book of the holy mass, that christ's
sacrifice is sufficient of it self to save all the whole world, and that the
sacrifice of the mass is the very self same sacrifice, touching the things
offered, which are christ's natural body and blood, and that it is distinct
only from it in the manner of offering, and is a mean to apply yt unto us for
the remission of our sins? It is also false that the bishop of Rome devised
this sacrifice, for christ him self did institute it, as I will prove, by gods
grace in the confutation of the fyft book. Ye say, my lord, that the bishop of
Rome devised the sacrifice of the mass, and that a priest makes no more Libr.
5.
sacrifice for our sins, then the lay man does, and also that your doctrine
is approved of the ancient docters, which your saynges are very false, for the
holy martyr Anacletus, that was whythin lx years after christ's passion, this
writes of that sacrifice of Epist. 1. omnibus ecclesiis scripta.
the mass. They that do make sacrifice perfectely unto god, ought not to be
vexed, but to be borne with al, conforted, and worshipped of al men. But when
they do make sacrifice unto our lord, they ought not to do it alone without
wytnes, that they might be proved to have made sacrifice unto god in places
haloued. Now will ye say, my lord, that this blessed martyr devised this
sacrifice of his oune head, against christ's sacrifice? He affirms that
priests do make sacrifice at mass, and ye deny utterly that they make any
sacrifice more then the lay man does. Whether of you two is more worthy to be
believed? Hear what S. Clement paul's compaignion in preaching of the gospel
says in this matter, these are his words unto S. James the apostle. Let
there be so many hoostes Epistola. 2.
offered upon the altar, as may suffice the people. What can ye now say, my
lord, unto this holy martyr? Does he not make plain mention here both of the
sacrifice of the mass, and also of an altar for that sacrifice to be made
upon? May ye not then, my lord, be ashamed of your writing that this sacrifice
of the mass was devised by the bishop of Rome against christ's blouddy
sacrifice, and that priests make no more sacrifice then the layte does? Why do
ye cast down the aulters, which the apostles used to say mass, and to offer
sacrifice upon? Is this to reform and restore, (as ye pretend) christ's
religion unto the state, that it was in at the beginning of the chuch? Do ye
not rather destroy that, which the primitive church ever used? But S. Clement
says again Epist. 3.
unto S. James. We must know gods will, whiles we do live here, where the place
is to offer sacrifice, for we may The mass is a sacrifice not of late devised.
not make sacrifice, and say masses in any other places, then in which our oune
bishop has commanded, or in that place that is, or shall be consecrated by
the bishops debite of that cite. For these things shall not be other wise well
done, both the old, and also the neue testament bearyng there unto wytnes. The
apostles learned these things of our lord, and taught the^ us. Who now may
not see plainly, my lord, how far your doctrine disse^teth from the apostles,
and the ancient docters teaching, and belief? S. Clement says that christ
taught his apostles to offer sacrifice at mass, and in what place they should
do it, and that the apostles taught the same unto him and his feloes, and ye,
my lord, say that the bishop of Rome devised that sacrifice, and that priests
do make no sacrifice more then the lay people do, and yet ye affirm in the
title of your book, that this your doctrine is approved by the consent of the
most ancient doctors of the church. O what mean ye, my lord? Think ye to
blere men's eyes after such sort? Think ye that we do not epsy, what ye goo
Epistola. ad burdegale^ses, cap. 3.
about? S. Martial peter's scholar thus writes of the masses sacrifice. A
sacrifice is offered upon an altar unto god, not to man, nor angel. Nor that
is An altar for mass to be said upon.
not only done upon an altar haloued but a clean sacrifice is offered unto
god in every place, as he does testify, whose body and blood, we offer to
obtain everlasting life. Do ye not yet, my lord, blusse? May ye not well repent
your labor spent in settinge forth of this your book, seeing this disciple of
S. peter so openly speaks both of the presence of christ's body and blood in
the holy sacrament, and also of the sacrifice of the mass? Why also do ye
destroy aulters, which were used in the apostles time (as it appears here)
for masses to be said upon? What I The mass is a sacrifice propitiaetori for
sin.
pray you, my lord, is it to offer christ's body and blood at mass, to
purchase thereby everlasting life, if it be not the mass to be a sacrifice to
pacify gods wrath for sin, and to obtain his mercy? Why then do ye deny
this, and say that such doctrine is blasphemous and injurious unto christ, and
his sacrifice? Would ye, that we should believe your sayng, before al these, and
al other old godly fathers doctrine? Hear yet ones again this holy martyr S.
peter's scholar, which says thus That same thing, that the Jews did The mass
is a sacrifice for sin.
kill through envy, we set forth upon the altar for our salvation knowing
that by this remedy alone the life that ever lasts, shall be given to us, and
death dreauen away from us, for our lord him self bade us do this in
remembrance Lucae. 22
of him. Loo, my lord, this blessed martyr S. peter's disciple affirms that
priests do offer for our salvation, to get heaven, and to auoyed hell, the
self same thing upon an altar, that the ieues did put unto death. With what
face do ye the^ deny, that christ's body is in the sacrament, but bread only
a sign of it, and say also that the mass is no sacrifice at al for sin?
This father says, that christ commanded sacrifice to be made of his body and
blood for our salvation, and are ye not, my lord, ashamed then to say that the
sacrifice of the mass was devised by the bishop of Rome, against christ's
sacrifice, which he made upon the cross? Who denies, my lord, but that
christ's sacrifice made upon the cross is sufficient for the remission of the
sins of the whole world? But what thereof? Will ye of that gather, either that
it did even, when it was made first upon the cross, take away clean in
effect, and actually al Note.
men's sins, or else that it neadeth none application to take effect in us for
our salvation? Why the^ should there be any hell, or any man be damned? For was
not that his sacrifice a sufficient redemption 1. Joan. 2
for the sins of all the whole world? Again, if the sacrifice of christ made
upon the cross, neade no application, why should we neade to believe in him? to
hope? to fear god? to do penance for our sins? to pray? to fast? to give
alms? to love god? to keep his commandments? or to do any good? May we not
then say (as 1. Cor. 15
many have done, and yet do) let us eat, drink, and make good chere, for
christ has done al, and enoughe for us? He will not lose one of us, that he
has bought so dearly. This many men do say, that are your scholars, my lord,
and they may gather no less out of many places of this your book, although ye
never meant any such thing. Wherefore seyyng christ did not actually, nor in
effect take away by his death the sins of men, but only as a meriter and
deseruer of grace and remission of our sins, he has prepared a remedy to
heal and cure them, that receive, do, and keep al such things, which he has
appointed to be means to apply that his benefit, virtue and strength of his
passion unto them. Why then may not the sacrifice of the mass be such a mean,
emou^g many other mo for that application of christ's merit unto us, without
any derogation of the perfection and sufficientcye of christ's sacrifice, made
by his death? Said Heb. 5.
not S Paul that christ was made the cause of salvation, not of al men
absolutely, but to them, that obeyed him? Does not he then plainly declare,
that this obedience of man is necessary for the application of christ's
perfect sacrifice, and yet that proves no imperfection at al in that
sacrifice? Said not Coloss. 1.
also S paul that christ had pacyfied his fathers wrath, and reconciled us unto
him by his death, and yet not wythstanding that that his sacrifice was full,
perfect, and sufficient, he said, that he did supplye those things, which
lacked in christ's passions, when he suffered afflictions, and persecution in
his body for the people? What me^t he, my lord, else but that the passions,
afflictions and peynes, which he suffered for the setting forth and defendyng
of the gospel, were means to apply christ's perfect, and sufficient sacrifice
unto the people for the remission of their sins, and their salvation? Why
then said ye, that they, which defend the sacrifice of the mass, as an
instrument and a mean to apply christ's passion unto us for our salvation, do
it to supplye the imperfection of christ's sacrifice, and to do that for us,
which christ either for lack of charity did not for us, or else for lack of
pouer could not do? Were ye not plainly disceaued, my lord, when ye wrote this
against the sacrifice of the mass? Reca^te then for shame, reca^te, this
noughty doctrine, and teach it no more. Now to the confutatio^ of your first
book.

The Confutation of the first book.
What so ever can not be grounded The bishop fo. 1. pa. 2
upon the scripture, (touching our faith) is man's deuyse, chaungeable, and
uncertain.

What say ye then, my lord, unto The Confutation.
the baptism of children? For of it S. Austen thus writes upon the Genesis.
The custom of our mother the church Lib. 1^. ca. 23. ad literam.
in baptizing of children, is not be despised, nor to be judged superfluous in
any wise, another it ought to be believed, except it had been a tradition of the
apostles Again origin says In ca. 6. ad Romanos.
after this manner. The church has received a tradition of the apostles to give
baptism also to children. See ye not noue, how that ye err? For Saint Austen
says that the baptism of children ought not to be believed to be necessary
for their salvation, if it had not been a tradition of the apostles, and ye
say, what so ever is not grounded upon the scripture, (touching our faith) is
man's devise, etc. Think ye, that the baptism of children is grounded upon
scripture, when S. Austen says yt is only a tradition of the apostles? Are ye
better learned then he, and origin, that ye can find scripture for it, where
they could find none? Also by what scripture is the baptism mynistred of an
heretic, or a schismatike, approved to be good and auayleable? Says not also
S. Austen that De vnico bapt. contra Donatistas.
there is no scripture to prove it? Called not also S. Hierom. Eluidium an
heretic, because he defended that christ's dear mother was not a continual
verge^? Is that verite set forth in scripture? No, ye are shamefully disceaued
in this point, but of this matter I have spoken more at large in my book of
traditions, unto which ye have yet made no answer, although ye rail daily
A book of traditions.
against vnwritte^ verites, It foloueth in your book.

And al doctrine concerning this matter The bishop fo. 5 pa. 2.
(of the sacrament) that is more the^ this, which is not grounded upon gods
word, is of no necessite, etc. Then let The confutation.
your communion be celebrated at night, my lord, when christ did institute it.
Then let al men break their fast before they receive the holy sacrament, as
one Bernard of christ's church Bernard. Ianuario epist. 119. Tertulianus. libr.
2. ad vxorem
in oxford did. For Austen says, our lord commanded not by what order this
sacrament should be received, but left that thing unto his apostles, by whon
he would set the churches in an 1. Cor. 11.
order, and therefore S. paul says, when he had spoken of the sacrament, I will
dispose the rest, when I shall come unto you. Moreover, saint Austen says. It
pleased the holy ghost, that our lords body should first enter in to man's
Epist. 119.
mouth before other meats, for the honor of so great a sacrament. Loo S.
Austen says it seamed good unto the holy ghost, that for the honor of so The
honor of the sacrament.
great a sacrament, we should receive our lords body fasting. And ye say, my
lord, that we receive but bread and wine, and that the sacrament ought not to
be honored, and that al doctrine, concerning this matter, which is not
grounded upon gods word, is of no necessite, and that the peoples consciences
ought not to be troubled there with What mean you? Do ye despise al godly
order, and the fathers doctrine, and yet say that your book is approved of the
old doctors? Think ye that me^ are so mad to believe you before S. Austen?
Origin says that every Homi. 5. in Numeros.
man must of necessite observe the order and manner of the receiving, and the
ministering of this sacrament, which the church observes. Also S. Cypria^ De
ablutione pedum.
writes after this sort. That thing is as firm, or as ratified, that the
apostles have taught by the inspiration of the holy ghost, as that, which
christ himself taught, and commanded to be done, for his remembrance. Also
saint Luc. 22.
Austen says that this sacrifice is not well done, except the sign of the
cross Tract. 189. in Ioanne^. Lib. 3. contra pelagi^ Epist. 1. ad omnes
ecclesias. Lib. 1. epi. 3
be made upon the host. S. Hierom affirms that christ taught his apostles to
say daily the pater noster in the sacrifice of his body. S. Alexander, which
was withyn lxx years after christ's passion, S. Cyprian and many other holy
men, and great clearkes say that christ mengled water with the wine in the
chalice, when he made sacrifice at his mandy, and bade priests to does same,
and therefore they must do it of necessite Is this thing expressed, my lord, in
scripture? It is not. With what face then, do ye say, that there is nothing of
any necessite, but that only which is grounded upon scripture? Is this your
doctrine to be approved (as ye say that it is) by the consent of the ancient
docters of the church? S. Clement paul's disciple, S. Anacletus, S. Martial
peter scholars, and many other old doctors, do testify, that the sacrament
ought to be celebrated only in hallowed places, and upon aulters, and ye, my
lord, regard nothing of this, and yet ye would make men believe that your
doctrine is allowed, and set fourth by the ancient writers of the church.
Think ye after such sort to blind men? Do ye not give an occasion unto men by
this your doctrine, to celebrate the communion (as ye call yt) in the buttery,
kechen, backhouse, or else where they list? Saint Basil Lib. de spis. cap. 27.
says that the words of invocation, which are said when the bread of
thanks giving, and the cup of blessyng The sacrament was sheued to the people
in baesils time lege Theophilu^. lib. 1. pasch.
is showed, came by tradition, and that the priests said, that time at mass,
certain words, that have great strength unto the mysteries, besides the words
of the gospel and the apostle, and are not ye then, my lord, ashamed to say,
that nothing is of any necessite in this matter, that is not grounded upon the
scripture? Would ye have men rather to believe you, then this saint? S. Epist.
praefixa Libr. paschalibus
Hierom commended Theophilus bishop of Alexandria for teaching men to worship
the holy chalices, and other things pertaynyng unto the ministration of the
blessed sacrament of the altar, and that with the same majesty, and honor,
that his body and blood are to be worshipped, because that they are there
present. Should we then follow, my lord, your doctrine, which say that nothing
is of any necessite, but that only, which is grounded upon gods word, and it is
idolatry to whorship the holy sacrament of the altar? In how many places of
his books Tract. ^3. in Joan. lib. 8. capi. 27. de ciuitate dei. Lib. 22. cap.
10. Deuerbis apost. sermon. 17.
says S. Austen that the holy martyrs and other saints names are rehearsed
at mass for to pray for us? Why then deny ye this? S. Austen, Cyprian,
Chrysostom, Cyril, and many other of the best writers, and most godly docters
of christ's church, do make mention Chrysostom. lib. 3. de sacerdotio ca. 4. and
lib. 6. cap. 4.
of many things used then at mass, which are not written in scripture, and do
say that the sacrifice of the altar is made by prayer, and invocation of
August. epistol. 57. Ser igi. lib. 3. cap. 4. de trinitate.
the holy ghost, and gods name. Wherefore your doctrine is false, my lord, and
utterly improued of the ancient doctors of the church, though ye say that
they do approve it. I pass over many things, that are of necessite to be
observed at mass, and be not expressed in the scripture, least I should be to
long, and tedious, ye say moreover thus.

First here is to be noted, that christ The bishop fo. 4 pa. 2.
called the material bread his, body, and the wine (which was the fruit of
the vine) his blood. Why did ye not prove The confutation.
this, my lord? Would ye that men should take you for a prophet, or for one,
that could not err in his sainges? How called christ the material bread, and
wine of the grape his body and blood when he added immediately these words,
which shall be given for you and shed for you? For gave he material Mark.
bread for our redemption upon the cross? Shed he there wine of the grape
for the remission of our sins? Gave he not his own natural body, and shed
his own precious blood then for us? Promised he not before to his apostles to
give them bread, that should be his own very natural body, which he Joan. 6.
would give by death for the life of the world? Who is then, my lord, so folysh
to believe this your doctrine? But ye go forward sayng.

Although none eats the body, and The bishop fo. 5. pa. 2.
drinks the blood of christ (but they have eternal life (as appears by
Ihons words before rehearsed) yet the good, etc.

My lord ye understand not christ's The confutation.
words written by S. Ihon, for the right sense of them is, that every man,
which eats and drinks christ's body and blood worthily, has ever lastyng
life, as saint paul expounds that place, 1. Cor. 11.
writing to the corinthians. That this only was christ's meaning there, yt shall
be proved anon by gods grace. Now ye recite S. paul's words, which says. Who
so ever shall eat of this 1. Cor. 11.
bread, and drink of this cup unworthily, he shall be gyltie of the body, and
blood of the lord, and then ye say thus.

Here S. paul says not, that he, that The bishop
eats the bread, and drinks the cup of the lord unworthily, eats and
drinks the body, and the blood of the lord, but is gyltie of the body and
blood of the lord, but what he eats and drinks, he declares, sayng. He
eats and drinks his oune damnation.

What if S. paul say not, my lord, that The confu^^tion.
the unworthy receauer of the holy sacrament, receaueth our lords body, and his
blood? Is that enoughe to prove that he receaueth them not, as ye defend? Who,
that has any learning in logic, will so reason? Does not paul affirm that
the unworthy receauour of this blessed sacrament is gyltie of the body and
blood of christ? May we justly say that he, which eats only bakers bread,
and drinks wine of the grape is gyltie of christ's body and blood? May a man
be gylt^e of the unworthy eating of a thing, which he eats not at al? Will any
wise man say, that I am gyltie of eating a capo^, when I eat but milk? Or may
we say well, that he is gyltie of mysse entreating of a kings oune person, when
he does abuse only his image, or picture? Why the^ have ye my lord, destroyed
so many images of christ, and his holy saints? images.
Were they not more lively, and manifest pictures, and representatio^s of
christ's passion, than bread, and wine are? That they so were, I will shortly by
gods grace, prove, to your reproach and shame, that have so leudly destroyed
them, without al good ground, and cause sufficient. Moreover ye are disceaued,
The bishop
when ye say, that S. paul declares, what the unworthy receauer 1. Cor. 11.
of the sacrament, eats and drinks, when he says, that he eats and
drinks his oune damnation. For he declares only by those words what
ponyshement he shall have, that unworthily receaueth christ's body and blood Did
ye not see, that paul used there a figure, and meant, that he did eat and
drink, that bread and blood, unto his oune damnation, that unworthily
received them? But of this sufficient, ye say thus again.

But al these forsayed admonitions, exhortations, and confortes does the The
bishop fo. 12. ca. 15
papists (as much as lies in them) take away from al christien people, by
their transubstantation. The confutation.


How prove ye this my lord, I beseech you? Marry thus say ye. For if we receive
The bishop
no bread, nor wine in the communion, then all the lessons, and confortes be
gone, which we should learn, and receive by eating of bread, and The
confutation.
drinking of wine. It is very false, my lord, that ye say here. Why did ye not
prove it to be true, but because ye could not, I am very certain? Wherefore may
we not learn al such lessons, by that only that bread and wine are taken of
the priest to be consecrated, and are so turned in to christ's flesh and
blood, that their forms, and qualitees remain still? For as the bread and
wine, which are consecrated, be made of many graynes of corn, and of diverse
grapes of the vine, likewise are Cyprianus.
al Christian people joined spiritually through faith, hope, love, and grace
Mark reader.
unto Christ the head of the church, which is his mystical body. Seconly, as
the bread, and wine, that we do eat, and drink daily, are so turned in to
our fleash and blood, that they make but one whole body, nor are distincted
from the other our flesh and blood, even so be al christen people spiritually
joined both unto christ, and also one unto an other through the worthy
receiving of christ's fleash and blood in the sacrament, (in to which bread and
wine of like nature and sort were chanuged by the word and pouer of god) that
they do make altogether but one body of christ, which is the church This thing
is, my lord, sufficiently represented, and signified by the bread and wine
laid upon the altar to be consecrated, and by their shapes, apparaunces, and
qualitees remayninge there still, and their substaunces presence is not required
thereunto, though ye say that it is but proving not your sayng. But if I should
grant, (as luther teaches, and his scholars) that the substance of bread, and
wine remains in the sacrament, what should that, that ye here say make for
your opinion? Does not the lutherians hold and defend that the substance also
of bread and wine is in the sacrament with christ's very natural body, and
blood? How can ye, my lord then prove this argument unto a lutherian? The
substance of bread and wine does still abide in the sacrament, ergo theryn My
lord labors al in vain.
is not christ's body and blood, but only bread, and wine, as ye say. See ye
not then, that all this your labor was clean il spent, and lost for thereby ye
proved not your purpose. Noue ye say, that the doctrine of transubstantiation
does subuerte our faith in christ, and to prove that your sayng, ye write after
this manner. For this sacrament is ordo^ned in bread, and wine (which The
bishop fo. 1^. pa. 2.
be foodes for the body) to signify, and to declare unto us our spiritual
food by christ, then if our corporal feeding upon the bread and wine, be but
fantastical (so that there be no bread, nor wine to feed upon, although they
appear to be there) than yt does us to understand, that our spiritual feadyng
in christ is also fantastical, and that The confutation.
in deed we feed not in christ. As this your sayng, my lord, is grounded upon
no reason, nor authorite, even so it may be sufficient for me at this time to
deny it, and to say that our spiritual feeding in christ, and also the
corporal eating and drinking of his body, and blood in the sacrament, are
sufficiently signified unto us by that, that the bread and wine, which be
consecrated in to christ's fleash, and blood, are of that same kind and nature,
of which the bread and wine be, that we do feed daily upon, and by that that
their forms, and properties do remain still in the sacrament. This was the
meaning of all the ancient doctors, which entreated any thing of this matter,
and ye shall never be able to prove the contrary, with the help of al them,
that made this your book but. I do traueile in vain to spend so many words
in a thing of it self manfestly false, and therefore I will pass it over, and
go forward. It foloueth in your book. This spiritual The bishop fo. 1^. pa 2.
cap 16.
meat of christ's body and blood: is not received in the mouth, etc. Why
proved ye not this your sainge? The confutation.
Is your bare word a sufficient proof my lord, of this pestilent doctrine, and
a reprouffe of the catholic faith of christ? The body and blood of Christ are,
I confess, a spiritual food of our souls, and yet they are not only received
of us spiritually, but also corporally with our mouths, when we do worthily
receive the sacrament of the altar. For Tertulianus says. Lib. de resurrect.
^anis.
The fleash of man eats christ's body, and blood, that his soul may be also
fed of god. How does, my lord, man's flesh eat christ's body and drink Lib. 4.
c. ^4.
his blood, if he eat it not (as ye say) with his mouth? Cyril also writes of
the same after this maniere.

We deny not, that we be joined spiritually unto christ through a right Lib
10. ca. 11. in Joan.
faith and pure charity, but that we have no ioynyng together with him bodylie,
we utterly deny, and do judge that against the scripture. And least any man
should say, that he spoke not this of the sacrament, and of our corporal
ioynyng unto Christ by the bodily receiving of him in the sacrament, he adds
mention of the 1. Cor. 10.
sacrament, saying Although we be many, yet we be one in him, for we are al
partakers of one bread. Thinks he, that we know not the virtue of the
sacrament, which when we do receive, does it not make Christ to dwell in us yea
corporally, through Mark.
the partakyng of his fleash? What may a man desire to be spoken more plainly,
to prove, my lord, that christ's fleash is received of us bodily in the
sacrament, and not only (as ye teach falsely) by faith spiritually? May Christ
dwell, I beseech you, in us corporally by the receiving of the sacrament of the
altar, and yet we not receive his body with our mouths? I let pass diverse
such authorites both of S Cyril, Chrysostom, and also of many other, but yet I
will not pass by Lib. senten^ia^ (...) prosperi.
this saying of S Austen. Whiles the host is broaken, whiles the blood is
poured out of the chalice in to the mouths of the faithful what thing is else
signified, but the death of our lords body upon the cross, and the sheddyng
of his blood out of his side? Saint Austen says that we receive bodily
christ's blood with our mouths, and my lord denies it, whether ought we to
believe of these two? Ye say again in your book thus. And so The bishop. fo.
1^. ca. 17.
there remains whytnesse, but nothing is whyt, there remain colors, but
nothing is colored, there remains roundnes, but nothing is round, and there
is bigness, but nothing is byg there is swetnes, but nothing is sweet, etc. What
of this, my lord? Will ye deny The confutation.
these things to be true, because your natural wit, and reason can not
perceive how these accidents, and qualites may be in the sacrament without any
substance to sustain the^, and in which they may be? Who will measure an
article of our faith by 1. Cor. 2. Theophilactus in Ioanne^. ca. 3.
his natural wit? Says not S paul, my lord, that a man, which follows
natural arguments, and reason, perceaueth not the things, that pertayne unto
the spirit of god? Why remember ye not, that gods word, is his deed? Psalm. ^3.
Psalm. 14.
Says not scripture that god does all that he will, and that nothing is unto
Luc. 1. Sap. 7. 11.
him impossible? Can he them not make whitnes, roundnes, swetnes, bygnes
savor, and other the qualitees of bread and wine, to be in the sacrament
without their substance to bear the^? Is this a greater thing, tha^ to create,
and make al thing of nothing? S Ambrose says, why seakest thou a natural
order in christ's body, that is in the sacrament, Libr. de his qui mysterus
initiantur. cap. 9.
seying that his body was borne of the virgen without, yea against the order of
nature? What mean ye then, my lord, to wounder so much at these things? The
hethen men, that lacks faith, may well merueile at them, and think that it is
madness to believe any such thing, as they do judge of all the articles of our
faith. Says not the prophet, except ye believe, ye shall not understand? Why
Esaiae. 7.
then do ye not, my lord, first believe, and afterward study humbly to
understand this deape mystery of our faith? Did not christ say that that
Matthew. 19.
thing, which seamed impossible to man, was possible unto god? Is not our faith
the fundation of all the things, that belong unto our salvation? 1. Cor. 3.
Wherefore then bylde ye that upon reason without faith which ought only Hebr.
11.
to be builded upon faith without reasoning? Cotta said unto Lucilius (as
lactantius says) If thou do ask De origene erroris Lib. 2. cap. 7.
a reason, thou do not believe, why do thou the^ require a reason, which
may cause the not to believe? But if thou do require a reason, and think
that a reason must neades be asked the^ thou do not believe. Lo, my lord a
paynim sets you to schole. Are ye not then a shamed of your reasonyng in
this matter, in which faith only ought to rule? Well I trust ye will be ano^, if
ye be not past al shame. Ye write thus again. But this is not the doctrine The
bishop. fo. 15.
of christ, but the subtle invention of Antichrist, first decreed by Innocent
the third, etc. Innocent the third, my The confutation.
lord, was a great learned man (as his books declare, and as platina
witnesses) and also a godly, which caused a general council at Rome to be had,
and celebrated, of M. ccc. xv fathers, some out A council of. M. ccc. xv
fathers.
of every region of al christen dome, and they after long prayng to god for
grace, much deliberation, and reasonyng upon this matter, made this act and
decree for the declaration of our belief in the sacrament. There is one
universal church of the faithful, out of the which no man utterly can be saved.
In which church christ himself is a priest, and a sacrifice, whose body and
blood is verily contained in the sacrament of the altar under the forms of
bread, and wine, the substance of the bread, and wine being turned in to
christ's body and blood by gods pouer. hitherto this the greatest counsel, that
ever was kept emo^gest christian people, Nou I appeal to thy conscience,
reader, and ask of the whether we ought not rather to believe this great nombre
of learned and godly men, that were assembled together in this counsel, than
either my lord of Canterbury, or else any one particulier council of any reaulme
christened? For who can justly think, that al those men gathered together in
Christ's name for the setting forth of the truth of our faith unto gods
honor, and the wealth of our souls, did err so shamefully, as my lord says
they did? For did not Christ promise Matthew. 18.
to be in the mids of two or three assembled in his name? Was he not the^
with these. M. cccxv. fathers, that were in this council, that they erred not
in their sentence? Why were ye not the^ ashamed, my lord, to say that
Innocentius the third first decreed this our doctrine, which al these fathers
did set forth above. ccc. yers passed and yet not first (as ye say) but only
established yt, being long before taught, even by Christ and his apostles,
albeit not so plainly, as they declared it? Haymo a godly bishop, which was
Haymo homiliade passione Christ secundum Matthaeum
above. cccc. years before this Innocen tius, did thus write of this matter.
The bread is changed in to our lords fleash, and the wine in to his blood,
not by a figure, nor by a shadow, but by In. 1. Cor. 11
the veryte. See ye not noue, my lord, how plainly ye err, saying that
Innocentius first decreed this doctrine of Transubstantiation? Anselme, that
was bishop of Canterbury. cxx. years before Innocentius was borne, wrote thus
of the sacrament, It appears bread to the outward senses of man, but do ye
know yt with the senses of the mind, for this is Christ's body, no other, but
that self same in substance, that was crucified for us, What can be more
plainly spoken than this is, my lord, against your wryti^g here? but let this
pass, as sufficienthy disscussed, and refuted, it follows in your Book. The
papists say, that the very The bishop
natural body and blood of Christ, which suffered for us upon the cross, and
sittehy at the rygth hand of the father in heaven, is also really, et. c. in
the sacrament. Here ye call papists, The confutation.
my lord, not luther only and al his scholars, which are against your doctrine,
but also al christen nations, and all the ancyent doctors of christ's church,
which do believe and defend the real presence of christ's blessed body in the
sacrament. Again ye falsely report of them, that they say, that christ's body
is naturally, and sensibly I^. 16.
in the sacrament, for they affirm manifestly, that it is there above nature
and vnsensiblye. It is also very false, that ye lay unto our charges, that we
say that christ's body is in the sacrament as yt was borne of the virgen, and
that it is broaken, and toren in peaces with our teth, for we say that he was
borne naturally of the vyrgen, and visibly in his oune form of fleash and
bone, and that he is unnaturally, inuisibly and under the form of bread and
wine in the sacrament, and that he is therein received wholly without breaking
of his body, or teryng of it with our teth, and that the forms only of bread
are broaken and toren with our teth. This meant berengarius, Fo. 16.
whon ye do allege, by such words of his recantation. And in those his words
he followed. S Chrysostom, Hom. ^5^. ^^ 83. in Matthaeum and homi. 45. in
Ioannem.
and certain other of the old writers, which for the more manifest setting forth
of the real presence of christ's body in the sacrament, do say often times that
it is therein touched, broaken, and seane, when only the forms and kinds of
bread are touched, broaken, and seane. And why may we not as well say, that we
do touch, break, and see christ's body in the sacrament, when we see, touch,
and break only the outword forms of the bread, Genesis 18. 19. 32. Iosue. 5.
Mar. vlt. Act. 1. 1. Joan. 1.
as the scripture says that loath, Abrahan, Jacob, Joshua, mary Madgalen, and
the Apostles saw and touched angels, and god, when they saw only and touched
te form, and shape of man? Moreover, I do ask of you, my lord, why may not we
say that christ's body is is broaken, when the forms of bread are broaken only
in the sacrament, and his body takes no hurt at al, as S. Thomas did put his
hand in to christ's side after his resurrection without al harm of his body,
which was then i^mortal, and not apt to suffer any hurt at al? Is not this as
impossible to man's natural reason, and wit, as the other, and as the
qualitees of bread and wine to remain still in the sacrament without any
substance to sustain them? Wherefore the^ do ye not believe the one, as well as
the other? Ye say that Fo. 16.
christ is gone up from us in to heaven bodily, and shall not come hither
again until domes day, and thereof ye gather that he is not bodily and really
in the sacrament, but how false that saying is, it does partly appear already,
and more plainly shall by these words, which do follow here. First, Christ is
both at ones in heaven, and also in the sacraement of the altar.
the catholic faith is, that Christ departed vysibly and in is oune form out
of this world in to heaven, at the time of his ascension, and after that manner
sits at the right hand of the father in heaven, and shall do until domes
day, and yet he is bodily also in the sacrament both at ones by the almighty
pouer of god above nature, and the understanding of al man's wit, and reason S.
Austen expounds Ad Dardadum epist. ^7. Actoru^. ^.
this matter after the like sense, saying. He will come again (as the angels
wytnessed) after that same sort as he was seane going up in to heaven, that is
to say (as S. Austen takes it) in the same form and substance of flesh. What
can be more plainly spoken to declare, that Christ is gone from us visibly in
the form of fleash, and that after such sorthe is not with us now, but shall be
at domes day? This proves not, that he is not with us now ynuisibly in the
form of bread and wine, and therefore this your argument, my lord, is soyled
sufficiently. I ask now of you, my lord, why may not god, that made both the
place and also the thing placed in yt, and appointed that One body may be in
diverse places at ones by gods pouer.
one body should be naturally but in one place at ones, cause that one body
should be against the common order of nature in diverse places at ones? May he
not do this, as well as to make a virgen to conceive and bear a child wythhout
man's help? Is not this as much against the order of nature, as the other? Was
it not as much impossible by man's reason, christ's body to walk upon the sea,
to come out of his grave through the great stone lying upon it, and to go
through the gates yet closed in to the house, where his apostles were, as the
same his body to be in diverse places of the earth, and in heaven also at one
time? If you do de nigh (as Ihon frith, peter martyr, and Peter Martyr Ihon
fryth.
diverse other have done) that christ entered in to the house, where his apostles
were, the doors or gates being yet still Io. 20.
closed, both the scripture it self, and also the doctors of the church are
against you. For leo says thus upon Epist. 40.
that matter. Let these fantastical christians tell me, what body Jesus brought
into the sight of his disciples, the gates Lib. 1. contra Iouinianum.
being yet closed? S. Hierom also has the same, saying after this manner. If
christ went into the house, the doors being shit, which thing the nature of
me^nes bodies suffers not to be done, shall we then deny that both Peter, and
also our lord had true bodies, because they against nature walked upon the
waters? S. Auste^ has the same, when Ser. 1^9. de tempore. Lib. 3. ad
volusianum. Libr. 10 in lucae ca. 24.
he writes thus. It was a miracle that our lord entered in to the house unto
his disciples through the gates being closed. Also S. Ambrose says. Thomas
had a cause to merueile, when he saw christ's body brought i^ to the house
without hurt through the gates closed, Lib. de trinitate.
which could not be passed throvghe with men's bodies. Hylary disse^teth not
from this, sayng why do thou ask, through what pa^tes of the closed door
christ hauin a body came in? For the evangelist diligently expresses christ's
entri^g in to the house the doors being yet ^hit. To pass over many
authorites, I will recite but this one out of Epiphani^ an old writer which
says. Our lord entered in to the ^ow^ primo. lib. pri^^^.
house, the gates being yet closed, that he might declare his body to be of
thi^ne peaces, which was, before he rose up again, of gross parts, and the
same body that had fleash and bones. Now it is manifest that christ's body
entered in to the house through the doors, being the^ still closed. Who ca^
the^, my lord, deny, but that his body was that time of his e^trye in to the
house, i^ one propre place with the body of the door and so there were two
bodies i^ one place? Why the^ may not his body be in heaven Two bodies in one
plac^ at o^es.
and in earth both at one time? Is not the one of the two as much impossible by
nature, as the other? Wy do ye not follow the faith of Abraham, which believed
Gene 2^. Romans 4
steadfastly the promise of god, made by the angel, concerning the having of a
child by Sara his wife both old, and also barre^, when the thing was by nature
impossible? S. Chrysostom believed that christ's very natural body was both in
heaven, and also in the holy sacrament at ones, for he says thus. O great
Lib. 4 cap. 3 de (...)
good will of god toward us, o^ miracle* He* that sits upon the right h^d
of his father i^ heaven above, is contained in men's hands in the time of the
sacrifice Also he says in an other place. There is one body of christ daily
Homi. ^ ^n ^pi. (...).
offered in sacrifice and one christ in every place (where the sacrament is)
which is here in this place full, and there in that Homi^^^. 2. (...) popular.
also full, or whole. Thirdly he writes thus. Helias the prophet asce^dyng up
left his mantel unto his disciple, but Christ's body i^ (...)
the son of god asce^ding up in to heaven has left unto us his oune flesh.
As for helias leaving his mantel unto his in the sacrament also not
wythsta^ding his ascensio in to heaven.
disciple, left it from himself, but our savior christ has both left his
fleash with us, and also taken it with himself in his asce^sio^. See ye not
now, my lord that this holy doctor, and notable clearke, plainly sets
forth, both the sacrifice of the mass, and also christ's bodily presence in
heaven and in the blessed sacrament of the altar both at one time? Are ye not
the^ ashamed to deny both of these two things, and yet say, that the ancient
writers be altogether upon your side? S. Chrysostom perceived right well, that
christ departed not so out of this world at the time of his ascension, that he
tarried not still bodily therein. Also he saw that christ's body was at ones in
diverse places, believed the same, and taught it us. Wherefore this our belief,
that ye, my lord, do call so often blasphemy, heresy, and idolatry, and say
that it rose up of late, is the old godly and catholic faith of the chuch.
Now ye allege these christ's words for your purpose. Ye shald have ever The
bishop Matthew. 26. The confutation.
poor people with you, but me ye shall not ever have. This author^te proves
not your doctrine, for christ meant only that they should not have him with them
ever visibly in his oune for me of fleash and blood, and by familiar
conversation, that Mary Magdalen might, when she listed, anoynte his body,
which she did whiles she might, and therefore christ commended her deed. That
this was his meaning the text of Matthew shows plainly, and Saint Mark more
plainly, Marci. 14.
saing. Ye have poor men ever with you, and when ye will, ye may do them good,
but me ye have not ever with you. As if he had said, ye may not at al times do
me good, nor ye have me not after any such common mortal and neadful sort with
you, as ye have me now, and as ye have the poor people, to whom ye may do
good, when so ever ye list. Saint Hierom expounded that place after the same
sort, saying Hierom in Matthew. 26.
that christ meant that they should not have him with them by familiar
conversation, and living together with them, as they had him before his
resurrection. And it is no straung thing to say, that christ is present ever
with us inuisibly in the form of bread, although he be absent from us
visibly, for he used a like manner of speaking himself, when he said unto his
apostles after his resurrection. Luc. 22.


These are the words, which I spoke unto you, when I was with you.

For he meant that he was not then with them as he was before his resurrection,
when he was mortal, apt to suffer peynes, neadyng meat, and drink, and
subject unto such other passions of man, and so he was not with them when he
spoke this unto then. But this your reason is anusweared fully. Noweye allege
words these of Christ.

Many hereafter shall come, and say, The ^ysshop Fo. 16. et. 24 Matthew. ^4. The
confutation.
look here is Christ, or look there is Christ, but believe them not. O lord,
what blyndnes is this? Christ prophised of false prophets, which then should
either come before the destruction of Jerusalem, such as were ben Cosban,
Theodas, and Judas of Galilee (of whom Josephus, Eusebius, and S. Act. 5.
Luke in the acts do make mention) and say that they are christ, or else (which
is nerer to the letter) christ spoke then of false prophets, and false
Christ's, that should come with Antichrist, The confutation.
and say by him, and other such, here is christ, or there is Christ, utterly
denying our savior to be the very messiah, Matthew. 26.
or redeamer of the world. In what blyndnes were ye then, my lord, to allege
this text against the real presence Note this reader.
of christ's natural dody in the blessed sacrament? But that this is the right
sense of that letter, yt is evident both by the words, which go before it
making mention of Antichrists coming, and also of the end of the world, and
like wise by these words, that follow there, Then if any man say unto you, Loo
here is christ, or there, believe him not, for false christ's, and Matthew. 24.
false prophets shall rise up, and wourke gteat miracles, and wounders, in so
much, yea the elected (if it may be done) shall be brought in to error. And
anon after he makes plain mention of christ's coming again at domes day.
See ye not then now, my lord, your oune error, in wresting this place,
against the sacrament, which christ spoke only of such false prophets, and
false christ's, that should Note.
come in the time of Antichrist, and set up an other savior of the world in
his sted? Do we say, here is upon this anlter, or there upon that, an other
christ, then our savior? Who believes, and says, my lord, here is christ, or
there, because any false prophet, or false christ affirms him to be there?
Say we not that he is in the sacrament, Joan. 6.
because he himself promised unto his apostles to give them his flesh, which,
he would give for the life of the world, and performyng that his Mahtth. 2^
promise said to them, take and eat, this is my body, and finally, because the
holy conciles, the ancient doctors, and the catholic church has so taught
us? Moreover, have ye not, my lord, alleged here that text for you which is
directely and openly aginst your own self? For say ye not, here Episcopus
iste suo iugulatur gladio.
is Christ in this part of England by his true faith, and religion, and there
he is? Is it not then great merueile, that any learned and wise man does follow
your doctrine, which sees this your wreasting of the scrioture for the
furtherance of your wicked doctrine? But of this place, I have spoken
sufficiently. Now ye allege saint Paul or your purpose, which thus writes.

As often as ye shall eat of this bread, 1. Cor. 11. The bishop fo. 16. pa. 2.
and drink of this cup, show ye fourth the lords death until he come. Unto
these words ye add and say. Till he come (says s. paul) signifiyng The
Confutation.
that he is not there corporally, No sir, he meant only that Christ was not
present then visibly in his own form, but that he would come again at domes
day after such sort, as it is already declared at large. For as these
christ's words, Lucae. 22.
these are the words, which I spoke unto you, when I was with you, do not
prove, that he was not the^ with them bodily, but only that he was not then
with them mortal and apt to suffer peynes, as he was with them before his
death, and resurrection, and as this saying of Christ. The spirit Joan. 7.
was not yet given, because Jesus was not yet glorified, does not prove that
the holy ghost was not given before that time unto his apostles, and certain
other me^, but only that he was not then given visibly, and in a visibly sign,
as he was afterward given in fyrye tongues, even so when Paul act. 2.
says, until he come, he meant not absolutely, that christ was not then bodily
present in the sacrament, but that he was not there visibly, and in his propre
form of fleash and blood, for after such sort he should come again at domes
day, and therefore scripture speaking Marei. 13. Lucae. 12. Joan. 16.
of this christ's retourning in to this world at domes day, says that he
shall be seane coming in his gloyrie, and majesty. Your similitude, my lord,
serves not your purpose, for it only takes place among men, which come not,
ne can come, any other wise then visiblye, and in their own form, of whom we
can not say well, do ye this until they come, if they be present then, which we
may truly say of christ, that is ever present with us bodily, and inuisiby in
the sacrament, and absent visibly. Christ used a like manner of speaking, when
Lucae. 24.
ge said unto his apostles, tarrye ye in Jerusalem, until ye be yndued with
strength from above, for he meant that they were not then endued with strength
from heaven in a visible sign for their confirmation, although inuisibly they
had received the strength Mark.
of the holy ghost by grace, why may we not then say, my lord, that S. Paul
sayng, until he come, meant of his visible coming again at domes day, and not
that he meant that Christ was not then present inuisibly in the holy sacrament
of the altar? Werfore this argument is fully anusweared. Now ye write after
this manner.

The papists say, that euel, and ungodly The bishop fo. 17. lib. 2. pa. 1.
The confutation.
men do receive in this sacrament the very body and blood of Christ, etc. Al
catholic learned men say even so in deed, and that not without S. Paul's
authoritate, and of many of the most best and oldest doctors of the church, as
it shall anon by gods grace, appear plainly. No we ye say thus against the
sacrifice of the holy mass. They say, that they offer The (...)*
Christ every day for remission of sin, etc. But the apostles, and
evangelists do say, that christ himself in his oune parson made a sacrifice
for our sins upon the cross, by whose wounds al our diseases were healed,
and our sins pardoned, and so did never no priest, nor creature, but he, nor
he did the same never but ones. What The confutation.
ignorance is this, my lord, that ye are in? Who denies that Christ has
redeamed us perfectly and sufficiently by his one sacrifice ones for all offered
upon the cross, at the least concerning his office duyte, part, and merit,
but yet not in effect, and actually (as it is declared before.) but he only
then deserved grace, remission of sin, and ever lasting life for all them,
that would believe in him, hope in gods mercy, fear god, do penance for their
sins, pray, give alms to the poor, fast, receive the sacraments, love
god, and their neighbors, and keape gods Hebr. 5. facto est causa salutis, etc.
commandments. Why then may we not well say that a priest (as a ministre of
god) says mass, and offers christ's body and bloudde for to apply his
sacrifice made upon the cross unto us for the actual remission of our sins,
although they do not take away our sins, nor pardonne them, nor heal our
diseases, but god only does yt for christ's perfect sacrifices sake? For
says not the scripture Matthew. 6. Marci 11. 1. Timo. 4. Matthew. ^. Iaco^i. 5.
that we do forgive one an other our offenses, that the preacher of gods word
does save the people, and himself thereby, that we must pray for the remission
of our sins, and of others also, that they may be saved, that Ecclesiast. 1.
Joan. 20. Daniel 4.
fear expels sin, that priests do remitte sin, that sin is taken a
way by alms, fasting, and baptism, Danielis. 4. Luc. 11. Matthew. 17. Esaie. 43
and yet god only for christ's merits sake remitteth our sins? Ye say that
every man must apply christ's sacrifice and merit unto himself and Abacuc. 2.
by his oune faith receive the fruit of it at christ's hands, and not at the
priests. What then, my lord? Is this a good argument, I beseech you, every man
must receive the benefit of christ's death by his oune faith at christ's
hands, ergo the priest says not mass for the obteyning the remission of
sins? Do not they, for whom the priest offers christ at mass, receive that
christ's benefit for the remission of their sins, and salvation, through
their faith, and repentance of god only for christ's sake? Does not this your
argument, my lord, prove as much against our praying one for an other, Iacobi
5 Matthew. 28.
preaching of the gospel, ministering of the sacraments for the remission of
our sins, and against many such other things, required of god in the
scripture, for remission of our sins, Mark reader.
and salvation. as it does against the sacrifice of the mass? For must they
not receive of christ by their oune faith remission of their sins, for whom
ye daily pray, to whom ye do ministre the sacraments and preach gods word?
Why then did you thus trifie, and myspend your time in such vain things to
seduce the people? Cease for shame, cease, I say, thus to reason
unreasonably, and unlearnedly against the truth, which ever obteyneth the 3
Esd. 3. psalm. 11^.
victory, and endures. Thus ye end your first book, and so I do mine.

The confutation of the second The bishop
book, which is of Transubstantiation.
After ye had, my lord, made to the Lib. 2. ca. 2. fo. 18. pa. 1.
reader a great promise in the beginning of this your book, ye say that christ
gave at his last soupper bread unto his disciples, and for the proof thereof ye
say thus. When christ said (This) the bread (say they) remained. O vain
tryfler.
And when he said (is) yet the bread remained still. And wha^ he said (bo) yet
the bread was there still. But when he finished the whole sentence, This is my
body, tha^ (they say) the bread was gone, and there remains no substance but
christ's body, as though the bread could not remain, when it is made a
sacrament. This is in deed, my The confutation.
lord, the very true sense of those christ's words although ye mock much
thereat (as it does right well become your estate, and degree) and your reason
makes no less against your oune My lords reason is as much against his oune
doctrine, as it is against ours.
opinion, than it does against ours.

For the bread, and wine are not made holy signs (as ye say that they are
only) of christ's body and blood, until the words of consecration be fully
pronounced, and therefore we may use this your oune reason after like sort
against your doctrine, as ye do use it against ours. Again, when the priest
baptizeth a child, saying. I do christen Matthew. 28.
the in the name of the father, the son, and the holy ghost, the child is not
baptized, nor his sins forgiven him, when the priest says (I christen the)
and so of the rest of those words, but only when the whole sentence is
pronounced. ^uc. 22.
Moreover, christ gave unto his apostles authorite to consecrate the bread and
wine, to offer his body and blood in sacrifice, and to ministre the^ unto
other, when he said, do this in remembrance of me, and yet when he said (Do)
they had not that authorite, nor when he said (This) but when al these words
were spoken, or else he speakinge them, gave that authorite.

Wherefore ye have gotten nothing by this your reasoning, my lord, but only
declared thereby your ignorance, as ye do, when you following your great Matthew.
26. Hoc est, etc
god, peter martyr, deny that these words, This is my body, are the words of
consecration. For S. Ireneus, Lib. 4. c. 32. De coena d.
Tertulian, Saint Cypria^, Chrysostom, Hierom Ambrose, basile libro de
institutione monachorum cap. 70. Damascene Contione. 2. in psalm. 33.
lib. 4. cap. 14. S. Austen, and many other of the oldest writers affirm
plainly that those are the words of consecration, but I will rehearse now
only the words of certain of them, for diverse causes. S. Ambrose thus writes.
Before it be consecrated, it is bread, Lib 4. ca. ^ de sacramentis
but after christ's words are come unto, it is christ's body. Hear him
saying. Take and eat. This is my body. S. Damascene also says. The bread,
Lib. 4. c. 14.
and wine are not a figure of the body and blood of christ (god forbid that)
but our lords body it self, joined unto the godhead, our lord himself sayng.
This is my body, not a figure of my body, but my body. Is Mark reader.
not this plainly spoken of that holy saint to declare both that those are the
words of consecration, and also that christ's very natural body and blood are
in the sacrament, and not only a figure of them? Where it not the^ great folly
to believe your doctrine, my lord before his, which was a notable clearke, Hom.
45 in Ioannem.
and a saint about D. ccc. years passed? Hear now S. Chrysostom, sayng. It is
not man, that makes our lords Mark this reader.
body and blood of the things, set forth upon the table to be consecrated, but
it is christ, that was crucified for us.

The words are pronounced of the priest, and the things (bread and wine) are
consecrated by gods pouer, and Matthew. 26.
grace, he said. This is my body, Hoc verbo proposita consecrantur, the bread
and wine, which are set forth, be consecrated by this word. See ye not, my
lord, how plainly this holy father, and great learned man, that was almost M.
cc. years sense, says that christ himself makes his oune body and blood of
the bread and wine, set forth upon the altar to be consecrated, and that by
these words of consecration. This is my body? Would ye then have men to believe
your contrary teaching, which are nothing like unto him, another in virtue of
life, nor in learning? May ye not be yet again ashamed, that ye said in the
title of your book, that your doctrine was approved of the ancient doctors of
christ's church seeing they are so manifestly against it? In psalm. 33.
S. Austen also says. Christ bare his oune body in his hands, wha^ he said
This is my body, and that he then did S. Austen believed that christ's very
natural body was in The sacrament.
that thing then, which no man could ever do, for no man can bear himself in
his oune hands, and therefore he me^t that christ consecrated the bread by
these words. This is my body, and turned it in to his natural body, which he
bare at his mandy in his hands, and not bread only a figure of it, for else he
had not said truly, that no man might bear himself in his oune hands, but
only christ, for every man may easily bear his picture or image in his oune
hands. Does not them S. Austen declare, my lord, very plainly in this place,
that he believed christ's body to be in the holy sacrament, and not bread a
sign only of it, as ye do teach, and say also that he taught? But of this
sufficient. Ye say moreover.

But this negative, that there is no bread, The bishop. fo. 18. pa. 1.
they make of their oune brains by their unwritten veritees. No not so my
lord, for christ, his apostles, the co^ciles, The confutation.
the catholic church, and all the old doctors taught it us, as partly I have
already proved, and will, by gods grace, more largely hereafter. And as touching
unwritten veritees, I wrote A book of unwritten veritees not yet anusweared
unto of the contrary side.
a book of them, which shows manifestly, how far your doctrine disse^teth
from the faith and religion of the apostles, the primitive church, and from all the ancient doctors, where ye pretend to restore christ's religion to that
pureness that it had in the beginning of the church. Why mock you so often at
unwritten verites, which came from Christ, and his apostles, (as it appears
in that my book) and yet anusweare not unto that book? Are your mockes, and
iestes a sufficient anuswere to it? Ye say that we make this negative, there is
no bread, of our oune brains, which is very false, for christ taught it us,
and his apostles, and the church, by these words, This is my body, but ye make
this negative, There is not our lords natural body, but bread only, of your
oune brains Matthew. 26. Joan. 6. pais.
against christ's plain words. S. Paul's words, the concels, the catholic
church, and all the holy doctors of the church, for none of them al ever said
(as ye do teach) that christ's very body is not in the sacrament, but the
clean contrary. Wherefore your doctrine is to be abhorred, and detested of al
good christen people. It follows in The bishop
your book. Oh good lord, how would they have bragged, if Christ had said lib.
2. fo. 18. pa. 1. The confutation.
this is no bread? But Christ spoke not that negative, etc. Oh good lord, how
would you, my lord, have bragged, if christ had said, this is material bread
and not my body, but only a sign, or a figure of it, but Christ spoke another
Mark this
that affirmative, This is material bread (as ye defend) nor that negative,
This is not my body, but he said the clean contrary to them both, This is my
body, that shall be given for you.

For these words can not be understood of material bread, because that is
not his body, that was given for us.

Again both the Greake text and the latin also will not permyt, that these
Matthew. 2^.
christ's words, this is my body, should be expounded of material bread. For
the greake has. (...), and the latin, hoc est corpus meum, Both in the neutre
gendre, and therefore we can not say, that christ meant of the bread, when he
said, This is my body, for then he should have said (...), Et hic panis est
Note well this reader.
corpus meu^, that the pronome (This) might have been referred unto the bread,
but he used the neutre gendre both in the Greake, and also in the latin,
Matthew. 26.
and therefore he me^t not of the material bread, when he said. This is my
body, but of his oune very natural body, that was crucified for us. Does it not
then appear now, my lord, that Christ meant this negative, there is no bread,
when he said, this is my body, that shall be given for you, although he said
not expressly, there is no bread? Moreover did not Christ promise to his
apostles to give then bread, that should be his oune fleash, which he would give
for the life of the Joan. 6. panis.
world, and performed that his promise at his last soupper, saying, take and
eat, this is my body, that shall be given for you? How can this be true of
bakers Mark.
bread? Was that given of Christ for the life of the world? Is it not as false
to say, this bread made of corn is christ's body, as to say, a man is an ass,
or an ass a man, for that bread differs much more from christ's body, than a
man from an ass, which both are lively creatures and have se^ses, in which
they do agree? When ye have, my lord, made anusweare unto this, ye shall hear
more to anusweare The bishop. fo. 19. lib. 1. page 2.
unto. Now ye go about to prove, that bread remains still in the sacrament,
sayng thus: Christ took bread, brake it, and gave it unto his disciples and
said: Take, eat. All this was spoken before the words of consecration.
Wherefore they must neades be understand of very bread, that Christ took bread,
brake bread, and gave bread unto his disciples, etc. This reason is very The
confutation.
weak, my lord, and as much against your oune doctrine, as it is against ours
For although the text seameth to say, that Christ gave unto his disciples the
sacrament before the words of consecration were spoken of him, yet he did not
so, but he did first consecrate the bread, sayng. This is my body, My lords
reason is against his oune doctrine.
and then he said, take and eat, for else he had given unto them no sacrament,
but only common bread, unconsecrated, which is very false, and as much against
your opinion, as against our doctrine. For ye do say, that christ gave to his
apostles holy consecrated bread, a sign, and a sacrament of his body. Ye are
also disceaued, when Luc. 22. fo. 19 Matthew. 26.
ye say that christ gave unto his disciples the cup of wine before he did
consecrated it, for then he had given to the^ wine unconsecrated, which had
been neither sign, nor sacrament of christ's precious blood, more tha^ al
other common wine was and now is, and the apostles also had then received, and
drounken but common wine, for the text of Mark, which ye follow here in your
book, says. They drou^ke of it al, and after it recites the words of the
consecration, sayng. This is Marci. 14.
my blood, etc. Is not this then against your doctrine, my lord, as much as it
is against ours? Why then do ye not thus construe christ's words in Mark? My
lord made an argument plaily against his oune doctrine.
This is my blood of the new testament, etc. Take it ye, and drink and, they
drounke of it al? Shall ye not else be enforced to say, that christ did nether
consecrate, the wine at al, nor give to his apostles any sacrament, or holy
sign, for he did not consecrate the wine after they had drounken it? Recante
therefore this your error for shame, recante, yea for our lords honors sake,
the saving of your oune soul, and the souls of many other, who^ ye have seduced
with this your wicked doctrine. Ye also write thus. Now I ask The bishop
of the papists, what thing it was, that christ commanded his disciples to
drink, when he said. Drink ye al of this? I anusweare, my lord, that it was
his oune precious blood, which he shed for many as he says there himself,
and that he spoke those wo^des after he had consecrated the wine, (as I have
already declared) although the letter has not that order. For else ye must
neades grant that Christ gave unto his apostles but common unconsecrated wine,
and that he did never consecrate it, nor make it a holy sign of his blood,
which how false it is, and houe plain against your oune doctrine, who sees
not? May not a man now, my lord, well perceive, how ye err for lack of
knowlage, though ye take upon you to correct al other, and to reform christ's
religion? Of like ignorance proceeded this reason, that now foloueth in your
book.

Before christ delivered the cup of wine The bishop lib. 2. fo. 19. page 2.
to his disciples, he said unto them Divide this among you. Here ye do
deskant, my lord, upon this word (Divide) The confutation.
and ask of the papists what thing it was, that christ bade his apostles
divide among them, I think, say ye, that they will not say, that it was his
blood, because those words were spoken before the consecration, and also the
blood of christ is not divided.

This ye reason without both reason, The Confutation.
and also good learning. For if Christ had spoken those words of the wine,
which appertayned unto the holy sacrament (as in deed he did not, but on ly of
the wine, that he drank at his soupper eating the paschal lamb before the
institution of the sacrament) Marci. 14. Luc. 22.
yet they should make nothing more against our belief, than against your
unbelief. For if he had commanded his apostles to have drounken the wine
Mark.
not yet consecrated, (as ye say falsely, that he did) than it had been no
sacrament, nor holy sign of christ's blood, as ye teach that it is. But I
say to the, good reader, that he must neades be very folish, that will give any
credence unto my lords doctrine, seeing he does so falsely allege, and wreast
gods word to maintene his error. But I will pass this over, as confuted
sufficiently. Ye say again. When the communion was ended, christ said unto
his apostles. Verily I say unto you, Luc. 22. The bishop lib. 2. fo. 19. pa. 2.
that I will drink no more hence forth of this fruit of the vine, until the
day, that I shall drink yt new with you in my fathers kyndome. These words
prove not, my lord, that christ's apostles The confutation.
drank wine in the receiving of the sacrament, (as ye say), but only that
they drank wine with christ at soupper, when they did eat the paschal lamb,
before the institution of the sacrament, as it appears by Saint Lukes
euangile, in which these words Lucae. 22.
are written, to declare both Saint Mattheus and Saint Marks words. Again if
those words had been spoken of the consecrated wine, yet they should not prove
your purpose, my lord, that wine of the grape remains still in the holy
sacrament, but only that christ called his very oune blood wine, because, that
wine was turned in to it by the consecration, and because it seamed to be wine,
and had the qualitees and properties of wine, least we should abhor to drink
it, if it did appear blood (as S. Damascene, Theophilacte, Damascene Lib. 4.
c. 14. Theophi. in Marci. 14.
Euthyimus, and many other learned men do witness) and that man might merit
believing against his senses judgments, which has no merit (as Saint
Gregory says) when he Homi. 28. in Euangelia.
has a prouffe of the thing. It is no strange thing for christ's blood to be
called wine, for the story of the Genesis Gene. 49.
says of christ in the person of Judah, he shall wash his stole in wine, and
his garment in the blood of the grape. Did not the holy ghost call wine here
christ's blood? Saint Cyprian proves ^i. 2. Epi. 3
by that text, and by an other of Esaiae the prophet, that wine must neades be
put in to the chalice to be consecrated, and made christ's blood, and
therefore christ meant that he would not drink his oune blood, (i^ to which the
wine was then changed by his words and pouer) after that time until he drank
yt with his apostles in the Lege Hier. ad hedihia^ quaest. 2.
church after his resurrection. And after this sort Saint Eucherius, that was
bishop of lions in France above. Libro quaestionum noui and veteris testame^ti.
M. c. years passed, expounds that text, sayng. What shall we follow here? The
kyndome of god (as learned men do understand it) is the church in which christ
daily drinks his blood by his holy people, as the head in the members. Loo
this holy doctor, my lord, understood by the fruete of the vine, of which S.
Luke makes mention, not wine of the vine (as ye do) but christ's very blood,
and says that he drank it, when his members, the godly people, dra^ke it in
the church, as the head drinks in his members. Now I ask of you, my lord,
where drinks christ his blood daily in the church, when his members the god
men drink it, except it be i^ the holy sacrament? Is not this argument then
anusweared sufficiently? It is very false also, that The bishop Li. 2. fo. 20
ye say, that christ used al such terms, and circumstances, which should make
us believe that bread and wine remained still in the sacrament. For the term of
his body, and saying that he gave even that same his body, that should be
crucified for us, and his blood that he would shed for us, and that he used the
neutre gendre, when he said (This is, etc) which can not be referred unto the
bread, that is both in latin and also in the Greake the masculine gendre,
ought to make us believe, that he spoke then of his oune very natural body and
blood. I let pass here your malicious railing upon the catholic priests,
which declares plainly by what spirit ye are led. ye write also this. Saint
Pol called bread, bread, and wine, wine, and never altered The bishop lib. 2.
fo. 20 pagina. 2.
christ's words heryn. The bread, which we break (says he) is it not the
communion of christ's body? It is The confutation.
not true, that Saint Pol called bread, bread, and wine wine, for he called
christ's blessed body and precious blood, bread and wine, because bread and
wine were turned in to them at the time of the consecration, and because there
remained still the qualitees and properties of bread, and wine, and thirdly, be
cause that christ's body and blood do feed the soul, as material bread, and
wine does the body. When ye say that S. Pol must neades be understood, when
he says the bread, that we break, etc. of material bread, because christ's
body is not broken, I say that ye err in so saying, for the forms, and
quantites of bread are broken, christ's body lying under them taking no har me
at al, as Saint Thomas did put his hand in to christ's side without al hurt
unto it, being then immortal, and Joan. 20
unapt to suffer harm. Saint Pol (I grant) makes often mention of bread and
wine, but what thereof? Is that sufficient to prove that he spoke of material 1.
Cor. 10. 11
bread, and of wine of the vine? Makes he not also often mention of christ's
body and blood? Why then Mark reader:
may not we say, that he spoke of the^, and meant by the bread and wine christ's
body and blood, in to which the bread was changed, and the wine also, and
whose properties, and qualitees remained still in the sacrament? Ye say that pol
never spoke of transubstantiation, if ye mean expressly and by that name, I
grant it, but that proves nothing for your purpose, for he spoke of the thing
signified, and meant by that word, that is to say, he taught us that christ's
body and blood are in the sacrament, and not bakers bread (as it is proved
before) Again Saint Pol never said that material bread remains still in the
sacrament (as ye teach, my lord) and therefore pol by your oune reason makes no
more for you, the^ he does for me. Also the scripture speaks not namely, and
expressly of this word (...) homousios, nor that the father is ingenitus, nor
that there are three persons in the trinite. Will ye, mi Mark.
lord, therefore conclude that scripture sets not forth the self same thing
by other terms and words? No, god forbid. Is it not then sufficient for our
doctrine, that the scripture teaches us the same thing, that this word
(transubstantiation) signifies, although it makes no mention of that word?
Now ye speak much against altering of christ's words. But who does, my lord,
so much alter them, as ye do? For christ said. This is my body, that shall be
given for you, and ye say, that it was not his body in deed, but bread of corn
and a sign or a figure of it only can there be, my lord, any greater altering
of a thing, then to deny it, and Mrrke.
to say it is not it, but only a figure of it? Christ said it was he self
same body, that he gave for us to death, and we say even the same, where ye say
it was not it, but bread. Have ye not then blamed us in that thing, in which ye
your self is most to be blamed? Well let The bishop. fo. 21. The confutation.
this pass. Now ye fall to reasoning, and say thus. Now let us consider, how
the same is also against reason, and natural operation, etc. What then? Are not
like wise all the articles of our faith against both reason, and natural
operation? For what can be more against reason and natural operation, than a
virgen to conceive and bear a child, without decay of her virginite? than ma^s
Matthew. 1. Lucae. 1. 1. Cor. 15.
flesh to rise again? than al things to be made of nothing? than death to be
overcome by death? than that there be three persons, and but one god? etc. Why
the^ deny ye not as well al these articles of our faith, as the real presence
of christ's body in the sacrament? Have ye forgetten S pols sayng, A man which
follows natural reason, and arguments made by his oune wit perceaueth 1. Cor.
1. Theophilactus in 10. 3
not things belonging to god, and those that are above reason? Did not
Nichodemus think it was impossible, that a man should be borne again because
he lacked faith, and followed natural reason only? Exhorts not us Coloss. 2.
S Pol to take heed, that no man disceaue us by vain reasoning, and
philosophy? Did not the heithen and paynyms judge it folly to believe in
christ's 1. Cor. 1.
death, because they thought it against reason, that a man should be saved by a
man's death? How much reasoned Saint pol against the natural philosophers to
prove the resurrection 1. Cor. 15
of the flesh? Which they would not believe, because it was against reason and
natural knowledge? Do ye not give me^ a great occasion, my lord, by your
reasoning in this your book, to deny all the articles of our faith, seeing they
are against natural reason and operation? I pray god, that ye bring not the
people unto such madness. Athanasius Libro. 4. ad Theophilum contra potentinum.
said unto one pontentine. Thou alone do dissent in this matter from the
catholics against the scriptures, and the whole world, whiles thou folouest
the philosophers doctrine.

May we not, my lord, say the same of you, and such other? S. Cyprian says,
Lib. 4. epi. 2
there is much difference between philosophers, and Christian people, for the
philosophers, and natural reasoners measure al their knowlage by wit and
reason, but christen men measure their belyefe by faith. Tertulian says Lib.
de praescriptione aduersus haereticos.
that al heresies spring out of philosophy. Will ye bring men, my lord, with
your natural reasoning in this article of our faith, to say, as one Abaillardus
did, (of whom bernard writes) Epist. 180.
that nothing ought to be believed of us, that excedeth natural rea, son? What
caused many men to say Epist. 1^0.
(as Solomon witnesses) that men perysh even as beasts, and therefore
Ecclesiast. 3
they said, let us eat, drink, fill ourselves 1. Cor. 15.
with delites, and plaisirs, for after this life there is no pleasure?

Was it not natural reasoning, and measuring of things by their wits?

Cease then, my lord, for shame, cease this reasoninge in mattiers of our
faith, and follow S. Ambrose, sayng De fide ad Gratianum
against such reasoninge. Away hence with arguments, where the faith is
sought. Let logic, or the science of reasonyng and disputing probably of
matters, now keep silence, and speak in the schools. Those men are daily
forsaken of their compaynions, that dispute, they do increase daily, which
believe simply, philosophers are not believed, and fisshers are. Wherefore leave,
my lord, I say again, leave this your reasonyng upon this high mystery, that
passes al man's wit, and reason. Now I will examine your unreasonable reasons,
and declare how foyble they are, of which this is one. Natural reason abhors
vacuum, The bishop fo. 21. page ^
that is to say, that there should be any empty place, wheryn no substance
should be, but if there remain no bread, nor wine, the place, where they were
before, and where their accide^tes be, is filled with no substance, but
remains vacuum, clean contrary to the order of nature. This reason The
confutation.
may well persuade a paynym, and a heithen philosopher, or any man, that will
rather follow reason than faith, but no good christian man, which believes
against al natural reason and the order of nature, as he is bound, and ^ene 22.
Romans 4
as Abraham believed that Sara his wife being both old and also barren, should
bear a child, which was against reason, and the order of nature. Zachary S.
Than baptistes father would not believe, that his wife, being barre^yn her yougth
should bear a child, because, yt was against reason, and the whole order of
nature, and therefore good took from him his speech until his son S. Ihan was
Luc. 1. Libro debis qui mysterijs initia^tur, cap. 9. Mark reader.
borne. S. Ambrose says. why do thou seake here in the sacrament the order
of nature in christ's body, seeing Christ our savyour was borne of the vyrge^
against the order of nature? This body, which we (priests) do make is of the
virgen. Does not Ambrose here, my lord, overthrow utterly al your reasoning in
this matter, when ye seake theryn the order of nature, against our faith? What
if the place, in which bread and wine were before the consecration, be afterward
empty, and unoccupied of any body, against the natural reason of man, and the
order of nature? Will ye bind god, that made ma^s reason, nature, and the order
of nature, to do nothing against those his creatures? Did he not make al
things of nothing with his word? Caused he not a Gene. 1.
vyrgen to bear a child contynuing still in her virginite, raised he not up
again the dead and did many other things Lib. 2 de generatione.
as much against natural reason, and the order of nature, as a place to be
empty. and without a body to fill yt? May not god, that made both the place,
and also the body, which occupies it, and appoynte, that ever place naturally
should be occupied with some body, break this order, course, and law of
nature, which he made himself, and cause a place to be empty, and void Mark.
of every thing? See ye not then, my lord, how lyttel this your reason is to
be esteamed, and regarded? but if I said unto you, my lord, that the a yer
occupies the place of bread and wine, when their substance is turned in to
christ's body and blowd, and so there is not vacuum, nor any empty place, what
can ye say against me? Now I will make one brief aunsweare, my How the
consecrated wine turns in to vinaygre the bread mouleth and cet.
lord, unto diverse of your natural reasons, and objections, that no man be
seduced by them. I say that the consecrated wine turns not in to vynaigre,
nor the co^sectated bread mouleth nor enge^dreth worms, nor is burned, nor
receaueth in to yt any poison, as long as christ's body, and blood are under
the forms of them, which do abide there so long, as the natural qualitees, and
properties of bread and wine tarrye there in their natural disposition and
condition, that the bread and wine might be naturally there, if they had not
been changed in to christ's hody and blood, and also as long as the host and
consecrated wine are apt to be received of man, and no le^ger, but do go and
depart thence by gods pouer, as yt pleases him, and then a new substance is
made of god, which turns in to vynegre, engenders worms, mouleth, is burned,
fedeth men, and the myse, receaueth poison et c. and so neither the substance
of bread and wine remains still in the sacrament, nor they that burn the
host, are christ burners, as ye mockyngly say that they should be, if christ's
body wereyn the sacrament S. Cyprian says that Sermon ^. de lapsis
a certain ungodly man would have eaten of the sacrifice consecrated, but he
could not handle, nor eat the, holy of god, and when he opened his hands, he
found that he bare ashes in them, by the example of that one man (says S.
Cypria^) yt is declared, that our lord goes away, when he is denied, and that
the thing, which is received, profits not the unworthy, seeing the hol some
grace, is turned in to ashes, the holiness fleyng awaye-See ye not, my lord,
that christ, and his body departed away, when the unworthy man would Mark
reader.
have received them, and that ashes only remained there in their place? Why
then may we not well say, that christ's body then goes away, and departs when
the host mouleth and corrupts to engendre worms and should be burned, as yt
does, when poison is put to the host, and the consecrated wine soureth, or
turns in to vynaigre? For is not the other as strange a thing, as this is, and
as much unlike to be true? Again, if I said, that the accidents, and
qualities of bread and wine remaynyng in the sacrament should nourysshe the
receauer above and also against their natures, as they are there, without their
substance against nature, what have ye to say unto me? For why may not they as
well feade man against their natures by gods almyghtie pouer, as god fed Moses
and 3. Reg. 13. 17.
Helias long against nature, the one without meat and the other with very
littell? Finally, may not poison be as well in the accidents, and qualitees of
the bread and wine* against nature, as god fed the children of Israel with
Manna, and with quayles, water out of the rock against nature? Ye are noue,
Exo. 16. P^al. 7. Exodus 7. Exodus 16.
my lord, anusweared in all these objections, and natural reasons. It follows
in your book. And most of al it is against the nature of accidents to be in
nothing. etc. What than, my The bishop lib. ^. fo. 21. page 2 The confutation.
lord. I pray you? Was it not as much against nature that the angeles did eat
and drink, and like wise christ after his resurrection, and nothing of that
meat and drink was turned Exodi 3. Exodus 17. Numerorum. 20.
in to their noryshement? Did not the busse of thorns flame with fire, and not
burn against nature? Was it not against nature, that water ran out of Exodus
17.
the hard rock? that quayles came down from the firmament? that the sea made
away for the Jews to pass throvghe Iosuae. 3. Psalm. 113.
it? that the ryver of iordane ran back against his course? that the
bytternes of the water of Marath was turned in to swetenes when Moses cast a
peace of wood in to it? that yro^ did swime above upon the water? that Exodus
15.
fire came down from the firmament by Helyas word? that the son and the 4.
Regu^. 6.
moon stod still? that christ walked, 4. Regum. 1 Iosuae. 10. Danielis. 3.
Danielis. 6. Lucae. 1.
and also peter upon the sea? that Daniels three feloes burned not in the great
fire? that the lions hurt not daniel? that christ was borne of his mother
Matthew. 28.
with out breaking of her closures? that he rose through the stone lying Joan.
20.
upon his tomb? that he entered in to the house, the doors being yet still
closed? Are not these things and many such other, as much impossible, and
against nature, as the accidents, and qualitees of bread, and wine to remain
in the sacrament without their substance to sustain them? Does not heavy Mark.
Plinius hist naturalis lib. 36. cap. 16. and libr. 36. cap. 14^
iron ascend up ward against nature when it is set under a stone called
Magnes, and will hang in the aer without any stay, if one magnes be set under
it, when it is going upward toward an other being above? For as much as the
one stone draws it upward toward him, so much does the other draw it down
wards toward him? Also no strength can break an adamant stone (as plinye
says) but In prooemio lib. 20. hist. natura.
the blood of a goat only. Are not the se things, which be done naturally,
as much against nature by man's reason, and judgment, as the accidents and
qualites of bread and wine to be in the sacrament without their substance by
gods pouer? Why then do ye, my lord, make so great a matter, that the
accidents, and qualites of bread and wine should remain still in the sacrament
without their substance, in which they might be? Will ye ascribe less unto gods
pouer, than to nature? It is no great merueile, that ye judge it follye to
affirm, (as we do in deed) against nature and reason, that one body is in
diverse places at ones, and two bodies in one propre place both together, for
the heithen people (as I have declared before) esteamed christ's faith and
religion nothing else but mere folly, and 1. Cor. 1. The bishop. fo. 21. 22.
madness, which thing S Pol testifies manifestly. Our doctrine is, I confess
against al our outward senses, but proves that, my lord, that it is false? Are
not like wise all the articles of our faith against our outward senses,
although not after like sort, as this is? May ye therefore deny them? Were it
not much better to leave this vain reasoning, and to follow Saint Chrysostoms
godly consail, which is this? Let us believe god in every thing, and Homi 83 in
Matthaeum Good counsel.
not say against him, yea although the thing, that he says, does appear an
inconvenience both unto our senses, thought, and understanding, and does also
excede our sense, capacyte, Mark.
and reason. Let us, I beseech you, believe his words in all things, but
chyefely in the sacraments, not loking only upon those things, which lie
before us, but considering also his words. For by his words, we cannot be
disceaued, but our senses are most easy to be disceaued. His words can not be
Matthew. 26
false, oursenses are very often times disceaued. Wherefore seeing christ has
said. This is my body, let us nothing doubt thereof, but believe, and perceive
it with the eyes of our understanding. Hither to this holy doctor. Now were it
not much more wisdom, and a greater saftye for our souls health, for to cease
reasonyng, in this matter, to mystrust the judgment of our senses, and to
stick wholly unto gods word (as Saint Chrysostom wylleth us to do) than to
foloue your natural reasonyng here, my lord, and measuryng of this high
mystery by our senses? Moreover ye write after this manner. Our faith teaches
The bishop Lib. 2. fo. 22 page 1. The confutation.
us to believe things, that we see not, but it does not bid us, that we shall
not believe, that we see daily with our eyes, etc. What do ye, my lord, see in
the sacrament, but the color of bread, and wine? For ye see not their
substance. Wherefore ye may believe that color to be there, but not the
substance of the bread and wine. S Thomas did at christ's commandment put his
had in to christ's side, and felt his wounds Joan. 20.
(I grant) for the confirmation of his faith. What then, my lord? Can ye of
that prove, that as he trusted then to his senses for to believe christ's
resurrection, even so we may believe our senses judgment touching this
sacrament? No, ye are disceaued, For althought our senses may help some what
to the proof of natural things, being in their natural forms such as christ's
body was then, yet in things that are above nature, and out of their natural
being, state, and shap, as christ's Narkc. Chrysosto. Damasce.
body is in the holy sacrament, they are not to be trusted, For in such things
they judge utterly against our faith. Again was not the sight, and feelyng of
loath, Abraham, Jacob, and certain other, which saw god, and Gene. 18. 19 32.
angels in men's forms and apparances, disceaued, when they thought they were
very me^ in deed, as they seamed to be unto them? Wherefore our senses may
disceaue us, and so it appears that this your reason, my lord, is of none
effect, nor force at al. We open no gate (as ye say falsely, that we do) unto
valentinianus heresy, nor to any such other. For although we do say, that our
senses are not to be trusted in this matter of the holy sacrament, yet we deny
not, but that some credence may be given well unto them in natural things,
having their natural condition and state. And as concerning the heresy of them,
that said christ was not a very man, or that he had not very flesh and bones,
the contrary was not proved sufficiently by their senses, which saw him, but
by many textes both of the old, and also the new testament. Moreover the
scriptures are manifest enoughe in many places against Basilides, and such
other, that said christ was not crucified for us, but Simon Cyrenaeus, by
which scriptures that article, and the belief of it is approved, and not by
our senses, Romanoru^. 10.
for S Paul says, that faith comes of the hearing of gods word, and not of
hearing, seeing, feeling, or of any of the other our senses, for they may often
times disceaue us (as Saint Homi. 93. in Matthaeum Joan. 14.
Chrysostom witnesses) where gods word, which is the truth itself, can never
disceaue us. Wherefore the senses are not to be trusted heryn, and so is all that
reasoni^ge, which ye make, my lord, here with so many words, not worth a
bleue point. Ye say also thus. And if there be no trust to be given The
bishop. fo. 22 pa. 2.
to our senses, in this matter of the sacrament, why than do the papists so
stoutly affirm, that the accidents remain after the consecration? which can
not be judged but by the senses.

Sir we do affirm, that there is no The confutation.
trust to be given to our senses in matters of our faith, especially where they
do judge agenst, gods word, as they do in this matter. For the scripture
says that christ promised to give his apostles bread, which should be his own
very flesh, that he would give for the life of the world, and that he gave Joan.
8. Matthew. 28. 1. Cor. 11.
to them his body, which was crucified for them, and the senses did judge,
that it was but bread of corn Again our senses do judge only the accidents
properly (as al learned men do well know) which every man may affirm to be in
the sacrament, but notthinke there of that their substances do remain,
although the scripture expresselye says not that there remains no bread,
but that it is christ's body, which he gave for us to death, and so it can not
be bread, forthat was not given for us upon the cross. The sacrament is not
an elusion of our senses (as ye say) although in yt appear bread, Genesis 18 19.
Mar vt Joan. 20 Actorum. 1.
and yt is not there as god and the angels, seamed men to loath. Abraham and
other and were not very men in deed, and yet they were no elusions of their
senses werfore an a^uwseare is now made to all this your reasoninge, my lord,
upon the judgment of our senses, and natural reason Now ye labor The bishop
lib. 2. fo. 23. page 1.
to prove that our belefe in this matter is against the faith of the old
autours of christ's church, and ye alleageiustine the Holy martyr, affirminge
The confutation. Anno d. ^0 103 90.
that he is the oldest author, that is known this day to writ any treaty
upon the sacraments, which is very false, for Anacletus the martyr, Clement,
dionise, saint Martial and certain other moo wrate of that matter before him a
great while, as it appareth plainly by their lives, writings and books. The
confutation.


I much merueile, my lord, that ye are not a shamed falsely to allege iustine
Justinius words.
for the furthera^ce of your wicked doctrine, which never wrote as ye say
butthus only: Tha^ afterward bread, and the chalice of wine and water myxed
together, is broughe unto the bishop, or priest. This nouryssheme^t is called
of us Eucharistia. And we take not these things as every meat and every
drink, but as through gods word, Christ our savior was incarnate, and
took fleashe, and blood for our salvation, even so we have learned by these
words, This is my body, and This is my blood, that this meat, by the which
our flesh and blood are through alteration nouryshed, when it is blessed by
the prayers of the word (gods son he means) is the flesh and blood of
jesus himself incarnate. These are his words, which are as plai^lie against
your doctrine as ca^ be in four points. The Justinius, who^ my lord alleges
for him, is
first is, that he speaks of me^glinge of wine and water together in the
chalice of which the scripture makes no me^tio^ against him in four points.
and therefore ye say, that it is not to be passed upon. Secondlye he is
contrary to your teachinge, when he affirms, verites not Written in
scripture.
that christ prayed, when he did consecrate, and that by his prayers the bread
and wine were blessed, which is not mentioned in the scripture, and for that
cause ye despise it, and say it is a thing of no necessite at al. Thirdly he
says, that these are the words of consecration, This is my body. This is
mybloud, which ye deny Four thely he says that the bread and wine, by which
our flesh and blood are nouryshed, are after they be blessed through christ's
prayers, the flesh and blood Mark* this reader
of christ. How blind were ye the^, my lord, when ye alleged this author for
our purpose, which is so evidently against your doctrine? But what if Justinius
had thought (as ye say, that he did and yet did not so indede) that bread, and
wine remained still in the sacrament? Could that have proved your doctrine, that
there is nothing else in the sacrament but bread, an wine only? No man is so
blind, but he may se, that it does not prove your purpose, though it seame to
make with luther Also many of the Greakes affirmed, that the holy ghost
proceeded not from the father, and he son both, and they agreed not theryn
with the latin church, until the conseil holden at florentia, which was with in
these cxx years, and yet that their opinion proved not that the latin church
erred in their belefe, why then should either Justinius saying, Theodoretus, or
any other of the Greates, which wrote that bread, and wine remained still in the
sacrament, make against our faith touchyngetra^substa^tiatio^, which Greakes
generally did not receive, manyyeres after the latin church had manifestly
taught yt? But Justinius (say ye) affirms that the bread, and wine are turned
in to our flesh, and blood, to nouryshe our bodies. It is true, but not as ye
do take his sainge, for he me^t that common bread and wine are turned by the
alteration of them in to man's flesh and blood but not that bread and wine that
are consecrated, but other of like nature. Wherefore this author is against
you, my lord, as IReneus is, whom ye allege, saying.

The bread, wherein wegeue than es The bishop jo. 22. pa. 2
unto god, although yt be of the earth yet when the name of god is called upon
it, it is not than common bread, Lib. 43.
but the bread of thanks geuinge, haui^ge two things in yt, one earthely, and
the other heauinlie. Here ye allege The confutation.
saint IReneus wrong, as ye did Justinius, for he has thus butr Houshal it
appear to them, that that bread, in which thanks are given, is the lords
body, and the chalice of is blood, if they call him not his son, which made
the world? Then a good way afterward he writes this. As the bread, which is of
the earth, feelynge, or perceauinge the calling upon of god, is not now common
bread, but a good grace, or a thanks geuinge, consistinge in two things an
earthilie, and an heauynlie, even so our bodies also receiving the good grace,
or sacrament, are not now apt to be corrupted, having hope of resurrection,
what makes this autour now for you, my lord, tell me? Calls he not that
bread, which is in the sacrament, christ's body? Says he not also, that it
is not commen bread? Does not this doctor say that it is a good grace, and
that it preserves our bodies from ever lasting corruption? Are these the
effects, and properties of bakers bread? Who is so mad, to believe that? Now
ye The bishop li. 2. pa. 2. fo. 23.
ask what Irenaeus^ment by the heavenly thing, which is in the sacrament but
the sanctification, that comes by the invocation of the name of god, and what
by the earthilie, but the very bre- and of the earth. To that I say that this
exposition is made of your oune head The confutation.
contrarily to his meaning, and mind, as his oune words before mentioned
declare. Wherefore he means by the heavenly thing christ's blessed body,
which was first fourmed, and made in his mothers womb above nature by the
heavenly pouer and operation Mark reader.
of the holy ghost, and in to which by the heavenly words of christ, by the
invocation of the holy ghost, by prayers, and by gods heavenly pouer and
workinge, the bread, which came from the earth, was turned in the time of the
consecration. And by the earthely thing, he meant that earthely bread was taken
to be consecrated, and that his properties, qualitees, quantite, and shape does
still remain in the sacrament. Wherefore this authorite seruith not, my lord,
for your il purpose, and as much does Origenes, whom ye now allege, saying.

The matter of the bread avails nothing, but goes down in to the bealie,
The bishop lib. 2. fo. 23. pa. 2.
and is avoided douneward, but the word of god spoken upon the bread, is it
that avails. To this I might aunsweare In cap. 15 Matthaei. L^b 1. paschali.
The confutation.
that this writer was a great heretic (as Theophilus and other declare) and
the chyefe scholemaistre of errors, but I will not so do, for he erred not (as
much as I have red) in this matter of the sacrament, and is plainly upon my
side against my lords doctrine in diverse places, of which this is one, upon
these words of Matthew, Homi. 5. in Diuersos.
Domine non sum dignus, etc, for these are his words. When ye do receive
Origenes is against my lords doctrine,
that holy meat, and uncorrupted disshe: when thou do use the bread, and
cup of lyse, thou eatest, and drinkest the body of our lord, than our lord
enters in to thy house. What could he have said more plainly against this my
lords opinion? Says he not that we do eat our lords body, and drink his
blood, and that tha^ our lord does enter in to our house, which is our
body? I might bring many other sentences of this writers to prove this
purpose, but I will not, because, I would be short. Now to the examination of
this place, which ye, my lord, do here allege very vnperfectlye to further
your matter with, for these In id Matthaei is Non quod intrat in os, etc. Fo.
23 pa. 2
are the authors words* But some man, chauncynge upon this place, will say,
that as that thing which goes in to the mouth, defiles not man, yea although
it were judged polluted of the Jews, like wise that thing, which goes in to
the mouth, makes him not holy, that eats it, though the more simple people
do think that the bread does sanctify him, which bread is called our lords
bread. If all that enters in at the mouth goes away down in to the belli and
is cast out i^to the draught that meat also, which
is hallowed by gods word, and prayer, touching that that it has material,
goes away in to the bealie, and is thrown forth in to the feage, but
concerning the prayers, which came to it it is made profitable after the
portion of man's faith, causynge a man's soul to se well, lokynge toward that
that is profitable for him. This origenes. First The Confutation.
note, reader, how doubtfully he speaks, and determynith not the matter.
Secondly mark how il he applies the se christ's words. That thing, which
Matthew. 15.
enters in at the mouth, defiles not man. All that goes in to the mouth
goes in to the stomach or bealie, and is cast out in to the iakes. For these
words were spoken only of bodily fode and nothing of any spiritual meat,
such as is this holy sacrament, and therefore this author erred herin, and was
not origin. Thirdly, he affirms that the bread is hallowed not only by gods
word, but also by prayer, which my lord denies. Fourthlye, he affirms that
that thing which e^tereth in to man's mouth, does not sanctify him, though it
be our lords bread, that is consecrated by gods word, and prayer* which
words declare open ly, that origin never wrote them, for they are clean
contrary to his words in an other book, which is undoubtedly his, where he
writes this. Wherefore Lib. 8. contra celsum.
let celsus, as a man that knows not god, give thanks to the deuelles, but
we obeynge the maker of things, after that we have given god thanks for his
benefits bestowed upon us, do eat the bread, which was offered in sacrifice,
and is certainly by petition, and prayer, made a certain holier body, which
body makes the^ more holy that do use that self same with a deuoter mind.
Hou say ye now, my Mark.
lord? Does not origin affirm plainly here that the bread, when it is
consecrated by prayer, is made a holier body, and that it does make the
deuote, and godly eater of it, more holy, than he was before? Can this then
stand with that place, which ye allege for your purpose, where he does deny
this utterly, Legate haec caecus Petrus Martyr.
and says that it does nothing sanctify the receauer? Affirms not origin
also here, that bread is made a holier body, than it was before? What body is
that if it be not christ's body it self? But hear, my lord, what follows in
that place that ye allege here This is therewritten. As appertains to the
eatinge, nether of that that we do not eat of that bread hallowed by gods
word and prayer, we are defrauded of any good thing, another we have by eatinge
of it, any more goodness in us. Does this saying agree with that that is
rehearsed before out of his other book, which affirms that the sacrament
makes us more holy? Is not this last sentence that the sacrament makes not
men holy, nor they take any hurt which receive it not, against many places of S
Iha^s gospel the vj. chap. and al old doctors minds, which say, (as christ
does Io. 6.) that by this Joan 6. Cyrillus. Cyprianus.
sacrament christ dwells in us, and we in him, and that we shall not have ever
lasting life without we eat christ's fleash, and drink his blood?

Why then may not I truly conclude and say, that ye, my lord, were shamefullie
disceaued, when ye alleged this authorite, and so was peter Martyr your great
god, in abusinge the same, as I will shortly, by gods help, declare to al men
in my book against him, which is now ready for the press. Now Cyprianus. Lib.
2. epi. 3 The bishop Fo. 24.
to S Cyprian, whom ye bring thus wrintinge. For as much as christ said, I
am a true vine, therefore the blood is not water, but wine, nor it can not be
thought, that his blood (whereby we are redeamed, and have life) is in the cup,
when wine is not in the cup, wherbye the blood of The confutation.
christ is showed. O'lord what means this man? Why remembers he not that S
Cyprian there went about to prove, that wine ought to be put in to the
chalice at mass, and not only water, as then some priests did use to do,
against christ's doing, and commandment, Luc. 22.
and not to prove that wine remained still therein after the consecration? Says
not S Cyprian here as plainly, that christ's very blood, whereby we were
redeamed, is in the chalice, as he does that wine is therein, and more plainlye
also? How then for shame could you, my lord, allege the one for your purpose,
and deny the other? Is this the rightwaye to set forth the truth to the
people? What is this, but to seduce them utterly? But let us se what S Cyprian
has in that same epistle against your doctrine. He writes after this manner.
As me^ ca^ not drink wine except the grapes be pressed before Lib. 2. epi. 3
so we ca^ not drink christ's blood, except christ had been before pressed
upon the cross, and had drounken first of the chalice, of which he began to
drink unto the^, that believed. Again Cyrillus Cyprianus.
he says in that same epistle If a man do put in to the chalice only water,
christ's blood begyinnythe to be in the chalice without us. Finally, he
writes thus. If in the sacrifice, which is christ, only christ must be
followed, we Christ is offered at mass in sacrifice, and not bread.
ought to obey and do that, which christ did, and commanded to be done of us.
How can we shead our blood for christ, which are ashamed to drink christ's
blood? Who now is so blind, my lord, I beseech you, that he sees not, how much
S. Cyprian is against your ungodly doctrine, which ye would yet father upon him?
God give al me^ grace to be ware of such teachers, which would bear men in
hand, that their doctrine is old, and grounded upon the belefe, and writi^ges
of godly ancient doctors, when they are against yt plainly* but I ask of
you, my lord, how ye can prove by S. Cypria^, or any other doctor, which ye do
allege here for your purpose, that there is none other substance in the
blessed sacrament of the altar then bare bakers bread, and wine of the vine?
Are ye so ignorant in logic (which does teach men to reason well, and to make
good arguments) as to make this argument for your matter? S. Cyprian affirms
that wine is in the chalice, ergo there is not christ's blood? A boy, which
only has learned the sophistrye, will not dispute so fondly, I am sure: but well
such is your authorite, and Note.
power in that reaulme, that no man may speak against your doctrine, be it
never so folysh, and wicked Christ and his apostles did not set fourth the
gospel by any such means as ye use. Now ye allege S. Cypria^ again, whose
words are euidentlye against your purpose, for he says, Christ offered
sacrifice at his last soupper, and that christ's blood is offered in sacrifice
at mass, which both two ye deny utterly, and yet are not ashamed to say,
that this your doctrine is approved So has the title of his ^oke
by the most ancient doctors of christ's church, of which S. Cyprian is one of
the chyefest. Ye bring now for you Eusebius Emissenus, which is most of al
men against your cause. Thus he writes. When the creatures The bissop lib. 2.
fo. 24 pa. 2.
(bread and wine) are to be blesshed with gods words, they are set upon
the holy aultour, before they be consecrated with the invocation of the most
high name, there is the substance of bread and wine, but after christ's words
be spoken, there is christ's body and blood. But what merueile is it, if god
can by his word turn those things that are created, which could make them
with his word? And that it ought not to seame to us a new and an impossible
thing, that earthly and mortal things are changed in to christ's substance
ask thyselfe et c. Again he writes, in this wise. The heavenly autorite In
homi. pasehali and de cons did 2. Quia corpus etc.
confirms this matter. My fleash is verily meat, and my blood is verily
dri^ke. let then al doubt of vnfayth fullnes depart away, for he, that is
the maker of the gift, is also the wytnes Joan. 8.
of the troth. For the invisible priest (christ) turns by the word, with a
Transubsta^tiation.
secret power, the visible creatures in to the substance of his body, and
blood, thus saying. Take ye, and eat, This is my body. And the sanctifieng
repeted, he said thus Take and drink. This is my blood. See thou not now
clearly, good reader, that this ancient father, and great clearke is plainly
against my lords doctrine? He would not allege these words, because he saw
that they were against him utterly. Even so the deuel alleged Matthew. 4.
the scriptures against christ. Aulters for the sacrament.
This doctor allows aulters for the consecration of the blessed sacrament,
and my lord casts them al down. This father says that the substance Mark
reader:
of bread and wine is by invocation of gods name, christ's words, and gods
power, turned in to christ's body and blood, and in to the substance of them,
and my lord denies both that invocation is necessary thereto, and that the
substance of bread, and wine is changed, and turned in to christ's body, and
blood, and yet says that this doctor is upon his side. All the words which
he recites here for him, do prove nothing his intent, but only that it ought
not be judged of us a thing impossible to fo. 25.
god, to turn the substance of bread, and wine in to christ's flesh and
blood. This meant only that author by those similitudes, that my lord
rehearses out of him, and not that there is none other change of bread and
wine in the sacrament, then is in man's soul, when he is baptized, and his
sins are forgeuen him, which change is only spiritualle, and not bodily
ffor that were not the substance of bread and wine to be turned, and changed
in to the substance of christ's fleashe and blood, which this aulthour
affirms plainly to be done in the sacrament. Wherefore this writer writes
contrarily to my lords purpose, and even so does, Hilary bishop of Rome,
whom ye allege, saying Hilarious Romanus de cons. did. 2. cap. corpus
after this manner. There is a figure (says he) for bread and wine be
outwardly seen and there is also a truth. Here my lord again alleges fo.
25. pa. 2.
falsely this authors words, leaving The confutation.
out the first part of the sentence, which makes against him plainly, for this
he writes. The body of christ which is taken from the altar is a figure,
when bread, and wine outwardly appear, but it is the truth, whiles the body,
and blood of christ is inwardly believed in the truth,

What may be more plainly said against my lords opinion, than this is? Says
he not, that we do receive christ's body at the altar, and that we do believe,
that christ's body and blood are of a truth ynwardly in the sacrament? What
is that, my lord, else but that christ's body and blood are believed of good
christen people to lie hyd ynwardly under neath the forms of bread and wine,
which are outwardly seen of us, and are also a figure? What have ye, my lord,
now gotten by this allegation of hilarie? Do ye so il understand, that ye
read, which fault ye were wont to ascribe unto me? Re, cante, recante for
shame, and go not forth this blyndly in your error to your oune confusion, and
many others also. Suffer learned men to say their minds for discharge of
their consciences toward god, and settinge forth Recante my lord.
of the truth. Keape men no longer in prison. leave your affection, and Mark
partialite, least ye repent it at the the length when it shall be to late to
repent. Epiphanius, whom ye recite for The bishop
you, is nothing for your purpose, for when he says the bread is meat, fo.
25. pa. 2.
he means that christ the heavenly bread and his blessed body under Homi.
83. in Matthew.
the form of bread in the sacrament, is the fode of the soul of man. S.
Chrysosto^ says truly, that christ used wine, when he gave the mysteries,
not that he gave to his apostles the^ very material wine, but that he myxed
wine and water together at the time of consecration, and them turned them in to
his blood, as I have declared before, and will more at large hereafter in this
book, by gods help. The epistle, that ye allege of chrisostom unto
Cesarium the Monk, is ^o. 26.
feigned and forged in his name, for it is against many of his other sainges. as
it shall be opened hereafter, although his sainge (if it were his) that the
nature of bread does still remain, proves not that very bread only does
remain in the sacrament. For why may not I here say (as ye do to cypria^ and
Ambrose) that this word (Natura, nature) signifies not here in Chrysostom the
substance of bread, but the properties and qualitees of it only? Again, what
makes this saying for your purpose, which do teach, that only bread remains
in this sacrament? Is this a good argument absolutely. There is bread, ergo
there is only bread? Luther erreth not so much i^ this matter as my lord does.
Says not luther that there is both bread and christ's body also? Finally,
says Chrysostom (as ye do) that there is not christ's very body, and blood?
No, no, nor yet any other catholic writer, that ever was. Wherefore this
authorite makes not for the furtherance of your doctrine. After this ye recite
Ambrose for you, when he writes in this manner. If the word of god be of De
ijs, qui mysterijs. initiantur capit. vl.
that force, that it can make things of naught, and those things to be,
which never were before, much more it can Lib. 4 ca. 4 de sacrame^tis. The
confutation.
make things, that were before still to be, and also to be changed in to other
things? This authorite, my lord, seameth a little, at the first sight, to make
for the lutherans doctrine, but nothing at al for yours, which say, that
christ's body is not reallie in this sacrament, but only bare bread, which
Ambrose never taught, but the clean contrary, as it may appear plainly by
theses his words. Let us prove, Libr. de ijs, qui mist. initiantur cap. 9.
that it is not that thing, which nature made, but that, which the blessi^g
has consecrated, and that the strength of the blessinge is greater than is the
force of nature, for by the blessinge, yea nature, is changed. Loo here, S
Ambrose denies plainly, that the thing, which is in the sacrament, is that
same that nature made, and says also that nature is therein changed through
the consecration, which he calls a blessinge. Who then can well and truly
say, that he meant by his words, which ye, my lord, do allege, that the nature
of bread remained still after the consecration? For then it were not changed
(as he affirms here that it is) and then also it were still, that same thing,
that nature made, which he denies utterly, wherefore that was not his mind,
but that the substance of the bread is changed in to our lords fleasn, as
his examples, which he brings immediately to prove his purpose, do manifestly
declare. For he brings there for an example, the turninge of Moses rod in to
a serpent, and of the serpent again in to a rod, of the ryuers of Egypt turned
in to blood, and how they were turned again in to their oune natures. Which
examples do declare that Ambrose meant of the change of the substance of bread
in the sacrament, because the substance in al those examples was turned and
changed. That this was saint Ambrose mind there, it appears plai^ly by
these his words that do follow as a conclusion of his treaty Lib. 4. ca. 4 de
sacrame^tis.
in this matter. Can not then the word of christ, which has made of naught
that thing, that was not, change the things, that are, in to that thing,
which they were not? What would a man desire to be spoken more plainly, then
this is, my lord, for the confutation of your opinion, and to prove that saint
Ambrose is against it? He says also thus. Thou do perchau^cesaye. My
bread is commonly used, but this is bread before the words of the sacrament,
after that the consecration is commen unto it, christ's flesh is made of the
bread. Is not this manifestly written against your teachinge, Mark.
my lord? Now to the words, which ye do allege here foryow, but not as they
were written perfectely, and fully, for this is in that place of Ambrose. If
the^ there be so great strength in our lord Jesus word, that the things,
which were not, should begin to be, how much more is that his word wourkinge,
that the things be, which were, and be changed in to an other thing? Heaven
was not, the sea was not, the earth was not, but hear him, that says. He
said, and they were made, he commanded, Psalm. 32. and 148.
and they were created. That I may then make aunsweare, the body of christ was
not, before the consecration, but I tell the after the consecration, that now
christ's body is there. He said, and it was made, he bade, and it was
created. This Ambrose. Now it is manifest that S Ambrose meant not that the
substance of bread does remain in the holy sacrament, but he meant by these
words, vt sint, quae erant, that the things be, that were, that gods word
does preserve from perisshinge the things which were not before they were made
until such time that he changes them in to other things, and so he does
also the bread and wine continue, and keep in their being until he turn their
substance in to christ's body, and blood at the time of the consecration.
Wherefore this is enoughe to S Ambrose. Now ye allege S Auste^, which says
thus (as peter Martyr, and Aecolampadius allegeth him) in a certain sermon to
infantes, which is not among al his books, that are in print, nor worthy to
be ascribed unto him. That which The bishop Fol. 2. pa. 2.
you see in the altar, is the bread, and the cup, which also your eyes do show
you. But faith shows further that bread is the body of christ, and the cup
his blood. In primis, S Austen here teacheh that aulters ought to be had for
The confutation.
the sacrament, and ye, my lord, do cast them down, against which thing, I
have wrote a book. Secondly, Austen says not here that the bread and wine
remain still in the holy sacrament, and that christ's body is not Aulters.
there, but only that we do see bread and the cup upon the altar, which
words may be verified of the bread not yet consecrated, and that after the
consecration our faith teaches us, that bread is christ's body, that is to
say, that his body is the meat, and fode of man's soul, and that his body
lies there covered under neath the form of bread, as our fayeth shows to
us. Wherefore this authorite makes not for your purpose, as this does not, that
now follows taken out of Saint Austen, but plainly against it, Lib. sent.
prospe. The honor of the sacrament.
for he says thus. We do honor under the form, or kind of bread and wine,
which form we see, things inuisibles, that is to say, flesh and blood. And we
do not take these two kinds, as we did before the consecracration, for we
confess faythfullye that before the consecration there is bread and wine,
which nature made, but after the consecration, christ's fleash and blood, which
the blessinge has consecrated.

Is it possible for any man to speak more plainlye against your opinion, my
lord, than Saint Austen does in these words, that are written in that book,
out of which ye allege him for you? Why winked ye at these words, which
immediately go before the sentence, that you here recite to defend your
opinion? Pleye ye yet again the deuelles part, which alleged (as ye do) that
part of the psalm, which seamed to make for his purpose, and yet it did not so
in deed, leauinge unspoken that peace which was against him? Wherefore did ye
not Matthew. 4.
read these words of saint Austen, which do follow there straight after the
sentence, that ye recyte?

It is christ's fleash, which we receive Note this reader.
in the sacrament, covered under neath the form of bread, and his blood,
which we do drink under the kind, and taste of wine.

How, mai^fest are these words, for the refutation of my lords doctrine? May
he not then be now ashamed of his part, and repent his error? but let us
examine saint Austens words, which he alleges here for his matter, and they
are even these, but moo, than he rehearses. This is the thinghe, that fo. 28.
pa. 2
we do goo about by all means to prove, that the sacrifice of the church is
made of two things, and consists by two ways, the visible kind of the
elements, and the ynuisible flesh and blood of our lord jesus christ, both the
sacrament, and also the thing of the sacrament, that is to say, the body of
christ. What man is now so blind, my lord, but that he may easily see, that
Auste^ is utterly against your doctrine eue^ in these words, which ye allege
for your purpose. For says he not, that the sacrifice of the church is made
both of the visible kind of bread and wine, which is the sacrament, and also
of the flesh and blood of christ The sacrifice of the mass.
which are therein invisible only, and are the things of the sacrament? Were ye
not then, my lord fowly disceaued, Mark.
when ye, folowinge peter Martyr, rehesed this place for your purpose, and
denied also (as hereafter it shall appear, to your great shame) that the priest
at Libro 5.
mass makes any sacrifice more then the lay people do? ye err, my lord,
openly, when ye gather of Auste^, that the nature of bread and wine remain
still in the sacrament, when he says, that as in christ there is the ma^hod,
and the godhead which are two natures, euenso in the sacrament there are two
things, or natures, that is to say, bread and wine (as ye take it) and the
body and blood of christ. Ye err, I say, in understanding of Two errors
of the bisshops.
this place, and that twyse, ones when ye think, that he meant, that the
substance of bread and wine did still abide in the sacrament, for he meant (as
his own words before written declare) that the forms and kinds of them fo.
2^. pa. 2.
only remain. Secondlye ye err shamefully, when ye affirm that saint Austen
makes here with you, for he says that christ's body and blood are in this
sacrifice, and that it is made of them, being present, as both the godhead,
and manhod are really present in christ, of which he is made. Where was your
sight, my lord, when ye saw not this, that is so plain? Ye do now allege
Chrysostom out of an epistle forged in his name, and it yet proves not your
purpose. For he me^t not that the substance of bread remained in the
sacrament, but the nature Ad Caesarium monachum.
of yt, meaning therbie the natural properties and qualites of bread, or else
he should have been directly against himself in an other place, which is, Fo.
23.
certainly his, where he says thus. These works, which he then does wourke
Homi. ^3. in Matthew.
in that soupper, are not of man's power, he himself works now also, he
makes, the things perfect. We priests are the ministers, but it is christ
himself, that halloueth the bread and wine, and does turn, or change them.
Loo, he says that christ himself changes the bread, and wine, how than do
they remain still, as ye say, that they do in their substance? Again,
Chrysostom says. The Homi. 24. in 1. cor. 10.
thing, that is in the chalice, is that, which ran out of christ's side, and
we are partakers of it. Did wine run out of christ's side upon the cross,
and not blood? In an other place he utterly denies, that we do see bread, and
wine in the sacrament, but I ask of Homi. 60. ad populu^
my lord, why he tryumpheth so much when some authors seame to say that as
two natures and substances remain still in the sacrament, which are christ's
body and blood and bread, and wine (if he say well) eue^ so two natures are
whole in christ not turned, nor consumed, ffor this saiynge of them is fullye
against his doctrine, because it proves that christ's body and blood are
realllye in the sacrament, as the nature of man, and of god both are really in
christ our savior, and not by a sign only. Wherefore, may it not be well said
here, that my lord is slain with Episcopus iste suoiugulatur (and aiunt)
gladio. Gelasius the pope.
his own swerd, as they say common lie? Gelasius the pope, whom ye now
allege for you, is against you, saying, Certainly the sacraments of christ's
body, and blood, which we receue are a dyuyne thing, wherefore we be also made
by them partakers of the dyvyne nature, and yet not withstanding that, the
substance or nature of bread, and wine cease not to be. And vndoubteldy an
image, and a similitude of christ's body and blood are celebrated in the
action of the mysteryes. Wherefore it is showed unto us evidently enoughe, that
we must judge that Ex antidoto contra omnes hereses.
in christ our lord himself, that we do profess, celebrate, and be in his
image: that like as they pass over in to this dyuine substance when the holy
ghost making perfect, permanente tamen in sua proprietate naturae, yet the
thing abydinge still in the property of is nature, euenso that principal
mystery, whose workinge and virtue they do verily represent unto us, of the
which it is evident that the pri^cipal mystery is one christ properly
remayninge, for as much as they do show plainly that one and a perfect christ
abides still. hitherto that writer, Note here first, good reader, that he
says, that we be made partakers of the nature of god, by the sacrament, which
his saying can not be understood of the receauinge of pure bread and wine,
but it must neades be taken of the very body and blood of christ, joined to
the godhead in one person, which when we do receive in the sacrament, we are
made partakers of that same dyuyne nature, by having it in us bodily.
Secondly, this doctor says not that Damascenus lib 4. cap. 14.
only bread, and wine remain in the holy sacrament, and that there is not the
body and blood of christ which you, my lord, do defend, and therefore he
makes not for your purpose. Thirdly, this sentence is so imperfect and so for
from true latin (as it appears by the latin words) that no man can make of
it any perfect sense, or construe it, and therefore it is not like that
Gelasius, which was very well learned, wrote it. Fourthlye, he was pope, and
sets fourth the popes primacie largely in many places (as it appears both
in his book of decrees, and also in the decrees gathered by Gratia^ Why the^
do, ye my lord, allege him in the matter of the sacrament, who^ ye follow not
in the other? Again, he calls the sacrament in an other place the holy body
of christ, and makes plain mention of the showing of it to the people, which
ye reprove. Also he affirms that virgens, Lib. suoru^ decretorum cap. 8.
and wydowes, which have made a vow of virginite, and chastyte may not marrye,
and calls al such marriages, whoredom and incest, and bids that they
should be broken again, as Cap. 20. ca. ^1.
it does appear in his decrees. Why do ye not follow him in these things? Now
ye do allege Theodoretus for you, which says that christ called the bread,
ad wine, his body and bloudde, and yet he changed not their natures. To this
author I say first, Theodoretu lib. Dialogoru^
that he was an heretic, and defended one Nestorius heresy, which said that
christ was not god and man both (as it appears in Cyrillus works, and in
other diverse books) and therefore he ought not to be believed in this matter of
our faith. Secondly I say that Lege anathematismos Cyrilli, and his adnexa.
he was a Greake writer, and the Greakes did not generally receive this
doctrine of transubsta^tiation before the procedynge of the holy ghost from
the father, and the son, although many of the best learned me^ of them
believed, and taught both these things Now why should his error in this our
matter of transubstantiation make any more against our belefe therein, the^
his, or any other Greake doctors error in the procedi^ge of the holy ghost
from the father and the son should hurt our faith therein? Thirdly, he teaches
not, as ye do, that christ's body is not in the holy sacrament, but only bread
and wine, signs and figures of them, wherefore he is not upon your side, as ye
say, that he his. And that does appear well by these his words written upon
this sainge of S Paul He that eats and drinks unworthily, shall be gyltie
of our lords body and blood. This is paul's meaning (says he), Theodoritus
in Gagnei scholijs
that as the Jews and Judas did Christ wrong, and spoke against him spiteful
checkinge words, even so they do injury to his name, which do touch his most
holy body with their unclean Theodoretus is against the bishop, though he
alleged him for his purpose.
hands, and do put it unto their cursed mouth. What might he have said more
evidently for me against you, my lord? Moreover theodoretus in his third
dialogue alleges Saint Ignatius, saying in his epistle to Smyrnenses. Mark
well this reader.
They do not receive, or admit the sacrament, and oblations, because they
confess not the sacrament to be our saviors flesh, which suffered for our
sins, and which the father raised up again from death to life. Does not this
authorite of S Ignatius which was saint Ihon the evangelists scholar way more
upon our side than al my lords doctors, that he alleges for him? And also
does it not appear that Theodoritus was against my lords doctrine, which
alleges that authorite of Ignatius, that affirms so plainlye that the same
fleash of christ is in the sacrament, that he offered upon the cross for us,
and that the sacrament is a sacrifice, which my lord denies? The sacrifice of
the mass.
The same writer also in his first dialogue, which ye allege, my lord, says
that these words. This is my body. This is my blood, are the words of
consecration, and that these words of christ Joan. 6.
written in Ihon. The bread, which I will give is my fleash, etc. were spoken of
christ's flesh in the sacrament, which both ye deny. He makes also mention
Theodoretus is in many points against my lord.
of the puttinge of water in to the chalice, and says that the consecration
is made with invocation, which ye say are of no necessite, because scripture
speaks not of them. Again in his second dialogue, he says after The
honor of the sacrame^te set out by Theodoretus my lords oune doctor.
this manner. But the things, which be made, are understand, and believed, and
honored, as being those things, which they are believed. Here he speaks of
the honouringe of the sacrament, which thing, as ye deny, my lord, so these
words can not be well said of bread and wine, for to honor them is
ydolatrie, as ye deny not your self This worsshippinge, or adoration of which
he speaks here, can not be referred to christ in heaven (as ye are wount to
avoid like sainges of the old authors, but very fondly) for he says that the
things, which by the consecration are made, be worshipped of us. Finally, he
says thus. We do call also this body, the body of god, teaching that it is
our lords body, and gives life, which is not true of a common body of every
man indifferently, but of the body of our lord Jesus Christ both god and man.
It is then now evident how well your sight, my lord, served you, when ye did
recyte this author for your purpose, which so plainly is against it. Farther ye
goo Fol. 29.
about to soil our arguments, and reasons, which we do make to prove
transubstantiation, and first ye improve, as Folio. 31.
ye think at the lest, our understanding of those christ's words, this is my
body, by which we believe, that the bread is turned in to chr^stes very
body. This is your saying against that our godly, and true belefe. But what
christian ears can patiently The bishop fo. 31. pa. 1.
hear this doctrine, that Christ is every day made a new, and made of an
other substance, than he was made of in his mothers womb? Here, my The
confutation.
lord, ye make a great wounderinge at the catholic faith, and doctrine of
christ, because ye understand it not, as your words declare manifestlye. For
christ is not made a new daily, nor we do not teach any such thing, but
only that the bread nou is daily Mark reader.
turned in to that his body, which was made ones for all in his mothers womb,
so that that one body, and one Christ, which was never made but ones only,
nor can not be made again, is thereby reallie present in the holy sacrament,
and in heaven also both at ones. This our doctrine, and believe is set forth
in the scriptures (as it Christ's body is daily made at mass.
is already declared) and also in all catholic doctors books, out of the
which, I will, by gods help rehearse a certain sentences for the proof and
defense Lib. 4. contra. Marciouem.
of this our faith. Tertulian says. Christ made the bread his body,
saying, this is my body. The holy martyr Alexander, which was above Epist. 1.
ad omnes ecclesias.
M. cccc. xxix. years passed, confirms the same, saying thus. Our lords
passion must be myxed in the oblations of the sacraments, which are offered to
our lord at mass, that his The mass is no new thing.
passion, whose body and blood is made, may be celebrated. Cyprian says
Our lord makes, even continually De coena domini.
until this day, this his most true and holy body, and makes it holy,
blesses it and divides it to them, which devoutly Ad athanasium and alios
episcopos Aegypti. etc.
receive it. Felix a holy martyr, which was M. cc. lxx. years sense, writes i^
this manner, intreati^ge of the persecution of priests. The mirth of the whole
conseil is turned in to mourninge, because it was not seamelie, that they which
do make christ's body daily with their oune mouth, should suffer so great
persecution. S Damasus says unto steaphon, that was in s. Hieroms time. The
priests do make christ's body with their mouth. s. Ambrose De ijs, qui
mysterijs, and o^. cap. 9.
says This body, that we do make, is of the virge^. Again, It was not
christ's body before the consecration, but I tell the, that after the
consecration it is now christ's body. He has said, and it Lib. 4. cap. 4. de
sacramentis.
is made, etc. Thou have then learned, that christ's body is made of bread
and that wine and water are put in to the chalice, but blood is made through
Lib. 4. cap. 5. de sacramentis.
the co^secratio^ of gods words. Before christ's words, the chalice is full
of water and wine after that christ's words have wroughte, there is made the
blood, which redeamed the people. Hom. 45. in Ioannem.
Chrysosto^ is of that same mi^de, which says. It is not man, but christ,
that was crucified for us, which makes his body and blood of the things,
that are set furthvpo^ our lords table to be consecrated Homi. 2. in 2.
timo. 1.
The same doctor thus says. Priests, what so ever they be, do offer daily
that same oblatio^, that christ offered himself, and gave to his apostles,
addinge at the length these words. And therefore both this is christ's body,
and that also is his body: he that thinks that this body has any thing
less the^ that knows not, that it is christ, which is now also present, and
workethe. And to let pass many of his sentences, I will recite Homi 17. in
epist. ad Hebraeos.
but this only now. We do not offer nou an other la^be, and two morrow an
other, but ever the same thing it self. Therefore this sacrifice is one, or
else by this reason, that he is offered i^ many places there are many christ's.
Nothi^ge less, but there is one christ every where, both Hieroni. ad
heliodoru^.
being here full, and there full, one body. Hiero^ has a like se^te^ce when he
says thus. God forbid that I should speak any il of the^, which succedi^ge
the apostles degree, do make christ's body with a holy mouth, through who^
we be christians, Also he says ad Euagrium. Lege eum in epistola^ ad Titum.
What eylde the minystre of tables and widows (a deaco^ he means) proudly to
extolle himself above the^ at whose prayers christ's body, and blood is made?
Finally, damascene Damas. lib. 4. cap. 14.
says can not christ, which was borne of a virgen, make the bread his own
body, and the wine his blood? Again he writes after this sort, do
Christ's body is made at mass.
thou ask, how bread is made christ's body and wine and water his blood? I
say to the, that the holy ghost works the things above ma^s speech, and
understanding, but the bread and wine are turned. Again he says. God has
joined is godhead unto bread, wine, and water, and made them his body and
blood, not that his body comes down from heaven, but because the bread and
wine are changed in to the body and Invocation helps to the consecration
blood of god. The bread, wine and water by the invocation and coming of the
holy ghost, are above nature changed in to christ's body, and blood and they
are not two bodies, but one, and the self same body. I pass by, good
reader, many such sainges both of these same writers, and of other also. Now
lerte my lord rail upon these doctors, and great clearkes, whose books he is
not worthy to bear after them, if they where now alive. Now he makes certain
sophistical and and captious arguments, that are bilded upon a false fundation,
which is (as it appears before) that we do believe The bishop fo. 31. pa. 2. A
false and an enuyous imagination of the bishop against priests.
and say, christ's body is made so of bread a new, as it was ones made in
the womb of his dear mother our lady, of whose most clean and pure blood
it was made by the operation of the holy ghost. This is a very pyuysh and an
envious imagination of this man, which never learned christened man did teach,
but we say only, that the bread and wine are by gods holy word, and
almighty pouer, turned in to he same christ's one body, and bloudde, which he
took of our lady, and was ones crucified to death, and that there are not two
bodies (as he fayneth, that we do teach) nor two christ's, Homi. 2. in 2 timo.
1 and homi. 17. in Hebr.
but one, and the same, that is in the sacrament, and in heaven also as S.
Chrisostom witnesses openly. Wherefore all this his sophistical reasonynge is
not worth a good ryshe, for he disputes thus. If christ's body, that The
bishop fo. 3^. pa. 2 ^n autem (vt video) pro christo aduersus christum pugnas
Nazian in apolgetico
was crucyfied, was not made of bread but the body, that was eaten at the
soupper, was made of bread (as the papystes say) than christ's body, that was
eaten, was not the same, that was crucyfied. This reason is (as I have said
before) grounded al together upon a false principle, which is, that the
catholic teachers do say, that christ's body which was eaten at his ma^dy,
was made of bread, as of a matter, or a substance of new, and not that the
bread was and is only turned in to that self same body of christ, that was
borne of the vyrgen, and that suffered upon the cross, which was never but
ones only made, and yet S. Cyprian says. The bread, which our lord gave unto
his disciples, not changed in form, Cyprianus de coenad.
but in nature, by the almyhtie power of the word is made flesh. Which is as
much to say, as that the bread is changed in to christ's very flesh, which
he took of is mother, and not that his body, or else he himself now Mark.
is made a new of the bread (as this bishop falselye affirms, that we do
believe, and teach) and therefore his reasons made here are of no strength at al,
though he judged then never so strong, and insoluble. Again, it is an
impudent lie, when he says, that priests do affirm, that they make God is
not made in the sacrament.
god of the bread, for god is not made at al nor yet christ's body a new,
but they say truly with all catholic doctors, that they are mynisters of god
and that when they do pronounce these words of christ. This is my body, in
the mass, then christ himself and the holy ghost do turn the bread in to
christ's body, that his mother conceived, and bare, with the which the fo. 32.
godhead, that never was made, is joined unseparably. This is the catholic
Note reader
faith, which we do believe, and defend, and not that thing which this bishop
falsely says, that we defend, and therefore he is sufficientlye aunsweared in
this his raylinge unreasonable reaso^ynge. And so is not our strongest
argument yet answered unto (as the bishop says, it is) nor our chief
fu^datio^, wherpo^we do buyldeour doctrine, subverted, nor never shall be by any
Matthew. 7. 18
heretic, for it is builded upon a sure rock, gods word, and the church of
christ, which erreth not. Ye say also after this manner in your book my lord
The soupper of our lord can be no perfect The bishop fo. 53. pa. 1.
sacrament of spiritual food, except there be as well bread and wine as the
body and blood of our savior spirituallie feedinge us, which by the said
bread and wine is signified. Why The confutation.
do ye then, my lord, deny that christ's body and blood be in this sacrament?
Again, is it enoughe to prove, that bread and wine must neades be there,
because ye do so say? No, your bare word is not of any such force. I pass by
the argument of impanation, fo. 33. pa. 1.
for I do not much esteame it, although your improbation, of it, my lord, be
very weak, and builded upon two similitudes, which do not serve for that
purpose. For who, that is learned, will say, that christ should be none other
wise joined unto the bread in the sacrament (if it were there) than the holy
ghost is unto the water in baptism, or than the holy ghost was unto Joan. 3.
Matthew. 3.
the dooue? For was it ever said in scripture of the holy ghost. This water is
the holy ghost, or this dooue is the holy ghost, as christ said. This is my
body? Wherefore ye were heryn disceaued manifestly, as ye were also, sayng that
christ spoke not theses words (the Joan. 6.
bread that I will give, is my fleash, which I will give for the life of the
woorld) of the sacramental bread, and of the sacramental eatinge, but of
spiritual bread, and of a spiritual eati^ge only. Which is very false, and
against both the text it self, and also the exposition of al old godly
doctors, as it shall anon, by gods grace be proved sufficiently, when I have
improued your reasons, which ye make for your The bishop fo. 34. pa. 1. Joan.
6.
opinion. They are rhese. That was spoken two, or three years before the
sacrament was first ordained. I am the bread of life, which came down from
heaven he that eats this bread, shall live for ever et c. O what blyndnes is
this? What man, that has The confutation.
any knowledge in the scriptures, will make this argument, which is made here of
my lord? These words of Iho^ (The bread, which I will give is my flesh et c,)
were spoken (says he) before the sacrament was first ordained, ergo they were
not spoken of the sacrament? May not a man prove by a like reason that all the
prophesies, which were made of christss incarnation, passion, resurrection, and
ascension, and of baptism, the institution and preachinge of the gospel with
many other things, were not spoken thereof, because they were spoken many
years before christ came, and before the th^nges were instituted and done? how
weak then is the first his proof? Now when he says, that these words, I am
the bread of Joan. 8.
life, which came down from heaven, can not be understand of the sacrame^tal
bread, for it came not down from heaven, if I should grant him, that
Cyrillus. Chrysostom Theophil.
to be very true, and say that they were spoken only of christ's godhead,
that should not yet prove, that these words, Joan. 6.
(The bread, which I will give, is my flesh, that I will give for the life of
the world,) were not spoken of christ's very natural flesh to be eaten in the
sacrament, as it is evident enoughe of it self. Again, I may say that
christ's fleash, which he spoke of then, and there in Ihon, came down from
heaven, both because it was, and is joined with the godhead, that came from
heaven, for christ used a like manner of speakinge, Joan. 3.
when he said. And no man ascends up in to heaven, but he that came down
from heaven, the son of man, which is in heaven. For here he said both that
the son of man came down from heaven, because christ's man hode was joined
in one person with his godhead, that came from heaven, and also that his manhod
was than in heaven, before his ascension in to heaven, because the godhead,
with which it was knytte in one person, was the^ in heaven. Secondly, I say,
that christ's body, which he then called bread in Ihon, came down from
heaven, for as much as it was made by the heavenly Matthew. 1.
pouer of god, and the holy ghost, by whom christ's blessed mother conceived 1.
Cor. 15
him. And this manner of speakinge is not strange in the holy scripture, which
calls christ the second man 1. Cor. 10
from heaven celestial, the Manna spiritual meat, and the water, which ran
out of the stone, spiritual drink, because they were prepared for the Jews
above nature by gods power, which is a spirit, and by the mynistery of
angels, that are also spirits, and therefore Joan. 4. Psalm. 103.
that manna is called angels food psalm. 77. Wherefore this reason is clearly
soiled. When he says, that these Ihons words, he that eats of this Joan.
4. fo. 34.
bread, shall live for ever, can not be understand of the sacrament, because
page 2.
it gives not life to al, that eat it, I say that these words are to be
understand of the sacrament, and that christ meant, that al which do worthily
eat of it (as s. paul teaches us to do) shall live for ever. Moreover ye say,
my lord, 1. Cor. 11. Fo. 34.
that these words of Ihon, the bread, pa. 2.
that I will give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world, can
not Joan. 6.
be understand, of the sacrament, because that of such bread christ could not
than presently have said, this is my flesh, because at that time bread was not
made his fleash, I say that they may right well be understand of it, and that
christ there used the present time Matthew. 3
for the future, and did put (is) for shall be, as he did, when he said after
the Greake letter, the tree, which bears not fruit, is cut down, and is
cast in to the fire, where the translatour said in latin, it shall be cut
down, and shall be cast in to the fire. A like phrase (...). Luc. 12. 1. Cor.
11.
used he, when he said. This is my body, that is given, and broken for you,
meaning that it should be given, and broken for them. Even so he said, this is
my blood, that is shead forth for you, as the Greake has, which the old
translatour turned nearer the sense, sainge, which shall be shead for you.

But why looked not my lord upon the Greake text of Iho^, which has twice Joan
6.
this werbe ((...), doso, dabo, I will give) Matthew. 26.
which declared plainly, that christ meant there, and then, that he would give
his flesh twice, ones to the apostles under the form of bread in the
sacrament Joan. 6.
to be eaten of the^, as the food of their souls, and for that cause he called
it bread which promise he performed at his last soupper when he took bread,
blessed it, and brake it, sainge. Take and eat, this is my body, that shall be
given for you. Again he gave that same his Note well reader.
fleashe in the form of flesh for the life of the world upon the cross, and
so does this promise plainlye agree with his deed upon the ma^dy and the next
day folowinge, which we call good frydaie. Wherefore this my lords reason is
fullye anusweared, and soluted, with a label which he, and his foloes, shall
never be able The bishop
to anusweare unto, whiles they live, I am very sure. Now mi lord goes about
to make an anusweare unto the An anuswere unto the holy doctors sainges.
doctors which the catholic me^ allege for the^, and first he labors to
anusweare unto S Cyprian which writes thus. This bread, which our lord gave
unto his disciples, not changed in outward form, but in nature, is by
omnipotency De coena domini.
of the word made flesh. Here my lord raileth upon al catholic writers The
bishop.
and teachers, calling the^ papists, and saying, that they do leave out
those words, which would open all the whole matter, and are these in s.
Cypria^s sermon. As in the person of christ, the humanite was seen, and the
divinity was hid, even so did the divinity ineffablye put it self in to the
visible sacrament. These words (says my lord) do He mysconstrueth saint
Cyprians words.
show manifestly, that the divinity is poured in to the bread and wine, the
same bread and wine still remayninge, like as the same divinity by unite of
person was in the humanite of christ, the same humanite still remaining with
the divinity. Which thing S. Cyprian never meant by that comparyso^, but only
that as the manhod of Christ was seen, and his godhead not seen in him, but
hid secretly from man's sight covered under ne^th the manhood, eue^ so did the
godhead power it self in to the visible sacrament unspeakably, The true sense
of S. Cyprians words.
when that it turned the bread and wine in to christ's fleash and blood,
ioynynge itself unto them in unite of person, which how they were done, no man
can tell, or express with his tongue. This was Saint Cyprians mind in that
place. Now he goes about to answer to cyprians words, which are that the
bread is changed in nature, and not in outward form, and says thus in
effect bryefely. It is not changed in substance, but The bishop.
in nature, that is to say, it has other properties, and an other condition,
tha^ folio. 35 pagina. 1
it had before it was consecrated, which far passes the nature and condition
of common bread. It shows to us, that we be partakers of the spirit of god,
and most purely joined unto christ, and spirituallie fead with his fleash and
blood This is your oune dream, my lord, The confutation.
which is directelie against the doctors meaning. For he meant that the bread,
which christ gave unto his disciples at his mandie, was changed in substance
in to christ's very natural fleash as these his last words of that same
sentence (is by the almighty power of his word made flesh) do show plainly.
Why winked ye my lord, at these words? Mark this reader.
Do not they declare, that cyprian meant, that the bread was so changed in
nature, that it was made christ's very flesh, by gods almyghtie power? What
madness is it the^, to wreast those words to anyother sense, tha^ unto that?
Again s. Cypria^ says a little before, after he had recited these words.
This is my body. The difference of corporal and spiritual meat is also made
manifest and that it was an other thing, that was set upon the table, and
confumed, and an other that was given and distributed of the maistre. how ca^,
mylord, this be true, if bread remained still in the sacrament? For is it the^
consumed and an other thing given, tha^ was set upon the table, if bread
remain still? S. Cyprian says also thus. This common bread changed in to
flesh and blood procures life and increase to the bodies. See thou not then
good reader, that my lord wreasted cyprian to his purpose, where he says that
we do wreast him unto ours?

Now he answers to Chrysostom, which wrote so plainly against hi^ i^ this
matter, that he can not be well wreasted Chrysosto^. fo. 35. pa 2.
from our belefe, for he says thus. Do thou see bread? Do thou see
wine? Do they avoid beneeth, as other meats do? God forbid, think not so.
For as wax (if it be put ones in to the fire) yt is made like the fire, no
substance remains, nothing is left, so here also think thou, that the
mysteries be consumed by the substance of the body. Hitherto Chrisostom. Who
would desire more plain words, Homilia de eucharistia.
than these are of this holy father, and great clearke? For does he notdenyee
utterly, that we see bread, or wine in the sacrament? Says he not plainly
that they goo not awey beneth in to the draught, as other common meats do?
Affirms he not also that the bread and wine are so consumed, that no
substance remains, as wax is consumed by fire? What follye is it Mark.
then to follow AEcolampadius, Peter martyrs, this bissoppes and such others
wreasting of this plain words? But let us now see, how learnedly my lord
auoideth this authorite* this he says. The bishop. fo. 36. pa. 1.
Saint. Chrisostoms words, which do follow there immediately, do declare his
mind, for he writes thus. Wherefore fo. 36. et 83
when ye come to those mysteries, do not think, that ye receive by a man the
body of god, but that with tongues, you receive fire by the angels Seraphim.
of these words ye, my lord, do gather that you may as well say, that Chrisostom
meant, that there is neither priest, nor christ's body, as we may gather that
there is neither bread nor wine in the sacrament, of those words, which are
before recited, and be gynne thus. Do thou see bread? But ye are shamefullye
disceaued theryn, The bishop
for he says not, do thou se the priest? Do thowe see Christ's body?
God forbyde, think not so, for they are consumed, as he does of the bread and
wine, why then do, ye my lord so trifle and cauil in this so manifest a matter?
Are ye not ashamed yet of your part? Wherefore when chrisostom says, do ye not
think, that ye receive by a man the body of god, he me^t, that we ough to
think, that we receive gods boddie not of him principally but of him only as
a minister, and of christ himself chyefely, as he says in an other place by
these words. Homi. 51 in Matthew. 14.
When thou do see the priest give to the christ's body, think not that the
priests hand, but christ's Joan. 1.
hand is reached unto the, as he does 1. cor. 3.
principally baptize. This said he to stere me^ for to receive christ's body
with greater reverence, and more pureness of conscience, as he did say. Do
thowe see bread? et c. to make men believe that although their eyes should
judge bread and wine to be in the sacrament, yet they should not think, that
there were very bread, and wine in deed, for the sense are disceaued easily in
this mystery, and therefore we must believe these christ's words. this is my
body, although al our senses, reason and understanding be utterly Homi. 93
in Matthew. 28.
against it, as he says in an other place. Wherefore my lord was disceaued in
this point playnlie, and so he was, in the wrong alleagynge of these words
out of chrysostoms book. Think De eucharistia in Enceniis.
ye, that the blood of salvation flows out of the pure, and godly side of
christ, and so coming to yt, receive it with pure lips. Chrysostom has not
so, but quasi e diuino, and impolluto latere effluere, that is to say, as it
were to flow out of the godly and pure side, and not to flow out. Are the se
two both one, my lord, to flow out and as it were to flow out? God said,
behold, Adam is made as it were Genesis 3. Matthew. ^6.
one of us. Is that as much as if he had said, he is made one of us? Also
christ said unto the jews, ye are come forth unto me, as it were to a these
Will ye, my lord, turn those words thus in to Englysh, ye are come forth Many
such translatio^^ would sonedryne christ as a these out of England.
to me a these? Why then did ye so translate chrysostoms words, to disceaue
the reader? But let this pass, I will, not ones touch your negatiues by
comparison (as ye term them) because they make nothing for your purpose, The
bishop*
as it appears now by the declaration of chrysostoms words, which he spoke
absolutely, and without al comparyson. Now ye allege these chrysostoms words
for you. What do fo. 37. fo. 3^.
thowe, o man? Did not thowe promise to the priest, which said, lyftvp your
minds, and hearts: and thowe Homi. de Eucharistia in enceniis.
did answer, we lift the^ up unto the lord? etc. Who is so blind, but if
he do yea ones read chrysostoms words, which ye do, my lord, here rehearse for
you, he may sone see, that he me^t that men in the time off the mass should be
godly occupied, and not consume that time in wordly busynes, another in
trifling, (as he says there) and talking, but to remember christ's death,
and passion, and that christ the lamb of god is then offered for them, that
the blood, which was drawn out of christ's side for their purgynge from sin,
is in the cup, and by these and such other means to endeavor them selfs to
purchase them gods mercy? This meant S. Chrysostom, and ye, my lord, would make
us believe, that he went about to withdraw The bishop fo. 40. lib. 3
men's minds from the co^sideratiom of sensible things, bread and wine,
which are in the holy sacrament as ye say. But how chanced it that ye
alleged these words, lyftevp your minds, etc. to prove that Chrysosto^ment,
that bread, and wine remained still in the sacrament? Have ye so ofte^tymes
said mass, hard it, and also the communion, that ye have forgotten, that
these words, Sursum cordaet c were ever and yet are song, and said both of
the Greakes in their mass, and also of the latins, before the co^secr atio^ of
bread and wine, to provoke and move men unto devotion, and especially at the
time of the sacrynge of it? This is S. basils mind, Chrysostoms, S. Ciprians,
and certain others. Basilius and Chrysostom. i^ missa coru^ and cypr. in orad,
Wherefore those words of the mass make not for you, which would prove that
material bread remains in the sacrament after the consecration. Moreover The
bishop fo. 41. pa. 2
ye say that S Ambrose (who^ we do alleege affirmi^g that the nature itself
of bread is changed by the consecration) meant not that the substance of it is
changed, but only that the nature of yt is altered in to a higher estate Lib.
de iis, qui mist intia^tur. ca. 9
and condition so that after the consecration it is not common bread, but a
holy fode of ma^s soul, whereby we receive spiritual fedyng, and supernatural
nouryshement from christ's body above in heaven. Which your answer is vaynly
forged of peter martyr, whom ye do follow, and it is plainly A vain enasion of
S Ambroses Words.
against the doctors mind, as these his words, which are written there and
are a part of the same sentence, declare sufficiently. There is not that thing,
which nature made, but that, which the consecration has formed, and the
benediction is of more strength tha^ nature. For by the blessyng the nature of
bread and wine is so changed through the consecration at mass, that the
thing, which nature made, is not afterward remaynyng in the sacrament, but only
that, which is made by the consecration How then meant he, that material bread
remained still in the sacrament, as ye feign? For did not nature make material
bakers bread? Were ye not then, my lord, plainly disceaued, when you wrote thus
unlearnedly to avoid the truth, which Ambrose did so manyfestly set forth?
The bishop fo. 43. pa. 2.
Now ye ask of us, what thing it is, that is eaten, broaken, chawed with the
mouth, teth, etc. in the sacrament, seeing The bishop fo. 43. pa. ^
that therein is no substance of bread (as we do say) and christ's body is not
broaken, for it is immortal and impassible? The confutation.
Unto the which I anusweare, that the forms, qua^titees, and qualitees of the
bread are broaken, chaued, etc. Which thing is done above nature, and man's
natural reason. May not this be as well Joan. 20. Matthew. 13 Luc. 16. Matthew. 25.
done by gods pouer, as that saint Thomas did put his hand in to christ's side
without al harm to it? as the fire of hell to burn and torment the damned
spirits and men's souls, without Gene. 1.
consumyng of them? And as water to be above the firmament? For are not al
these things as much against nature and above man's capacyte, as the accidents
of the bread to be alone without their substance, and to be broaken, chawed,
The bishop fo. 43. pa. 2.
etc? Ought ye not, my lord to have been ashamed to say in your book, that we
do teach, that christ's body is naturally in the sacrament without his
accide^tes and qualites, seeing we say that it is there against nature with all
his qualytes Fol. 44
and accidents? Moreover, ye say untruly, my lord, that we do defend, that a
substance is made of accidents when the bread moulyth, or engenders worms,
for we say that christ's body departs out of the sacrament, or the oost
reserved, when it begins to moule, or putrify, and should engendrewormes,
and that then an other substance succedeth it, of which such things are made.
Thus ends the second book. The co^futatio^ of the third The confutatio^ of
the third book
book. In this book, good reader, I will be short, for in it the bishop vainly
alleges many authorites to prove that christ bodily departed out of this fib.
3. fo. 46
world at the time of his ascension, and sits now upon the fathers right
hand in heaven, of the which no good christian man doubts, and yet he is also
bodily and really in the sacrament of the altar both at ones. This is no new
doctrine, although my lord says that it is, but the old catholic doctrine,
taught of christ, his apostles, and all the ancyent fathers at the beginning of
the church and ever shall be until the 1. Cor. 11 3. Esdrae. 3
worlds end, for the truth of gods word ever endures, and has the vyctorie.
My lord makes a great matter The bishop. ^ol 46 page 2. lib. ^
at the being of christ and his body in the sacrament, how he is there, and
after what manner, when it is enoughe for us to believe, that his body is there
present really, although how it is there we know not, for gods word tells
tovs, that it is there, but not how it Ioannis. 6. Matthew. 26. Luc. 22. 1 Cor. 11
is there. Now he brings forth four lies, the first, that we do say, that
good me^ do eat, and drink christ's body and blood only, when they receive
the sacrament, fol. 47.
for we say not so, but that they the^ only do eat christ's body and drink
his blood corporally, which they eat spiritually at al other seasons. The
second lie is, that we do say, that christ has his oune form in the sacrament
for we do say, that he is in the sacrament in form of bread and wine, and not
of flesh and blood. The third lie is, that we do affirm, that the fathers and
prophets of the old testament did not eat the body of christ and drink his
blood, where we say they did it not corporally (as we now do) but only
spiritually through faith, and virtuous lyuinge. The fourth lie is, that we do
say, that christ is made every day of bread, and wine, for we do say, that he
was never made touching his godhead, and but only ones in his mothers womb,
concerning his manhod and body, and yet bread and wine are daily at mass
turned in to that same his body and blood, that never was made but ones only.
The fyfth lie is this, that fo. 47 pa. 2
we do say, that the mass is a sacrifice satisfactorie for sin, by the
devotion of the priest, and not by the thing, that is offered, which we never
taught, but only that it is a sacrifice for sin, in that that christ's very
body and blood, which he ones offered upon the cross for our sins, as a
full and sufficient satisfaction for the sins of the whole world, are theryn
offered in sacrifice for our sins, and thereby christ's death and bloody
sacrifice is applied unto us, for to obtain this effect, and benefit.
Wherefore my lord might well have been ashamed so falsely to report of us, as he
here does, if he had not been al past shame. Who denies, my lord, that christ
is fo. 48. 49.
ascended out of this world in to heaven, and that he sits there at the
right hand of his father, and shall do until the worlds end, as our common
creed has, the scriptures, and the doctors also do teach? But what then? Does
any of these. iij. say, that he is only in heaven and not in the sacrament
also, or that he so went hence then that he tarryed not still also here with us
inuisiblye in the saerament, as ye do say and defend? No, not one of them
utterly, and therefore al your traueile, my lord, is clean lost, which ye have
here spent in rehearsinge so many of the doctors, of which not one says, as
ye do mayntene, that Christ is not still here bodyly. When origin and other the
doctors say christ is bodily gone hence, and not here present with us, they
mean that he is not here in his oune form visiblye, for so he departed out of
this world at his ascension. Augustinus ad darda^u^. Epist. 57
Saint Austen meant that christ's body was not in all places at ones, as his
godhead was, and that it was then, and is now but in one place visibly,
naturally, and by circunscription of it, for so it is now only in heaven, which
proves not, that it is not in the sacrament above nature, inuysibly, and
without circunscription of it and sacramentally not compased, not measured
theryn, as it is in heaven only. This is the anuswere bryefely unto all the
doctors here alleged against us It is very false, that ye do say, that as
these words (This is my body) do fo. 57. 58.
lie, there can be gathered of them none other sense, but that bread is
christ's body, and that christ's body is bread, for there can no such thing
be gathered of those words, but only that christ gave his disciples his very
body, to eat, in to which he had turned the bread, when he spoke those
words. Why the scripture, and the doctors do call, christ's body bread, is
sufficiently declared at the beginning of this confutation, and therefore I say
now in very few words, that the doctors, which ye, my lord, allege here
for you, prove not your purpose, A brief anusweare to all the doctors alleged
of the bishop in his book.
but only, that christ called his body bread, because he turned the bread in
to it, it seems and appears still to be bread, it has the quantite, and
qualites of bread, and because it is the food of the soul, as corporal meat is
of the body. Not one of al these doctors says, as ye do, my lord, that
there is only bread in the sacrament, and not christ's body, but they al say
in other of their works, that it is there, as by gods grace I will declare at
large shortly in an other book of latin, that every man may easily see, how
A book of the doctors sentences.
ye mystake, and ill understand their sentences for your purpose. Christ meant
not in Ihon the eight chaptre, that the Jews should not eat his very natural
body corporally Io, 6 fo. 60. lib. 3.
in the sacrament, (as ye say falsely) but that they should not eat it
carnally, as other common meats are wount to be eaten, that they should teere
it with there teth, chawe it, digest it, and turn it in to the nourysshement
of their bodies, (as S. Austen expounds it) But after an In psalm. 98
other spiritual manner without breakyng, consuming, and devouring of it for else
he could not have ascended up in to heaven alive wholly, and safly, Joan. 6.
as he did. This meant christ in sho^, Joan. 8. The bishop fo. 81. 82. lib. 3.
origenes, chrysostom, and Austen, which ye do allege. Ye recyte Tertulia^ for
you, but he is against you plainly, for he says that christ made the bread
his body, when he said. This is Lib. 1. and 4. contra Macionem.
my body, He said it is a figure, and a representation of christ's body, but
not (as ye do) that it is only a figure of it and not his body, for he
says, that he made the bread his body. The outward forms of bread and wine
are signs, and figures of christ's body, and blood, covered under them. Also
the oblation and sacrifice made at mass, ^ow the sacramentis a figure of
christ's body.
and the receiving of the sacrament is a sign and commemoration of christ's
body and blood in respect that they were offered upon the cross, and that
meant christ, when he said do ye Luc. 22. 1. cor. 11.
this in remembrance of me Thirdly the sacrament is a figure of christ's
mystical body the church, paul says We be al one body, that eat of one 1.
cor 10.
bread. S. Cyprian, whom ye allege is fully against you (as it appears
before in this book) although he say, that christ's blood is showed by the
wine, meaning that wine must neaades be put in to the chalice at mass to be
consecrated, and not water only (as some priests then used to do) for Lib. 2.
epi. 3
by the wine put in to the chalice, christ's blood, which ran out of his side
perced with a spear at the time of his Alexander primus epi. prima.
death, is represented, and showed, and therefore he says even in that same
epistle, that our sacrifice must aunsweare, and be like to christ's passion,
in the time of the which both blood and water ran out of his side. This is
nothing against the presence of christ's blood in the sacrament, nor it
proves not that wine remains still after the consecration, but only that wine
must be put in to the chalice to be consecrated with water. This only cyprian
went about to prove at that time, and there. Wherefore this place of Cyprian
makes nothing for your purpose, and as much does that, Which ye bring for yo
we out of the same doctor, which says that christ gave bread and De vnctio^e
^^^smatis. The bishop fo 63.
wine to his apostles, because he gave them his body and blood under the
forms of bread and wine, and not in the forms of flesh and blood, for after
such sort and form he gave his body to be wounded with the hands of
soldiers. Also he calls the forms of bread and wine figures of christ's
body and blood, because they signified and represented them, not absent, but
presently hid under them ynuisiblye. Again Cyprian says in that sermon,
Christ gave unto priests a cup of his blood full of abound ance of an
infinite fulness, both to be reserved, and also to be given, which ye my lord
wynke at. Finally, he makes there plain mention of the consecratynge of both
oil, and cream upon mandy thursday, for the anoyntynge of kings and
priests, when they Oil and cream.
are made, and of children, in their co^firmatio^, and says that thruoghe the
benefit of that anoyntinge wisdom and understanding are given to us of
Esaiae. 11.
god, and like wise the gift of counsel, of strength, kunnyng, pity and fear
are powered by gods inspiration in to Marks. reader.
us. And also that we, being anointed with this oil, do fight with il
spirits, and can not be infected with unclean savors. Why do ye not, my
lord, observe these lessons? Will ye take that only, that a little seameth to
make for your purpose, and refuse all the rest, which makes plainly, and fully
against your domges, and doctrine? Why also do ye labor so much in allegynge
the authors, which said that bread and wine remained still in the sacrament
because there was bread and wine before the consecration, and because they
seame yet to be there still, when none of al those doctors say (as ye do) that
there is only bread, and wine, and not christ's body, and blood, but the
clean contrary to it? S. Chrysostom, who ye allege upon the psalm, meant In
Psalm. 22
that christ would show unto us bread, and wine, that is to say, his body
and blood in to which, bread and wine was turned, and which appeared still
bread, and wine, and that for a similitude of his body and blood, in their
own propre forms offered upon the cross, for by the celebration of the holy
sacrament (as Gelasius says) there is an image and a similitude made of
christ's body crucified, and of his blood shead forth of that body for our
redemption S. Hieroms words do make Hierom i^ Matthew. 2^
nothing for your doctrine, when he says that christ took bread, that
conforteth man's heart, that he might represent thereby his very body and blood.
For first he says not (as ye do) that he gave only bread, nor yet bread unto
his apostles, and that he gave the^ not his very body and blood, but that he
took bread to be consecrated, and turned it in to his body, and that by the
distributinge and receauinge of it he might represent his body, and blood, in
that they were put to death and crucyfied for us, which thing he bade his
apostles, and by them al other priests to do, whem he said. Do ye this Luc.
22. 1. Cor. 11.
for remembrance of me. Again, saint Hierom used this word (Representare to
represent) for to give presently and out of hand, as diverse authors
R^presentare Hieroni, Matthe^ 26
do use it. For Cicero said. But also I would gladly offer my body to suffer
death, si representari morte mea libertas ciuitatis potest, id est, dari nu^c,
and stati^, Philippica 2
if by my death the liberte of the city might be even now by and by given.
Also columella says. Itaque non aegre Libr 11.
consequetur, si semper se representauerit, id est, se presentem ostenderit,
inquit Budeus, neque discesserit Cyprianus Representare quid sit Cypriano.
in oratione^ dominicam says. We do desire the kyndom of god to be
represented unto us, that is to say, to be given unto us presently. Again,
there he has thus. Christ also himself, brethren, may be understood the
kyndom of god, whom we daily desire to come, whose coming we desire sone to
be represented to us, that is to say, openly, and presently to be showed unto
us. By these authorites it is manifest, good reader, that hierom is against my
lord very much in this place. S. Ambrose makes not for your purpose, Lib. de
i^^, qui mysteri is initia^tur cap. vlt.
when he says that christ's body and blood are signified after the
co^secratio^, for as he says not that they are only signified, and not
present there fo. 63.
(as ye defend) even so he mente that by the outward forms of bread, and wine
christ's body and blood were signified to bo hid secretly under them, and
that the death of him in his body and blood offeringe upon August. ser. 28 in
Luca^.
the cross, was signified by the administration of the sacrament. Also yt is
true that he says, that we do receive Lib 4. ca. 4. De sacrame^tis.
the sacrament for a similitude of christ's flesh and blood, but he does Lib 4.
ca. 4 De sacrame^tis.
declare his meaning with these words. Wine and water are put in to the
chalice, but blood is made by the consecration of the heavenly word. But thou
do perauenture say, I see not the kind or form of blood, but a similitude
is there, for as thowe have received (in baptism) a similitude of death, even
so thowe drinkest also a similitude of precious blood, that there should be no
abhorringe or a lothinge of blood, appeari^ge as blood. What can be more
plainly spoken to declare that he meant that the very blood of christ is made by
the consecration of wine ynto it, and yet we receive it not in form of blood,
but in a similitude and shape of it the form of wine, that is like to blood in
color, least we should abhor to drink it, if it did appear unto our eyes
very blood? Why read ye not this my lord, that ye had not erred in the
alleaginge of this authorite of s. Ambrose? you followed, and trusted to much
peter Martyrs allegation Peter Martyr falsely alleges the^ doctor
which recites almost al authors falsely, and untruly, as I will, by gods
grace, declare in my book made against him. Saint Ambrose is against you, whom
ye allege for you, saying that the priest prays thus at mass. lib. 4. cap.
^ de sacrame^tis.
Make unto us this oblation to be acceptable, which is a figure of the body,
and blood of christ. For he calls here the mass a sacrifice, and says that
the priest makes therein sacrifice to god for him self, and other, which ye
deny utterly. Again he says not, that it is only a figure (as ye defend it
to be), but that it is a figure of christ's body and blood in that respect,
that they were crucified, for as much as christ's death is in the sacrament
represented, and figured. Ye do now corrupt and falsely Ambrofius in. 1. cor.
11.
allege S. Ambrose, and make of his true sainge a false sentence. For this ye
make him say. In eatinge, and drinking the bread, and wine, we do signify the
flesh and blood, that were offered for us, where in deed these are his words
upon this text of S. Paul, ye shall show forth our lords death until he come.
For because ye are (says he) made free by our lords death, we remembringe
that thing, in eatinge, and drinkinge fleash and blood, which were offered for
us, do signify, etc.

Loo, my lord, S. Ambrose says we do eat and drink fleash and blood, and ye
make him say, that we do eat and drink bread and wine. Are ye not ashamed so
manifestly to lie upon the authors? Also saint Ambrose says well (though ye
il understand his words) that we do receive the mystical cup of blood for
tuition of our body and soul, in a signification or a figure, not of christ's
body (as ye would make us believe) but of that that the new testament was
confirmed by christ's blood, and that blood is a wytnes of christ's benifite,
which came by his blood sheadynge unto us. Therefore ye do il conclude, of these
authorites of the doctors that christ's body and Fol. 64.
blood are not really in the holy sacrament, but that bread and wine are only
signs, figures, similitudes, and representations of them, as ye do like wise
Augustinus Epist. 23.
il understand saint Austen wrytinge to Bonifacius. For he meant that christ was
not dailye offered in the mass by death, and sufferinge of his passion again,
for so he was never but ones offered, and yet he is daily offered in the
sacrament for the people atmasse and his passion represented unto us theryn.
For we do use to say that christ suffered his passion upon this day (good
friday) and that day he arose again, when the days of his passion, and
resurrection are passed many hundred years before, and a memory, or a
representation only of those two things is celebrated, and made upon such
days And so is the sacrament a sign and a similitude of christ's body in
sufferinge death and passion and is called in a manner his body, as the outward
forms and kinds of bread and wine are sacraments, and signs of christ's
body and blood, being some time called christ's body and blood, as they may
right well in a certain manner of speakinge (as Saint Austen witnesses there),
because that some time things signified are called by the names of their
signs, and contrarily also.

This we see plainlye enough that saint Austen is not upon my lords side, but
against him utterly, when he says, that christ is dailye offered in sacrifice
at mass for the people, which, my lord, denies utterly, and yet says that
saint Austen is of his The bishop. fo. 62. page 2. Contra adamantum. cap. 12.
mind and belief therein To be short when Saint Austen, or any other docter
affirms that the sacrament is a figure, or a sign, they never say that
bakers bread, or material bread, and wine of the grape are only in the
sacrament as signs of christ's body and The sign of christ's body how hit is
to be understand
blood only absent, but they mean (as I said a fore) that the outward forms
and kinds of bread and wine are signs of them there presently covered under
neath them. And also that the sacrament is a sign of christ's mystical body
the church, and of his passion a representation and figure.

As for Theodoretus, whom he alleges again, is anusweared before
sufficiently. Your fyfte note, my lord, fo. 66. pa. ^
which ye gather out of Theodoretus, that nothing ought to be affirmed for a
certain truth in religion, which is not spoken of in holy scripture, is a very
damnable note, and the mother of many abamynable heresies, as I have declared
largely in my book of traditions, and also briefly before in this book. And
to touch the same matter vnwritte^ verytees.
a little again, is the baptism of children set out in scripture? Confessed
not origin and saint Auste^ the clean contrary? Says not Saint Austen that
it is a tradition unwritten Origenes lib. 6. in. Romanos ca. 6
in scripture, that baptism ministered of an heretic, or a schismatike is
sufficient and good? In the scripture is no mention made that the father of
heaven is vngotten, that there are three persons, that christ is
consuhstantialis patri, that our lady was a continual vyrgen, that the souday
ought to be kept holy, and many such other certain truethes in christ's religion
are not written in scripture. What then, my lord? Is he arrogant and
presumptuous, that affirms them for certain verites in religion? You say
untruly that papists do make and unmake articles of our faith at their
pleasure, for they never made article of the faith, nor unmade, but heretics
has so done many times. Unto this lie, ye add two moo, This lie is often
repeted of him.
one that we do say that christ's body is naturally and sensibly in the
bread, when we say bread is not there, and that christ's body is there
unnaturally, against nature, and vnsensiblye. Fol. 71
The second lie is, that priests make of Christ a new sacrifice for sin,
for it is no new sacrifice, but the self same in the thing offered, Homi. 2.
in. 2 ad Timot.
that (as Saint Chrysostom says) Christ ones offered himself upon the
cross, and which he offered at his last soupper, and commanded al priests
to offer like wise, as it shall be declared here after, by gods grace. Now ye
rehearse many figurative speeches used in the scripture to prove that christ
spoke like these words. This is my body, by a Fo. 72. 73
figure, which al proves it not, except ye will say, that Christ spoke
nothing without a figure, which, I am sure, ye will not say. Moreover, ye
gather Fo. 76.
three things out of s. Cleme^tes epistle against the catholics belefe. The
first Epist. 2
is that bread is called our lords body, which is very false, for there is no
mention at al of any bread, but of our lords body, and he says that that
holy portion of his body should not be myxed with the meat, that is dygested
by the bealy, or stomach, and auoyed out at the foundament, declaringe plainly
thereby that it is not material bread, for then it should be also digested in
the stomach and cast out at the foundament, as other meats be. Wherefore my
lord was heryn ouerseene. The second thing that ye note of S. Clementes words
is that the bread (as ye call it falsely) ought not to be reserved, when he
has the clean contrary, saying in the same words, that ye allege here, for
this he writes in effect. The priests, deacons and ministers ought with fear
and tremblinge keep the leauinges of the broken peaces of our lords body,
that no corruption be found in the holy place, least by negligence great
ynyurie be done to the portion of the lords body. My lord wynked at these
words, and took those only that seamed to make with him and yet did not, for
S. Clement willed only that none of the hoostes or portions of them, which
were consecrated for the lay people, should be reserved, but spent and
received of the clearkes Another the third note, that ye gather of S. Cleme^tes
words, is true, which is that priests ought not to receive the sacrament
alone, but the people must neades communicate with them. For he says only
that the layte did then receive the sacrament with the priests, as they ever
might do, if they would themselfes, but that their fact makes no necessary
law for us as diverse men lived in common, and had nothing propre in the
apostles time and yet that makes no law to enforce us so to live. Moreover,
ye affirm that christ's sacrifice made upon the cross was that oblation, of
which Cyprian speaks unto cecilius, saying that it was figured before it was
done The bishop fo. 78
by the bread and wine, which Melchizedech gave unto Abraham, in which sayng ye
make two faults, the one is that Melchizedech gave bread and wine Lib. 2.
epi. 3
unto Abraham, and did not offer the^ to god, that the other the sacrifice of
christ done at his last soupper, and the sacrifice Genesis 14.
of the mass was not signified and figured by Melchisedecs deed than* which
two errors saint Cyprian confuteth sufficiently, saying thus in that same
epistle, after he had alleged the words of the Genesis written of
Melchizedech for ever. Which order (says he) certainly is this, coming of
that sacrifice that Melchizedech was the priest of the high god, and that he
offered bread and wine. For Lib. 2 epi. 3. Psalm. 109.
who is rather a priest of the high god than our lord jesus christ, which
offered a sacrifice unto god the father? and he offered the self same
sacrifice, that Melchisedech had offered, that is, bread and wine, forsooth his
body and blood. Here we may plainly see, that ye, my lord, erred both in
saying that Melchisedech gave bread and wine unto Abraham, for Cyprian says,
as the text of the Genesis also has, that he offered them in sacrifice to
god, and and also in saying that Melchisedechs doing then figured not christ's
sacrifice made at his mandy but only that Gene. 14.
which was done ones upon the cross for it signified and figured his sacrifice
made at his mandye, as saint Cyprian affirms by and by in that same epistle,
thus writing. There went before by Melchizedech an image of a sacrifice
ordained in bread and wine. Which thing our lord perfectly doing, and
fulfillynge, has offered bread, and a chalice mixed with wine, and he, that is
the fulness has fulfilled the truth of the image fygured before. Hitherto
Cyprian. Where he says also that christ commanded priests to offer
sacrifice at mass in a remembrance of his death, sayi^ge, do ye this in my
remembrance. If a man will The sacrifice the holy mass.
but only look upon and consider what Cyprian went about to prove, and persuade
in that epistle, he shall find anon, that my lord erred manifestly, when he
said, that Melchisedechs oblation Lucae. 22. ^. Cor. 2.
figured only christ's sacrifice made upon the cross, for Cyprians purpose and
intent there was to prove by many figures of the old testament, that wine ought
to be put in to the Mark.
chalice at mass to be offered in sacrifice, god, as Melchisedech had done
before in a figure, and as chtist fulfillinge and accomplysshyng perfitely that
figure had done also at his mandye. Wherefore ye ought, my lord, to recante this
plain error, and to use that law upon your self justly, which ye have
used against many other me^ unjustly. Christ offered sacrifice at his last
souppe^
Ye peruerte also these words of Chrysostom. When you come to these mysteries,
do not think, that ye receive De eucharistia io enceniis.
by a man the body of god. Upon these words my lord makes this argument.
Than if we receive not the body of christ at the hands of man, ergo the body
of christ is not reallye corporalli, and naturally in the sacrament, and so
given to us by the priest. What blyndnes is this? Chrysostom The bishop fo. 93.
byddeth men not think that they receive christ's body of a man the prieest,
meaning that they received yt not of him pri^cipally, but so of christ The
confutation.
himself, and that he said to stere the^ unto greater devotion in receiving of
christ's blessed body, and my lord gathers thereof a pure negation, that we
receive not christ's body at the hands of ma. Is this a worthy person to be
believed in his doctrine, that thus reasons without reason? Fourthermore my
lord does make answer unto Theophilus bishop of Alexandria, which writes
thus upon Marks gospel, Theophilus
christ geuinge thanks did break the bread (which also we do) adding
thereunto prayer. And gave unto the^ saying. Take, this is my body. This that
I do now give, and that, which ye do now take. For the bread is not only a
figure of christ's body, but it is changed in to the very body of christ
For christ says. The bread which I will give you is my flesh. Nevertheless
Joan. 8.
the flesh of christ is not seen for our weakness, but bread and wine are
familiar unto us. And surely if we should vysibly see flesh and blood, we
could not abide it. And therefore our lord, bearing with our weekenes does
reteyne and keep the form and apparaunce of bread and wine, but he turns
the bread and wine in to the The bishop fo. 95. pa. 2
very flesh and blood of christ. These are the very words of Theophilus, In
catenaaurea in Marcum.
although my lord say, that they are not his words, but one Theophilactus
and makes thereof no proof at al. Saint Thomas a great clearke, and a holy
father and diverse other blessed men many years before my lord was borne said
that he wrote those words, and my lord of canterburye says nay, wether party
will a wise man believe? I ask of my lord, why may not these words be
Theophilus bishop of Alexandria, as the first author of them, and yet the
same to be after written our of him by Theophilactus, as well as Theophilactus
followed saint Chrysostom, and used many sentences of his in his commentaries?
Which sentences no man can deny but they are chrysostoms. For Chrysostom and
Theophilactus has this sentence upon paul. The thing, which is in the
chalice, is that that has flowed out of the side, and we Homi. 24 in 1. Cor.
10.
are partakers of yt. May a man gather now of that that Theophilactus writes
those words following Chrysosto^ that the same sentence was not written by
Chrysostom? Why then says my lord that Theophilus wrote not the sentence
above recited upon S: Mark, but it was only written after his time of
Theophilactus? Might not Theophilus first write it, and Teophilactus borowe it
of him, as Theophilactus did many sayings of Chrysostom? But to-go nearer the
matter, it apearethe plainlye by many things, that those words were not
written by Theophilactus upon Mark, for first Theophilactus has not these
words (And he gave it unto then saying) nor these words (This that I do now
give) nor this word (only) for this he Theophila.
writes there, as the Greake letter has When he had blessed it, that is to
say geuinge thanks, he break the bread, which thing we do also, addinge
prayer. This is my body, this, I say, that ye do receive. For the bread is not
a figure Note this lege Grace.
and a certain exemplar of our lords body, but it is chaunded in to the Joan.
6.
self same body of christ. For our lord says, the bread, which I will give
is my flesh. He said not it is a figure of my flesh, but it is my flesh. And
thou say, how is not flesh seen? O man, this is done for our weakness.
For because bread, and wine are of those things, with which we have been
accustomed, we do not abhor them, but we seeing blood, and flesh set forth,
would not abide it, but abhor it clean Wherefore the mercyful god, bearinge
with our infirmite, does reteyne still the form of bread and wine, but he
turns them i^ to the virtue of flesh and blood. Hitherto Theophilactus, by
whose words we see both that he wrote not the other sentence, which is before
rehearsed of my lord, because these his words varye much from those other of
theophilus, and also that theophilactus is utterly against my lords doctrine
in this matter. Wherefore we father The bishop fol. 95.
not wrong that sainge upon theophilus, as my lord says that we do.

Again, my lord says untruly that we do falsify this authors words, and
meaning. For as Teophilus has the same words before in his name recited even
so Theophilactus has, I deny not, these words, God condesce^dinge unto our
i^firmite reserueth the kind of bread and wine, but he turns them in to the
virtue of
flesh and blood. Which words my lord thinks does declare plainly, that he
meant, that bread and wine remain still in their substance, and are turned only
in to the virtue of christ's flesh and blood, for as much as, that they, which
do worthilye receive the^, receive thereby the virtue of christ's body and blood
spiritualy. Which exposition is utterly against his meaning, for he says
evide^tly that the bread is not a figure of our lords body, but that it is
turned in to the very natural body of christ. For says he not that there is
flesh and blood in the sacrament, but they appear Mark.
not there to our eyes, and sight, but the forms only of the^, least we
should abhor the receaui^ge of the^? Whould he have so said, if he had
believed that only bread and wine were present in the Theophilactus.
sacrament? Again he does upon Matthe we declare his mind more plai^lye
Matthew. 2^.
sayingt thus. Christ sayi^ge. This is my body, shows that the bread, which
is hallowed upon the altar, is our lords Aulters.
body it self, and not a figure aunsweri^ge to it For he said not, this is a
figure but this is my body For it is transformed by an operation unspeakable
yea althoug it seame bread, because we be weak, and do abhor to eat raw
flesh, chyefely the flesh of a man, and for that cause it appears to be
bread, but it is flesh in deed. Again upon Ihons gospel In cap. 6. Ioannis.
he is as plain as may be against my lords doctrine, when he says thus. But
mark that the bread, which is eaten of us in the sacrament, is not only a
figure of our lords flesh, but our lords flesh itself. For christ said
not, Joan. 6.
the bread which I will give, is a figure of my flesh, but my flesh. For that
bread is transformed with secret words in to our lords flesh, through the
mystical blessinge, and coming of the holy ghost unto it. Now what can my
lord say to this? Has he here any startinge hole, or evasion, but he must
neades grant his error, and recante it? S Hierom writes thus. There is as
Hierom in ^iti. cap. 1.
great difference between the loaves of show bread, and the body of christ as
is between a shadow of a body, and the body itself, and as there is between
an image, and the thing itself, and between an example of things to come,
and the things, that be prefigurated by them. Unto this authorite my lord
makes this sclender anusweare. He meant, that the show bread of the The
bishop fo. 86. pa. 2.
law, was but a dark shadow of christ to come, but the sacrament of christ's
body is a clear testimonye that christ is already come, and that he has
performed that, which was promised, and does presently conforte, and feed us,
spirituallie with his precious body and blood. Is not this a shameful
wreastinge, of this sentence? S Hierom allegeth 1. Regu^. ^^.
there that Abymelech would not give to david and his compaynye the show bread
to eat, when they were almost famyshed through want of meat, until he had
perceived, that they had forborne the co^payni^ge with their wyfes two days
space before, and by that fact he exhorts men to come with a pure conscience
unto the receauinge of the holy sacrament, because there is as much difference
between Mark.
christ's body therein received, and those show loaves, as is between the
shadow of a body and the body, between an image and the truth pictured by
it, and as there is between the examples of things to come, and the things
them selfs, that were figured by those examples, declari^ge manifestly, that
that christ's body, which is received and eaten in the sacrament, is in
co^paryson to the sheue loaves, which were a shadow, the very body shadowed by
the^, the truth expressed by that image, and the very thing itself figured
by that example. How can this be true, if there be but material bakers bread
eaten in the sacrament, as a bare sign, and a figure of christ's body, Note.
abse^t thence? Is a figure the body shadowed, the truth set fourth by an
image, and the very thing itself figured by an example? What man is so blind,
thus to say? Again S. Hierom even there upon that same epistle says, that
the Hierony. in cap* 1. ad Titum.
priests do offer daily for their sins and the peoples also, pure
sacrifices, and that the priest makes christ's body at mass. This can not be
understand of pure material bread, and therefore my lord must look better upon
his books and the^ he shall see the truth in this matter, and cease thus
falsely to gloss the doctors sainges. Now he labors, to soil S Damascenes
words, which are these, that follow, but my lord did not rehearse them,
because they should have marred al his matter. Do thowe Damascen. lib. 4.
ca. 14
now ask of me, how bread is made christ's body, and wine and water his
bloudde? I anusweare unto the that the holy ghost works these things above
man's speech, and understanding, but the bread, and wine are turned. The body
is joined unto the deite, which body is of the vyrgen, not that the body taken
of the vyrgen comes down from heaven, but that the bread itself, and wine
are changed in to the body, Christ's body is in the sacrament, and in heaven
both at ones.
and blood of god. The bread, wine, and water through invocation, and the
coming of the holy ghost unto them, are above nature changed in to christ's
body, and blood, and they are not two bodies, but one and the same body. The
bread and wine be Mark reader and believe.
not a figure of christ's body and blood. For god forbid that, but it is his
body itself joined unto the godhead, our lord himself saying. This is my
body, not a figure of the body, but the body, not a figure of the blood, but
the Matthew. 26.
blood. This S Damascene wrote. Now my lord might have been ashamed to goo
about to wreaste, and wryth these so manifest words of this holy and great
clearke to any other sense, if he had had any shame at al, but let us examyne
his aunsweare unto him. In primis he says. He was a young new author in
respect of those, which we have brought in for our party. Sir ye have yet
brought in none for The bishop ^o. 37. pa. 1.
your party, that says that christ's The confutation.
body is not really in the sacrament, or that there remains still only
bakers bread, as a figure of christ's body, as ye do teach, but this godly
father says, that christ's body is present theri^ and that the bread is
turned in to it, and that it is not nou a figure, Ye can never bring any
catholic writer of any age, that writteth so plainly for you, as this does for
us. Again, for his age, S. Damascenes age.
he was after many learned men's minds above M. c years past, but at the
least, I am certain, that he was almost eight hundred years sense, which is
nyghe ccc years before the father of your doctrine berengarius, was borne.
Berengarius was the father of this bishops doctrine.
Wherefore this is an answer sufficient unto the objection of Damascenes age
Moreover ye say, my lord, that he varieth from all the old authors, when he
denies, that the bread is a figure of christ's body, for they called it a
figure. Ye say not truly, for he agrees well with them therein, for they call
not the material bread a figure of christ's body only absent in heaven (as ye
do) which How the sacrament is a figure. Aug. sermon. 28. in Lu^a^
Damascene also denies, but many of them say the sacrament is a figure,
because the outward forms of bread and wine are figures of christ's body and
blood hyd under them, and because the oblation, ministratio^ and receauinge of
them is a figure of christ's passion and bloody sacrifice, and thirdly, because
the sacrament is a figure of christ's mystical body the church, which
Damascene denies not, and therefore he agrees right well with the fathers in
that point, and so this startinge hole is stopped, that ye can not crepe out at
him, my lord. S. Damascene says also in deed (as ye say here) my lord, that
the thing, There is no material bread in the sacrament
which is in the sacrament co^sumeth not, nor auoydeth not downward from man,
in which saying, as he declares plainly that he meant not (as ye say he did)
that material bread remains still in the sacrament, for then yt must neades
consume, and auoyed douneward, as al other bread does, even so he says not
therein against either orige^ or else Austen, for another of them says that the
consecrated bread consumes, and auoydeth dounewarde, but saint Austen has the
contrary sayin Ser 23. de verbis domini secu^dum Luca^.
ge. It is called bread of the priest in the mass after the co^secratio^, when
he recyteth the paternoster, in which he prays to god to give us our daily
bread but not that bread, which goes in to the body, but that which bears
up the substance of our soul so he denies here manifestly that there is any
such bread after the consecration in the holy sacrament as goes in to the
Saint Auste^ says there is no material bread in the sacrament.
sustynaunce and nouryshement of man's body. Wherefore he says not (as my lord
says) that there is material bread in the sacrament, which consumes in
eatinge of it, and goes douneward fro man. Now my lord runnyth to an other
evasion, and says that this holy Damascene was one of the bishop of romes
chyefe proctours The bishop fo. ^7. pa. 2
against the emperors to set abroad al idolatry by his own hand writing and
therefore if he lost his hand (as they say he did) he lost yt by gods most
righteous iud^ement, etc What means my lord here this falsely to diffame that
holy saint, and noble clearke, Images.
by whom god wrought many great and notable miracles (as it appears plainlye
in his life) and against whom no man, that was a good christen man, did ever
write for any error? In deed he wrote against leo the emperor for his
destroynge of images, and that he did full clearkely, and godly, as I have
declared, and proved in my book of images. It is true that he lost his hand for
the defense of images, but not (as the bishop says) by the just judgment of
god but by the cruel and malicious forgynge of his letters by that emperor
against him to the prince of the cite Damascus, by which letters that noughtie
and cursed emperor certified that prince that saint Damascene would have
betrayed that cite to him and therefore that prince commanded his hand to be
stricken of, but it was anon after restored unto him again, and mad hole, when
he prayed before an image of our lady, as it appears both in his life
written by a patriarche of Graecia long sense, and also Mark.
in the seventh general council, for theri^ was that miracle reharsed before mo
them ccc. bysshoppes above seven hundred years passed, and therefore my lord
erred, when he wrote that this my racle was feigned. Yet my lord seaketh moo
awayes to avoid this authorite of S. Damascene, but al in vain, for thus he
writes, after much bablyng. The bread, and wine remain still, and are changed
only sacramentally, and The bishop fo. 99. lib. 3.
are made figures, not naked, for that Damascene denies, but so pythy and
effectuous, that who so ever worthily eats them, eats spirituallie
christ's flesh, and blood, and has by that ever lasting life. Is not this a
manifest* The confutation.
auillynge to auoyed the truth? S Damascene says, that christ made the bread
his body, and the wine and water his blood, that the holy ghost Mark this
turns the bread in to christ's body, and the wine and water in to his
blood, that the bread, and wine are changed above nature in to christ's body
and blood, and that they are not two bodies, but one and the same body that
still abides in heaven, and finallye, that bread and wine are not figures of
christ's body and blood, but his own body, unto which the godhead is joined,
and yet this man was not ashamed to say, that he mente that bread and wine
remain still in the sacrament, and that they are not turned by their substance
in to christ's body and blood, which be not in the sacrament but only bread
and wine, as he says. What is this, if it be not a wounderful blyndnes, and a
malicious subuertinge of this doctors godly, and true doctrine least he should
seame to be against their erroneous, and wicked doctrine, as he is plainly? He
brings many other fond euasio^s, which be so manifestly against this
doctors plain words, that it were but a lost labor to confute them, because
every man may sone see that they are not to the purpose, if he do but ones
compare them with saint Damascens words. And as touching the worshippinge of
the holy sacrament, we do worship therein christ very god and man present
really, and not the outward and visible forms and kinds of bread and wine,
which thing S. Damascen meant. Truth it is, that Damascene says not
expressly, that there remains no bread, nor wine, but yet the very self
same thing he affirms, when he says, that they are turned and changed in
to christ's body and blood, which he took of his blessed mother, and unto
which the The bishop fo. 99. pa. 2
god head is joined in one parsone, and christ's soul is also coupled there
with them, and therefore my lord said untruly, that if we deny bread and wine
to be there still, we must also by force Note this.
deny, that there is either christ's diuynitee or his soul. For may not these
two be joined unto christ's body and blood in the sacrament, as they be in
heaven, if neither bread, nor wine be therein? Will he have christ's soul, and
godhead to be in the bread, and wine, or else they ca^ not be in the sacrament?
What ignorance is this? Why says he that we deuyde christ? Do they divide
him, that say he his both god, and man, and that his very body, blood soul,
and godhead are really in the blessed sacrament of the altar altogether
ioynctly? Further more it is very false, that he leyeth unto our charges, that
we separate christ's body from his members in the sacrament, for we do say,
that it is there with all his members perfectely, and wholly, but how Fo. 90.
Lib. de duabus in christo, voluntatibus.
we define not, nor can do. Damascene says well, that the distinction of
me^bres does pertayne so unto the nature of man's body, that where there is no
such distinction, there is no perfect ma^s body, but that is very true of
every natural body of man, being in his natural estate and condition, and in
his oune form, and shape, after which sort christ is not in this sacrament,
and therefore Damascene is not against our doctrine, and belief in this matter,
but altogether with it. Thus is now made a full confutation of al my lords
objections against Transubstantiation, and the real presence of christ's very
natural body and blood in the blessed sacrament of the altar. Now I make an
end of this third book, and begin the fourth, in which I will confute like
wise his objections made against our doctrine, which is that sinners do eat
christ's very natural body and drink his blood, although to their damnation,
as saint Paul witnesses plainly. 1. Cor. 11.


Thus ends the confutation of my lords third book, and follows the
co^futation of his fourth book. First he The bishop. fo. 90. page 2.
brings forth of Saint Ihons gospel these words, to prove that sinners eat
not christ's very body with their mouths, nor drink his blood in the
sacrament, but only bread and wine. I am the lively bread, that came down
Joan. 6.
from heaven. If any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever, etc. The
confutation.


Do ye not, my lord, remember, that diverse times before in your book, ye
said that christ's words written in Ihon the syxt chapter did nothing
pertayne to the sacrament, but only unto a spiritual eating of christ's body
by faith? Why then bring Mark.
ye now forth his words to prove that il and ungodly men eat not christ's
body in receauynge the sacrament? But yet it is very true that Joan. ^.
Christ spoke those words of the sacrament, and of the eatinge of his oune
body in the same with our mouths meaning that whosoever eats his body,
and drinks his blood worthily with a perfect faith, and a clean conscience,
and not only with his mouth bodilye, shall live for ever there by, and have
everlasting life, and therefore Saint paul declaringe this doctrine of christ
written by Ihon, exhorts every man to try and examyne 1 Cor. 1^*
himself, and his conscience well before he receive this holy sacrament that he
receive it not to his damnation. Why looked ye not, my lord, upon that text of
paul, that ye might have learned of him, the manner of eatinge christ's body,
which is required necessarily, that we should live for ever, through
receauinge of it in the sacrament? Are ye so ignorant in the scriptures, that
ye know not, that there are very many such speeches and sentences in them,
which are not generally and absolutely true, but with certain Marc. 16.
additions and conditions? For christ said, whosoever shall believe, and be
baptized, shall be saved, and yet many Matthew. 7.
thousands do believe, and are baptized also, that shall be damned, of the
nombre of which they are, that shall say at domes day, lord, lord, have we not
cast out deuelles in thy name, prophised also, and wrought many miracles in thy
name? To whom christ shall say, I know ye not, get ye hence from me, ye
wourkers of iniquitee.

Wherefore this sentence, whosoever Mar. vlt.
shall believe, and be christened, shall be saved, has this condition joined unto
yt, if he continue in his faith and Matthew. 2^
in the grace of god and pureness of soul received in baptism, as christ says
himself by these words, whosoever shall persevere until the end, shall be
saved. Forthermore says not christ every man that asks receaueth? Matthew. 7
Lucae* 11.


What then, my lord? May we thereof gather, I pray you, that the mother of the
sons of Zebudaei did not ask Matthew. 2^
of christ that one of her sons might sit upon his right hand, and the
other at his lift in his kyndome, because she obtained not that her petition?
We may so say by your manner of reasonynge here. Asked not also Saint Paul of
god a petition, that the prickynge of the fleash might be taken from him, and
yet he obtained 1. Cor. 12. Iacob^. ^
not his desire? Must not then this sentence of Christ, every man that asks
receaueth, be understand with this condition, if he ask godly, and necessary
things for his salvation, according to 1. Joan. 5
gods will and commandment, as saint Ihon says? To be short, and Matthew.
1^.
to pass over many such speeches, said not christ who so ever believes in
Joan. 3. 5
the son of god has everlasting life? Will ye thereof, my lord, prove against
scripture, that al they believes not in Joan 12
christ, that have not everlasting life, saying Ihon says, that many of the
princes of the Synagoge believed in christ, and yet confessed him not for fear
of the pharisees, least they should be cast out of the Synagoge, for they loved
more the glory of man, than the glory of god? Must we not then understand
christ's words, when he says, who so ever believes in the son of god, or
in me, has everlasting life, of a certain manner of beleuinge, which is with a
lively wourkinge faith, that avails Joan. 12
(says paul) in christ Jesus? May we not the^ now see plainly, hou Gala. 5
that christ meant not, that every man generally which should eat that bread,
which came down from heaven should have everlasting life, but only they that
should eat it godly and worthily, as paul teaches us to do? Wherefore these 1.
Cor. 11
textes of Ihon, which ye, my lord, bri^ge moreover for your purpose, that Fo.
91
he, which eats christ's flesh and drinks his blood has everlasting life,
Joan. 6
dwells in christ, and christ i^ him, etc. do nothi^ge utterly serve
thereunto* for they must be al understand of the^ only, that eats and drinks
christ's body and blood godly, as S. Auste^ expounds it saying. When christ
says, he that eats Ser. ^1. de verbis domini secundu^ Matthaeum.
my flesh, and drinks my blood dwells in me, and I ^n him, may we
understand it of the^, of who^ paul says that they eat and drink their oune
judgment, 1. Cor. 11
when they eat that body, and dri^ke that blood? The^ after a^ example
brought of Judas, and of other certain il men, he asks whether they did eat
christ's body, and drink his blood, and thereby did abide in christ, and
christ in the^, or not? He does anuswe are to that question so plainly, that he
utterly takes away al doubt i^ that matter, and destroys your false
glosynge clean, my lord, saying thus. But truly there is a certain manner of
eatinge that flesh, and drinkinge that blood after the which, he that eats,
and dri^keth, dwells in christ, and christ in him. Wherefore a man shall not
eat christ's flesh, and dri^ke his blood after every Mark this reader.
sort of eatinge and drinking of the^, and abide in christ, and christ i^ him,
but after a certain manner, which manner he himself saw, when he said these
words. Loo my lord how manifestly has S Auste^ opened all this matter, and
declared that ye understood not well christ's words, which ye do allege here.
It is the^ evidently proved that christ's words in Iho^ make nothing utterly
against our doctrine which is that the ungodly me^ and women do eat and dri^ke
christ's flesh and blood i^ receaui^ge of the holy sacrament although they
have not everlasting life as the godly only have, but euerlasti^ge damnation.
Now ye say that christ is The bishop fo. 91. pa. 2. fo. 92.
not eaten, swalowed, and dygested, with our teth, tungues, throtes, and
bealyes, which saying is only true, in that that ye say he is not dygested
with our bealyes, for all the rest of that sentence is very false, and neither
Cyprian, nor S. Austen proves the contrary, for S. Cypria^ meant that we
whette not our teeth to bytte christ's body Cyprianus de coena domini.
in the sacrament, as we do bodily meats, S. Austen, whon ye do allege, my
lord, makes not for your purpose for when he says. Prepare not thy Ser. 3^.
de verbis d.
jaws, but thy heart, he meant (as S. Cyprian did before him) that men should not
think, that christ's flesh ought to be eaten as common meats, beuffe, la^b,
veale, mouton and such other meats sold in the shambles commonly (as he says
himself in an other place) In psalm 98. and ser. 2. de verbis apostoli.
which is nothing against our belief, and doctrine For we say that we eat
christ's body as a spiritual food and meat of our souls, without breaking,
rentinge, tearinge, chawynge, digestinge, and such other ynyuryes doing Tract.
2^ in Ioa^nem.
unto yt. Again, when S. Auste^ says, Why do thou prepare thy bealy and
teth believe, and thowe have eaten, he speaks only against the unfaithful
jews, which thought that he spoke of a Ioa. 6.
bodily meat when he said unto the^ wourke ye not the meat, that perysseth,
but that abides still unto euerla^stinge life, where he spoke of beleui^ge in
him, and of the spiritual eatinge of him, troughe a lively faith, unto the
which men should not neade to prepare either bealy, or teth, but what is this
against our teachinge? Does it follow that we eat not christ bodyly with our
mouth and teth, because that we neade not to prepare our bealy and teth to eat
christ only spiritually through faith, which the fathers did before the
institution of the sacrament, and now also many do, when they receive not the
sacrament? Is there but only one manner to eat christ? Is he not eaten both
when the sacrament is received, and when it is not received? Why red ye not
Austens words in his book upon Ihon, that ye might have seen and perceived
the true sense of Tract 25.
them? For he thus writes upon this text. This is the work of god, that ye
believe in him. This is the^ to eat that Joan. 8.
meat, which perysheth not, but abides still unto everlasting life, to believe
in him. Why preparest thou teth and bealy? believe, and thowe have eaten. We see
now that S. Austen then expounded that text, which was spoken of christ
before he did entreat any thing of the sacrament, and meant only of a spiritual
eatinge of himself by faith, unto which eating men ought not (as S. Austen
said) to prepare either bealye or else teeth, as to the eati^g of common meat
of the body they are wount to do, and as the jews il understood christ
speakinge then of meat, that should bring unto them life ever enduringe.
Wherefore ye are anuswered, my lord, in this objection sufficiently Origin, whom
ye allege next meant (as christ did in Ihon, whose words he recites, and are
expounded of Joan. 8.
S. Austen before) that is to say that evil men receive not, nor eat not
christ's flesh worthyly, and profitably, to have thereby everlasting life, but
only bodily, and unworthily to their damnation, like wise S. Cyprian spoke of a
spiritual eating of christ's flesh, and denied Sers de lapsis de coena domini.
not the corporal eatinge of it with our mouths, and said (as christ did)
that none do eat of that la^be our savior christ spiritually, and worthily
(as S. fo. 92 pa. 2.
Paul bids men do) but only true 1. Cor. 11.
Israelites, that is to say, good christian men. Also Athanasius meant not (as
ye Athanasius lib. de pecca to in spi. sanctum.
say he did) that christ made therefore mention of his ascension in to heaven,
when he spoke unto the jews of eati^g his flesh and of his blood, to pluck
their minds utterly from thinkinge upon any eatinge of his body, and
dri^kinge of his blood with their mouths but only from beleuinge (as they did
then) that he moved them to eat his flesh dead* cut out in peaces* and to
devour it clean up, as other common meats are eaten, for then he could not
ascend up from them in to heaven alive, and whole, as he said unto them that
he would do. This meant Athanasius Joan. 6.
and christ making there mention of his ascension, for so does Cyril, Cyprian,
Chrisostom, saint Austen, and many other the eldest and best doctors expound
that place of Ihon. For S. Austen thus writes expoundyng that same saying of
Ihon. Did ye think, that I would make peaces of this body, which ye do see, and
The confutation.
cut the parts of my body and give them unto you? What then if ye shall the
son of man ascend thither, where he was before? Certainly he that Joan. 6.
could asce^de up whole, could not be consumed. He has then both given
Augusti. in pal. 8 and in Ioannem
unto us a wholesome refection of his body and blood, and also soyled a great
question touching his wholnes. Hitherto S. Austen. Wherefore this authorite is
not against our belief, which is that we do eat christ's fleash bodily with
our mouths without al hurt Basilius Epist. 141.
and harm to it, and without deuouringe up of yt. S Basil spoke there only of
a spiritual eatinge of christ's fleash by faith and godly lyuinge, and nothing
of the sacrament, nor of eatinge of christ's flesh therein, and therefore his
sainge is not to the purpose Hiero^ Hierom in Esaie ca. 88 and in Hiere 22.
upon Esaye, and Hieremie affirms only that sinners, and heretics eat not
the body of christ worthily for to obtain the fruit, effect, and profit In
Osean cap. 8.
thereof, which is spiritual nourisheme^t, increase of grace, to dwell in christ,
and christ in them, and to come unto everlasting life, but he denied not
Ambros de benedict. patriar. ca. 9. lib. de sacramentis. 4. cap. 4. and lib. 5.
cap 3. August. de ciuitate dei lib. 21 cap. 2^. and in Ioann. trac 28. and 27.
de verbis a post. ser. 2. Tract. 59. i^ Joan. The bishop fo. 18.
that they eat it ungodly and unworthily to their da^natio^. The same me^t
Ambrose, and S. Austen also spoke in those places, which ye allege of a
fruteful, and a profitable eatinge of christ's flesh, and of drinkinge of his
blood to the obteyning of everlasting life. Ye understand not S. Austen
writing thus Albert the other apostles did eat bread, that was the lord, yet
Judas did eat but the bread of the lord, and not the bread that was the lord.
For he meant only that the other apostles did eat christ's body both bodyly
with their mouths, and also spiritually with a perfect faith, and a pure
conscience, but Judas did eat it only bodyly with his mouth S. Cyril meant even
the very same thing, that only good men do eat christ's flesh unto their
profit, and salvation, but yet he says not, nor none other doctor (as ye
do) that il men do not bodyly receive it with their mouths in the holy
sacrament, and therefore none of The bishop fo. 97 lib. 4.
the^ proves your doctrine to be true. Now ye ask of us, whether an
unrepentant sinner have christ's body within him, or no, when he receaueth A
reason taken out of Peter martyr book.
the sacrament? To that I say, that he so has, and also to the second
question, I answer, that il men, being impenitent when they do receive the
sacrament, have christ's spirit within them, and yet they are not his sons
although paul do say, that he is gods son (as ye say and gather of him)
and has christ in him, and lives, Romans 8.
because he is justified S. paul's words are these. And if his spirit, that
raised up jesus from death, dwell in you, he that raised christ from death,
shall give life to your mortal bodies, for his spirits sake, which dwells in
you. My lord understands not, how that man receaueth the spirit of god by
certain of his gifts, and in his very nature, substance, presence and power,
and yet he is nevertheless a sinner, having not in him christ's spirit by
grace and adoption. To prove this I will allege of many places of the scripture
a few. Has not mani the ghost Sap. 7, 1, Cor. 12 Esaiae. 11 Matthew. 7 1, Cor.
13 Joan. 11
and spirit of god by the gift of wisdom, prudence, kunninge, faith to wourke
miracles, the power to do miracles, to prophecy, the grace of healinge the
diseased, the gift of toungues, of interpretation, the gift to give counsel
(as Ietro did unto Moses) the gift of fear the gift to preach, to absolve the
penitent in confession, and the Joan, 20
gifts of many other things, and yet they are not gods sons by grace? Was
not the spirit of god in balaam 1. Regu^. 18. Number. 22 Joan. 11
Saul and cayphas, when they prophesied, and yet they were wicked men? Was not
then, my lord, disceaued openly and shamefully, when he thought that the
spirit of god is i^ none except they be his children by grace? Did he not
know that they only be his sons Romans 5. 8 Zacha. 12
in whom his spirit is by grace and adoption, and that paul spoke those
words, which he alleges here for him through ignora^cye, of that being only
of the spirit of god in man by grace? But to touch the matter some what
nearer, I ask of him, whether the spirit of god be not in every place, in
earth, the water, in heaven, and hell and in every part, and creature of them?
If he say yea, ergo he is in every sinner, and wicked man. If he say nay, the
scripture is against him saying. I fill heaven, and earth, says our lord.
Heaven Hiere. 23 Esaie. 66
is my seat, and the earth my fotestole And again. Whyther shall I goo from
Psalm, 138 Christ's spirit, which is joined in one parson unto his ma^hod, is
by his presence in sinners.
thy spirit, and fly from thy face? If I go up in to heaven, thou art there,
if I go down unto hell, thou art present there. Now it appears that god is
every where, and in every place. Why the^ is not the spirit of god, which is
very god, in the wicked men, by his presence and substance, which is in every
place, and placed in no place? Wherefore christ's blessed flesh, blood, soul,
holy spirit, and his deite joined unto them in one parson certenlylmaye be,
and is often times, in a man subject to sin, and a lymne of the devil, and
so god, and the deuel do dwell both Actoru^. 17.
at ones in a sinner, god by his power, preseruinge him, feadynge him, geuinge
to him virtue to live, to be, to move and wourke, and also he is in him by his
presence, and substance, and the deuel through sin and tentation. Thus is al
my lords reasoni^ge proved voyed and of none effect. And so is not our third
verite, and catholic doctrine confuted, which is that the il me^ do eat and
dri^ke christ's flesh and blood unto their damnation (although he says Joan.
6
that it is confuted) nor proved contrary unto christ's words, saying,
whosoeeuer eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has everlasting life, for
those words were only spoken of the godly and worthy eaters, and drinkers of
the^, as it is proved before sufficiently, both by the scripture, and also by
the exposition of s. Auste^. Now my lord goes about to answer unto a place
of paul, which 1. Cor. 11
we do allege for us. Let a man examyne himself, and so eat of the bread, and
drink of the cup, for he that eats, and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks his oune damnation, not discerninge The bishop fo. 98. lib. 3.
the lords body. Unto this sentence he says, that S Paul meant, that for as
much as the bread and wine in the lords soupper, do represent unto us the body
and blood of christ, therefore although he does sit at the fathers right
hand in heaven, yet if we come not unto this mystical bread, and wine with
faith, reverence, purite of conscience, and fear, as we would do, if we should
come to see and receive christ himself sensibly present, we do eat and
drink our damnation. This is the effect of his answer unto that text of
paul, which The confutation.
is directely against his mind, for paul in the next sentence before affirms
that the unworthy eater and drinker of that our lords blessed bread, and holy
wine, is gyltie of our lords body and blood declaringe thereby that he eats
and dri^keth not material bread, and wine of the grape, but christ's very body
and blood, which he calls bread and wine, because bread and wine were turned
in to the^ by the consecration, and because they De coena domini.
be the food of man's soul (as Cyprian witnesses) like as common bread and
wine are of the body, and also because they appear as bread and wine, still
reteyninge al other qualites, and accide^tes of 1. Cor. 11
the^. This was S Paul's mind. who can say truly that he is guilty of our
lords body and blood, and eats and drinks his oune da^natio^, that
receaueth nothing else but only bread made of corn, and Mark.
wine of the grape? May a man be guilty for eatinge of a thing, and yet eat
it not but only a figure of it? Why then are Legeeyprianum ser ^. De lapsis.
not they worthy to be judged guilty of destroyinge, and breakinge of christ's
body, and of his holy saints, that have broken, and destroyed their Images
Images of christ, and his saints.
and pictures in England, saying they were more plain, express, and lively
signs, and figures of them, then are the bread and wine of christ's body, and
blood? Neade we so diligent and so great trial and examining of ourselves (as
saint paul requires here) for the receauinge, of bread and wine? Eats he,
and drinks his oune damnation, that eats and drinks bread of weate, and
wine of the vine only? The paschal lamb, the bread of show Exodi. 12 1.
Regu^. 21 Deuteronomy. 8
and Ma^na were figures of christ's body and more excellent and plain, than
bread and wine can be, and yet the scripture witnesses not, that the unworthy
eaters of any of them were guilty of our lords body, or did eat their oune
damnation, not discerninge his body from other common meat. Is it not then a
sufficient proof that there is christ's body itself in the sacrament, and not
only bread a figure of it? Moreover, if bread and wine were only in the
sacrament, how could the receauer of it discern our lords body (as paul
bids him do) from other common meats, to receive it with greater cleanes of
conscience and more devotion than such common meats? Again, says not saint
paul Mark this
that for the unworthy receauinge of 1. Cor. 11
this holy sacrament, many were sick, diseased, weak, and died? Who may well
say, that god would punysh men so grievously, for the unworthy eatinge, and
drinking of bare bread, and wine? Does it not them now appear plainly that
Saint paul meant that christ's body is really in this sacrament, and that my
lords exposition of saint paul's words is vain, and false? Farther he makes
an aunsweare unto Saint Austen, which does plainly affirm, Contrae cres conium
lib. 1. cap. 25.
that euel man do eat christ's body, and drink his blood unworthily in the
sacrament and are thereby guilty of christ's body, and blood, although Christ
says, he that eats not my fleash, and drinks not my blood Joan. 6
shall not have life in him, and says, that Austen mente not of the eating of
christ's very flesh, and of his blood, but of the sacrament, or of the bread
and wine, which are signs and figures only of them. This is a wounderful fond
and a blind wreastinge of Saint Austens words? For he says manyfestly that
sinners do eat christ's fleash and drink his blood in the receauinge of the
sacrament, and my lord says that he meant that only of the bread and wine. I
deny not that Austens intent was there, to prove that good things avail not
them, that do euel used them. But what thereof? Is that enough to prove, that
he me^t that il men receive not christ's very body, flesh and blood in the
sacrament? What learned man would make any such argument, as this is? A good
thing avails not the il receauour of it, ergo the il receauer receaueth it
not. S. Austen meant, that good things il Aduersus Cresconiu^. lib. 1. ca. 25
used profit not the il vser, and for an example he brings fourth christ's
flesh and blood, the receauinge of which avails not, but hurts them that do
il and unworthily take them, although christ said that he, which eats and
drinks not his flesh and Joan. 6.
blood, shall not have life in him. What may a man desire to be spoken more
plainly? Also S. Austen openly affirms that the wicked man Judas received the
body and blood of christ De baptismo contra Dontistas. lib. 5. ca. ^.
and ye say, my lord, that he received them not, but only bread and wine, as a
figure of the^. What anusweare is this? Is it not a manifest subuertinge of the
truth? Who will believe such teachers, if he regard any thing the health of
his soul? It is very true, that sacraments be signs (as ye allege Aduersus
Maximinu^. lib 3. ca. 22. August. ser. 28. de verbis secundu^ Lucan.
out of S. Austen) of other things, and so is the sacrament of the altar a
figne of christ's death and passion, of the mystical body of christ the church
and of christ's natural body really the rin present. Was not the paschal la^be,
the eatinge and oblation of him a figure of christ, of his body, his sacrifice,
and passion, and yet he was verily offered in sacrifice, and eaten? Was not
also christ's death and resurrection Romans 6.
a figure of our dyinge unto sin, and rysinge up from sin unto a new
life, and yet they were also very Romans 4.
things, and done in deed? does not paul call christ a figure of god the Heb. 1.
fathers substance, and yet he is one thing with him, and of the very same
substance, that he is of? Why then may we not well and truly say that the
sacrament of the altar is both a sign, and the thing it self signified in a
manner, as S. Austen says Epistola 23.
that it is? The sacrament properlye consists in the outward and visible
forms of bread and wine, and in the oblation and receauinge of christ's body
and blood, and the thing of the sacrament is christ's body and blood therein
contained, and increase of gods grace, with other benefits of god, which
only the good men receive. What if figures and pictures be often times called
by the names of the things themselfes figured, and pictured? Can ye prove
thereby that the sacrament is so called of the old doctors a sign of christ's
body and blood, that yt is only a sign of them, The bishop fo. 99. pa. 2
and that it conteyneth not the same in yt reallye? No not so, for the doctors
affirm that it is both a sign of those things, and has in it presently them
also. Now ye do wreast S. Chrysostoms words clean out of tune. For he says
that we see christ with our eyes in the sacrament, touch him, feel him, fyxe
our teth in his flesh, taste him, and so fourth, but not dygest him (as ye say
falsely) because that we do al those things unto the outward kinds and forms
of bread, and wine, which do hyde and cover him there secretly. Which sainge of
him is much like unto the phrase or manner of speakinge, which scripture uses,
when it witnesses that loath Note.
Abraham, Jacob, Iosuae, Mary Magdale^, and the apostles saw, touched, hand
led, and hard angels, and god him self because they saw, touched, and
handled, the shape or form of man Gene. 18. 19 32. Iosuae. 5. Mar. vlt. Act. 1.
and hard his voice, under which form and shape those angels and god did
then appear, and spoke unto the^. And S. Chrysostom used that manner in
speakinge to persuade us the sooner both to believe christ's body and blood to be
really present in the holy sacrament, and also to receive them with greater
reverence, and devotion. Ye now excuse your self, my lord, for settinge out
of the presence of christ's body and blood in the sacrament and say that when
ye wrote in a catechism by you translated out of latin in to English, that
we do receive This bishop reca^ted his first doctrine of the sacrament.
christ's body and blood bodily with our mouths, ye meant by a figure, that is
to say, that we do eat and drink bread and wine figures and signs of them.
This excuse is not true, for ye wrote so manifestly then of the really presence
of christ's body and blood both in the sacrament, and also in heaven at ones,
that nothing might be written more plainly, and that neither ye could
yourselfe, nor none other of your brethren other wise take it, and therefore ye
perceauinge that that doctrine did myslike and offend the rest of your brethren
in christ, did shortly recante yt, as it appears by the settinge forth again
of that The bishop fo. 10* pa. 2 The Worshippinge of ^he sacrame^
book called a catechism. Moreover ye write of the adoration, and
worshippinge of the holy sacrament, or of christ himself, very ungodly
speakinge against al learned catholic doctors, and teachers, and affirminge
that they have brought the people in to horrible idolatry, to worship visible
things, made with their hands, as their god, and maker. Is this, my lord your
charity, so openly to report falsely of men? The old doctors did ever The
confutation.
teach the people, as we do now also teach them, that they ought not to worship
the outward forms, and apparaunces of bread and wine, but only christ god,
and man, under neath the^ present, as their only maker, and god, and are ye
not, my lord, then ashamed thus untruly to say of them, and of us? The runnyng
of the people out of their seats, and from altar to altar, from sakering to
sakering, the lifting up of the sacrament over the priests heads, do not
prove (as ye say falsely they does) that the people worshipped that thing,
which they saw with their bodily eyes, but only christ god and man, whom they
beleved to be under that form of bread, and this may we do right well. For did
not Abraham see three like men appearinge unto him, ran forth to mete them,
and fell down upon the earth and worshypped one of them, which was god
appearinge like a man? did not also loath see two angels, like two men, and
rose up, went to mete them, and falling down greuelinge unto the ground
whorshipped them? What did they worship then, else but god, and his angels,
which they saw not, being ynvisible, but only the shape and form of man? Why
then may we not go to see christ in the sacrament, say we saw him and
whorshippe theri^ him Both god and man, although we see him not there, as
Jacob did not see god, and yet he said that he saw him, because he saw the
form of man, in which he Gene. 32.
appeared to him? Came not the kings of colen to see christ, and did worship
Matthew. 2.
him upon their kneenes, and worshipped not the thing, that they saw, but his
godhead? Said not saint 1. Joan. 1.
Ihon, that he, and his foloes the apostles saw, hard and felt with their
hands, that thing, that was even from the be gynnynge, the son of god, when
they saw, hard and felt only christ's man hode? Tell me then why we may not
say, that we have seen christ our maker in the holy host and sacrament, when
when saw but the outward sensible form of bread, under the which he lies hid?
We do go from place to place (I grant) to see the sacrament, but not to
worship the thing apeari^ge Mark.
outwardly to our bodily eyes, but that only that we see there by faith, as
loath, Abraham, and the three kings went not forth to honor and worship that
thing, which they saw bodily, but that that they believed and saw then with
their in ward eyes. Did not the king david offer sacrifices, caused 2. Regum.
6
instruments of musyke to make sweet melody, daunsed and played before the ark of god? But he did those things not to worship the arc, but god, and therefore
he said that he daunsed, lept, and played before our lord? And to touch the
matter yet some what nerer, hear what s. Austen says. He Lib. 3. cap 9 De
doctrina christiana.
that worshippeth a profitable sign instituted of god, the strength, and
signification of which he understands, does not worship the thing, that is
see ne, and passes away, but rather that thing, unto which al such things
must be referred. Hitherto Austen. Now we see plainly that after S Austens
mind, we might honor the sacrament, if it were but a sign only ordained of
god, so that we did refer that worshippinge unto christ represented and
signified by it, how much more then is it leful, yea godly, to go to see and
worship the sacrament, or the host, and chalice lifted up over the priests
head at mass, referringe that honor unto god, seeing that the sacrament is
not only a sign instituted of god, but it does also co^teyne in it christ very
god and man? Lib. de cathechy Zaudis rudibus cap. 2^.
Says not s. Austen again, sacraments are visible signs of godly things,
but the invisible things the^ selves are honored in the^? He answeareth now
unto this place of Auste^, part of which he does only allege, least it should
hurt In psalm. 98.
his matter. Christ tokeflesh of the flesh of Marye, and because he walked here
in the same flesh, and gave unto us the self same flesh to be eaten for our
salvation, and no man eats that flesh, except he worship it before, it is
found out how such a forestole of our lords feet may be worshipped, and that
we should not only not sin in worshippinge of it, The honor of the holy
sacram^^
but sin in not worshippinge of it. These words of s. Auste^ declare
plainly, both that christ gave unto us to be eaten in the holy sacrament, that
same flesh, that he took of his mother, and also that every man synneth, that
worshippeth it not before he eat it in the sacrament, and my lord says that
he He followed peter Martyr theryn.
gives us to eat only bread, and wine, and that auste^ me^te, that we must
worship christ sittinge in heaven at the right hand of his father, and not in
the sacrament, when he spoke only of the eatinge and worshippi^ge of christ's
flesh in the sacrament, as his oune words show that In psalm. ^8.
follow anon after, when he says. I have committed unto you a certain
sacrament, it shall give life unto you, if it be spiritually understood.
Although it be necessary, that it be visiblye celebrated, yet it must be
inuisiblye under stand Loo, we see here that s. Auste^ spoke of the sacrament
and of eatinge of christ's flesh, and worshippinge of it therein, before we do
eat it. Therefore my lord mystoke him, and was therein utterly disceaued. He
untruly says that we would persuade the people by s. Auste^s words to
worship the sacramental bread, and wine, or the visible thing in the
sacrament, for we do say, and teach the people, that there is another bread,
nor wine in the sacrament and that no visible thing of the sacrament must be
worshipped of itself (as S. Austen teaches us) but only god. Now he goes In
psalm. 98. Deutero. 6
about to prove that Saint Austen me^t not, that christ's flesh is corporally
present, and eaten corporally in the sacrament, Fo. 102 pa 2
by these his words, written there also. But the flesh profits nothing, the
words, which I have spoken unto you, are spirit and life. In psalm. 98.


That, which I have spoken, understand you spirituallye. You shall not eat this
body, which you, see, and drink that blood, which they shall shed, that will
crucify me. I have commended unto you a sacrament, understand it spiritually,
and it shall give you life, etc. Here is not one word, my lord, that proves
your purpose, for his words a littel before recited there, do declare what he
means. For these are his words expounding this text of Ihon. Except a man
eat the fleash of the son Joan. 6.
of man, etc. They took that folyshely, they thought of it carnallye, and
judged that our lord would cut of from his body certain peaces, and give them
unto them to eat, and they said, this is a hard saying. He instructed them,
saying. The spirit gives life, but the fleash profits nothing, etc. Do
thou not see here, reader, that Saint Austen meant not to deny the corporal and
real being, and eatinge of christ's body in the sacrament? For he meant that
fleash, that is to say, such a fleshely and folyshe understanding of christ's
words, werby they thought that christ would that they should eat his flesh cut
out in peaces ^er. 2. de verbis apost
(as common meats are eaten) and not alive and whole without al hurt done to
it, profits nothing, but the spirit, that is to say, a spiritual
understanding of his words, that they should eat his flesh alive, joined
unto his spirit, and godhead, whole, and not harmed in any thing, gives
life. And so he would that they should not think that they should eat that his
body, which they saw, after any such manner and as they saw it in that same
form of fleash visibly, but inuisiblye (as he says there) nor drink the
blood, which the jews should shed forth in that form of blood, in which it
should be shed out, and visiblie.

This meant he, as his oune words before recited declare plainly, and therefore
those words, which my lord alleges for him, makes nothing for him at al.

The end of the fourth book.

The fyfth book of the sacrifice of the holy mass. Although, ye, my lord, do
say, without any good ground, that it is a great blasphem ye against christ,
to say that in the mass is made a sacrifice propitiatory for sin, yet all the eldest, and best learned doctors that ever were, are utterly against your
error therein, as I have declared, touching The bishop fol. 104.
many of the^ in my book of the sacrifice of the holy mass, and as I will
anon, by gods grace, prove by some of their sai^ges briefly. We make no
sacrifice The confutation. Luc. 22.
at mass, but only as ministers of christ, which bade us so to do, and
offers himself daily for us therein, and therefore ye are disceaued at the
beginning of this your book, when ye say, that priests do make their mass a
sacrifice propitiatory for the sins of the quycke and dead, as never no
creature made, but christ alone, and that ones only for all upon the cross.
And to prove this ye allege S. Paul which spoke there to the hebrews of
christ's Hebr. 9. 10.
blouddy sacrifice made by his death only, which he offered never but ones (as
he says) or else he must neades have dyed more the^ ones, for as much as that
kind of sacrifice is necessarily joined with his passion, but this makes
nothing utterly against the sacrifice of the mass, in which christ himself
turns the substance of bread, and wine in to his own very natural fleash
and blood, and offers How, and in What se^ce the mass is a sacrifice.
them in a remembrance of his death for the application of his passion, and
the merit of it for remission of the sins, both of the quycke and the dead,
as al holy doctors both Graekes and latins, do witness Fo. 105.
plainly, of whose sentences I will allege some anon. But here I ask of you,
my lord, why may not Christ every day be offered in sacrifice without dyinge
again for us, as well as he was slain (as Ihon says) even from Apocal. 13.
the beginning of the world, and yet he suffered death not many thousand years
after? Were not the sacrifices of Abel, Isaac, of the paschal lamb, and many
other sacrifices of the old law, certain figures of christ's sacrifice the^
Exodi. 12. 1 L^^^ti. 24. Gene. 4.
to come upon the cross, and were offered to put me^ in mind of it? What the^
should let, my lord, that the mass might not be a sacrifice for a
remembrance of christ's passion and death now passed, as well as they were of it
to come, and that this sacrifice should not as well be an application of christ's
merits unto us for remission of our sins, as they were? I am very sure,
Lib. 17 ca 20 De ciuitate Dei.
that ye are not able with the help of althem, that made this your book to
avoid this. Austen writes after this sort therein. Solomon says A man has
nothing that god is to him, Ecclesiastes 8.
but that thing, which he shall eat, and drink. What thing more credible may
here be understood to say than that which does pertayne to the partakinge of
this table? Which that priest the mediator of the new testament gives of his
body and blood after Mark this reader.
the order of Melchisedech. For that sacrifice has succeeded all the sacrifices
of the old testament, which were offered in a shadow of it to come. Wherefore
we do acknowledge that voice of the same mediator written in the Psalm. 39.
psalm, by the prophet. Thowe would not have (said christ the son to his
father) a sacrifice and an oblatio^, but thowe made me a perfect body for
because in the stead of al those old sacrifices, and oblations christ's body
is offered in sacrifice, and mynystred Three errors confuted here.
unto the partakers. Here are three of your errors, my lord, confuted. The
first that Melchisedech offered not sacrifice in bread and wine for a figure of
christ's sacrifice made at his last soupper. The second that christ's bodi and
blood are not in the holy sacrament but only bread, and wine. The third that
christ's body is not offered in sacrifice at mass. We do confess that
christ's sacrifice made upon the cross was full, perfect, sufficient, and did
and does still put away the sins of al them, that believe perfectly in him,
trust in gods mercy, repent their illyues, and receive the holy saeramentes,
by which, as means, that christ's sacrifice is, and neades must be applied
unto them, and therefore it comes not of any imperfection of christ's
sacrifice, ones made for ever upon the cross, that his blessed body is
offered daily in sacrifice for our sins, but only to apply that perfect
sacrifice unto us, for to take away actually our imperfectenes of sin. This
a unsweare is sufficient for the soilynge of all that is brought out of S.
paul's epistle unto the hebrews. Now ye make a distinction of sacrifices,
saying, that there is one kind of sacrifices a propitiatory, or a mercyful
sacrifice, that is to say, such as pacyfieth gods wrath and indignation, and
obteyneth mercy for our sins and forgeuenes of them, which is only
christ's death, and sacrifice made ones for all upon the cross. Which no good
christian man The confutation.
denies. But what then? Canye thereby prove, my lord, that christ offers not
himself yet daily at mass, by the priest as his ministre, for an applyi^ge of
that his propitiatory, and most mercyful sacrifice, made never but ones? May
not the sacrifice of the mass made in a remembrance of christ's death, and
blouddy sacrifice, be as well a mean to apply christ's passion and sacrifice
made upon the cross unto us for remission of our sins and the obteynyng of
gods mercy, through the force and virtue of it, as many sacrifices of the
old law, made to signify and figure the same his death and sacrifice were
applications of it for remission of sin, and the pacyfynge Mark reader.
of gods wrath, and indignation not through their own strength, virtue and
merit, but through the virtue and merit of christ's bloody sacrifice to come
of which they were figures representations, and shadows? For bade not god by
Moses, that Aaron, and his sons, should offer sacrifices, that Exode. 24.
Exode. 32. Number. 15.
were called, victimae pacificae, and sacrificia placabilia, that is to say,
sacrifices to pacify gods wrath, and to appease his indignation? Did god
then bid them commit blasphemye against christ, and to rob him of his
honor, and glory, which consists in reconciling of mankind unto gods
Exodi 9.
favor, and grace? Did they not then offer at his commaundynge sacrifices for
sin, to obtain gods mercy, as priests do now at mass, although not so
perfectly, another the same things, but only figures, and shadows? Were not
their sacrifices means to apply christ's death, and sacrifice then to come,
unto the people for remission of their sins, and the purchasing of mercy
and grace, as the sacrifice of the mass is, although not in like degree? Why
then are priests now more injurious to christ, than the priests were then in
Moses law? Did they not as well depryue christ of his honor, and took it unto
themselves, as priests do that now say mass, and offer sacrifice therein for
sin? If ye did well understand the matter, my lord, ye would not so rail
without al charity upon Io. 1. 10.
priests,, as ye now do. Is not christ called 2. Timo. 2.
the light, a good pastor, the only mediator of god and man, he that
baptizeth, and many such other things, and yet preachers of his gospel are the
light of the world, pastors, mediators between god and man by prayer, and
offeringe of gifts and sacrifices Hebr. 5.
(as paul says) for sin? Why then may they not be called, in some sense, as
well workers with christ in reconcylinge of man unto good, as his mynysters? Is
it not christ's office as well to christen (for Ihon baptist says he it is
that baptizeth) and to be intercessour Joan. 1.
for man unto god, as it is to reconcile man unto god by offeringe 1 Timothy 2.
of sacrifice? Is not the sacrifice of prayer, repentance, contrition of heart,
alms, fasting, and such other things, means to purchase gods favor, and
mercy, as it appears plainly in the scripture? May they not then be esteamed
well sacrifices to pacyfie gods wrath, and to obtain, of him mercy and grace
through the merit of christ's passion, and sacrifice made thereby,
notwithstanding that only christ satisfied sufficiently for our sins, and
reconciled us unto god by his only sacrifice? Did ye not then, my lord, il and
unlearnedly deuyde the kinds of sacrifices in this your book? Who, but you,
will say that that repentance and contrition of a sinners heart, is a sacrifice
of a reconciled man, and of laud? It is also a perilous error, that ye do
teach, my lord, when ye say that christ did so purge an infinite heap of
sins by his one oblation, that he remitted them, acquyeted our co^scie^ces
and that there remains now utterly no sacrifice for sin. For as I deny
The confutation.
not, but he did merit and deserve by his death grace, and mercy for remission
of all the whole worlds sins, even so he remitted in effect and actually,
when he died, the sins of very few, for he suffered for us (as paul says)
To. 5.
when we were yet gods ennymies, and sinners. For if he had in deed remytted
me^nes sins actually, and acquyeted their consciences in act (as ye write
here) why then said saint To. 6.
paul that we dye unto sin in baptism? Why then said he that christ Ephesians.
5.
purges his spouse the church from sin by baptism? Why bade saint Peter
after christ's passion, that the Act. 2*
people should repent, that every one of them might be baptized for remission
Matthew. 6
of their sins? Why commanded Luc. 24
then christ men to ask remission of their sins, and bade his apostles after
his resurrection to preach penance for remission of sin? Why said also
saint Ihon, that if we do say that 1. Joan. 1
we have not sin in us, we say not truly? And if we do confess our sins
god will forgive them us? and that there is a sin unto death? Does it not 1.
Joan 5
then openly appear, that christ did only merit, and purchase grace, and
remission of our sins by his passion and that actually he remitted them not,
nor quyeted men's consciences, (as ye say untruly, my lord, that he did) but
that the actual remission of them, and quyetinge of men's consciences must be
obtained by faith, hope, fear, repentance, prayer, alms deeds, fasting,
charity, and receauinge of the holy sacraments? Who says The bishop fo. 10.
lib. 5.
that priests do merit or deserve remission of sins by their sacrifice made
at mass? Say we not that only christ merited and deserved remission of sin
by his death, and blouddie sacrifice Romans 3.
made upon the cross, (as paul says) and that the sacrifice made in the
mass by christ himself chiefly, and of the priest as a mynistre at his
commandment, is only an application of that his merit unto men for the free
and francke remission of their sins? Who is so mad to say, (as ye feign
that we do) that the act, or administration of a priest has the same office,
that christ executed in offeringe Fo. 108
himself upon the cross for us? We say not that christ's sacrifice is
imperfecte, nor insufficient, but most perfect and sufficient in itself for
the remission of all the worlds sins, and yet the most part of the world shall
be damned, through their own default, and throught want of 1. Fo. 2 Matthew. 22.
application of christ's death, and therefore christ said, that his blood
should Matthew. 26
be shed for many and not for all, and saint Paul witnesses, that christ
offered himself to consume away Heb. 9
many men's sins, and not al, because many men (says upon that text
Chrisostom) will not do their duite, christ's sacrifice is in itself, says
he, sufficient to save al men and he saves al, Heb. 7
as much as lies in him. Now ye allege saint Paul, saying, that The bishop
christ's priesthod can not pass from one to an other. Which sentence makes
The confutation.
nothing for your purpose to prove that priests offer not sacrifices for
sin. For who says that christ's priesthood passes from him to any Psalm. 109
priest? Say we not with the holy ghost speakinge in David, and saint Paul,
Heb. 7
that he is a priest for ever? We affirm and teach that he himself offers
his body, and blood daily at mass by the ministry of the priest, as he Joan.
1. 10. 1. Cor. 3.
does contynually baptize, and preach unto the people by his ministres the
priests. My lord ye understand not Saint paul, for he only meant, that no
other priesthode should ever succeed christ's priesthode, as his priesthod did
Aarons, but that it should 1. Cor. 11.
endure until the worlds end. Wherefore, seyinge we say, that christ ever
continues a priest still, and that we priests are but his mynisters,
executinge his office, by his own commission, sainge. Do ye this in
remembrance Luc. 22.
of me, my lord reproved us without a just cause. What neadeth any moo The
bishop fo. 128. lib. 5
sacrifices if christ's sacrifice be perfect, and sufficient? Sir the sacrifice
The confutation.
of the holy mass is not an other sacrifice then christ's, but the very self
same sacrifice concerning the things offered, which are his body and blood.
Again this sacrifice of the mass is not made for any vnperfectenes, or
vnsufficiencye of christ's death and sacrifice, as ye would make men believe that
we do teach), but only to apply it unto us for our imperfectenes through our
sin. May I not prove by a like reason grounded upon the perfectenes and
sufficiencye of christ's sacrifice, that we shall al be saved, and that none of
al should be damned and that we neade not to believe, hope, fear god, repent our
lyfes synfully spent fast, pray, give alms, receive the sacraments, nor to
keep gods commandments at al? For may I not thus argue? Christ's
sacrifice is sufficient to save me, what neade I then to do any thing of my
party for to add any thing unto that which is of itself perfect, and
sufficient? Think ye not, my lord, that many of your scholars has gathered
such arguments, and will gather here after of your doctrine, and thereby cast al
virtue aside, lead their lyfes in a leude liberte, and Mark.
say Christ has perfectely, and sufficiently satisfied for me, I neade to do
nothing at al, for he will not lose, that he has so dearly bought? Paul said
(I deny not) that if Aarons sacrifices Heb. 8
had been sufficient to have put away sin, christ's sacrifice should not have
been required. But what thereof? Will ye prove by that, that for as much as
christ's sacrifice is sufficient we neade not the sacrifice of the mass? Is it
not declared sufficiently in my book of the sacrifice of the mass and also
here before, that it is not for any imperfectness or insufficiency of christ's
sacrifice that the mass is a sacrifice As it was that christ's sacrifice
succeeded Aarons. The bishop fo. 109. li. 5
commanded of christ (as it shall be proved anon) but only to apply that
sacrifice unto us? But now ye obiecte against our answer to your
arguments, which is, that we do make no new sacrifice, nor none other, than
christ made himself at his mandy and upon the cross. Than The bishop
say you, it must neades follow, that ye slaye or kill Christ every day, for
as much as christ's oblation was made by his death, and effusion of his blood.
No, sir, not so, for it is the same The confutation.
sacrifice touching the things offered, that is to say, christ's body and
blood, but the manner of offering is not one one is bloody, and the other
vnblouddye, the one by death, and the other by the representation and
commemoration of that death. Did not the fathers of the old law offer christ
in figures, and shadows, which admonyshed Apoc. 13.
them of his death, and yet they slayed him not in deed, although Iho^ says,
that he was slain even from the beginning of the world? Why then may we not
offer his body and blood in the sacrament, in which he Epist. 23.
is daily offered (as Saint Austen says) for the people, without killing of
him? Why should we not, my lord, I be seche you, believe the holy church (which
does thus expound this matter,) as well as we do, and neades must, in many
other things, that appartayne unto our faith? Would ye, that we should believe
you before all the ancient doctors of christ's church both Graekes and latynes
of al ages? For they are altogether utterly against your doctrine? Why do ye
not make aunsweare unto my books of the sacrifice of the blessed mass, and of
the sacrament of the altar? But now hear S. Chrysostom Homi. 17. in Heb. 9.
which teaches us how this may well be done, saying. Do we not offer
sacrifices daily? We do offer, but doing it in remembrance of christ's death.
And this host is one, not many. How is it one, and not many? And that
oblation was ones offered in to heaven, but this sacrifice is an example of
that, we do ever offer the self same thing. When offer not to day one lamb
(christ) and two morrow an other, but ever the self same thing. Wherefore
this sacrifice is one, or else by that reason that it is offered in many places,
are they many christ's? Nothing less, but there is one christ every were,
being both here full, and there full, one body For as that, which is offered in
every place, is one body, and not many bodies, even so it is also one
sacrifice, but he is our bishop, which offered a sacrifice making us clean,
we do offer the same, and that which then was offered, can not now be
consumed. Hitherto chrysostom, out of whose words many notable lessons may be
gathered for the confutation of al your raylinge reasonynge, my lord, and false
chargynge of al catholic teachers with many things, which they never dreamed
upon. The first lesson is, that notwythstandynge that saint paul affirms
that christ was never but ones offered upon the cross, and that he made al
the^ perfect with that his one sacrifice, which are made holy, yet priests do
offer hi^ daily at mass. The second is, that this our oblatio^ of christ, is
not a kilynge of him, but a remembrynge of his death. The third lesson is, that
we offer daily, and ever one, and the self same host, or sacrifice, which
can not be verified of bread and wine, for they are not one and the same in
many places, but it is only true of christ's body and blood, that are one, and
the same in all places, where they be offered in sacrifice. The fourth lesson
is, that the thing offered is the lamb christ, that is offered in sacrifice
daily in many places, and yet he is but one christ, which is here upon this
altar, and there (upon that) full, one body, and not many bodies, and one
sacrifice. The fifte lesson is, that priests do daily offer in sacrifice that
same host, or sacrifice, which christ himself offered ones by his death to
cleanse us from sin. The syxt and last lesson is, that the host or sacrifice
which priests do offer daily, can not be consumed, and therefore it is not
bread, and wine, for they are sone consumed, but christ's body and blood, which
are not consumed in eatinge, and drinki^ge of them, but they still ever remain
whole, and safe. Now a man may see evidently that my lords doctrine is against
saint Chrysostoms belief and teachinge, and that he rayleth upon him, and his
doctrine in this his last book. For first my lord says, that priests have
invented of them selfs a new sacrifice, unto the great blasphemy, and
yniurye of christ. But ancient docters say that christ himself offered the
same sacrifice (that priests offer at mass) both at his last soupper, and
upon the cross also, and commanded priests to offer yt in remembrance of
his death, as these autoritees do show manyfestly. S. Ireneus above M. ccc
lxxiiij. wrote thus Christ took bread and gave thanks saying. lib. 4. ca. 32.
Christ did institute the sacrifice of the mass.
This is my body. And took the chalice of wine, and confessed it to be his
blood, and he taught a new sacrifice of the new testament, which the church
receauinge of the apostles, offers unto god in all the whole world This holy
martyr, which was very night christ's time, says that christ taught his
apostles at his mandy by say in he these words. This is my body. This is my
blood, a new sacrifice of the new testament, and that the apostles taught it
unto the church, which offers the same in the whole world and my lord says
that christ offered not his body and blood in sacrifice at his last soupper,
nor taught his apostles to offer them in sacrifice, nor finally, that priests
offer any sactifice more then the laite does, but they have iuuented a new
sacrifice distincted from christ's, iuiurious and blasphemous unto it. What is
this, if it be not plain blyndnes, and ignorance? Is this, my lord, your
doctrine to be approved of the ancient docters sainges? S. Cyprian agrees
with this, saying. Luc. 22. Epist. lib. 2. epist. 3.
If our lord iusus christ, and god himself be the high priest of god the
father, and he himself did first offer a sacrifice unto god the father, and
has commanded that same to be done in remembrance of him, that priest is
verily christ's vicar, which does follow that thing, that christ has done And
then he offers in the church a true, and a full sacrifice unto god. if he
begin to offer, as he may perceive, that christ offered. And in the
beginning of that epistle he says, that christ is the author and teacher of
this sacrifice of the mass, and bade priests Homi. 24. in 1. Cor. 10.
offer it unto god, as he himself had done before at his mandy. Chrysostom
Homi. 2. in 2. time. 1.
says also thus. But christ has prepared a much more wounderful, and a
magnificent sacrifice, both when he changed the sacrifice it self, and also
when he did command him self to be offered in the stead of brute beasts,
which were offered in the Homi. 2. in 2 Timothy 1.
old law. Again he writes thus, that holy oblation, whether peter offer it,
or Note this well.
paul, or else a priest, what soever his deserving be, is the same sacrifice,
which christ himself gave unto his disciples, and which also priests do now
make. This the priests sacrifice has in it nothing less, than that of
christ's making Why so? because men do not make holy this the priests
sacrifice, but christ, that had made that his own sacrifice holy before. For as
the words, which christ spoke, are the same, that the priests do now also
pronounce, even so is the sacrifice also the same. Then he concludes saying.
Wherefore this sacrifice is christ's body, and that also. He that thinks that
this body has any thing less than that, knweth not that it is christ. which
is now also present, and works. Eusebius, which was about M cc years passed,
Eusebius lib 1. ca. 10. Demonst. euangelicae.
holds also against my lords doctrine, saiynge, Wherefore after al thiges,
christ wrought a certain merueylous host, and an excellent sacrifice, he offered
it unto his father for all our salvation, and did ordain that we should offer a
remembrance of that same thing to god himself for a sacrifice. Ambrose
says. I o lord, reme^bringe thy passion, do come unto thy Primae precatione
praepara^te ad missam.
altar, although I be a sinner, that I may offer to the that sacrifice, which
thou did ordeyne, and command to be offered for our salvation in
remembrance De eccles. hierarch.
of the. S. Dionyse paul's disciple writes thus. Wherefore he both reverently,
and also according to the office of a bishop, after holy praises of gods
works, excuses himself, that he offers a sacrifice of salvation (which is
excelle^ter than he is himself) criynge out unto him. Thou did bydde, o
lord. Do ye this for a remembrance of me. Ignatius Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11. Epist.
8.
S. Ihons scholar says. It is not leful to offer, another make sacrifice, nor
to celebrate masses without the bishops autorite or consent. Finally, for I
pass over many other doctors autorites, li. 10. ed. 20 de ciuitate dei.
Austen has thus speakinge of christ's blouddy sacrifice made upon the cross.
A sacrament of the which thing, he would that the daily sacrifice of the
church should be, seiynge he is the head of his body the church, and she also
is the body of that head, as well she by him, as he by her, used to be offered
in sacrifice, Now can my lord, justly, say that priests have invented
Christ is offered in sacrifice.
of them selfs a new sacrifice against christ's sacrifice, and that his
doctrine is approved of all the ancient The mass is a sacrifice propitiatorye
for sin.
doctors? Moreover let us see, whether this sacrifice of the mass, which we
have now proved to be i^stituted of christ be a sacrifice for remission of
sin, or not. Of which matter thus writes Hom. 69. ad pop. Antiochenum and in
cap. 1. ad phil.
Chrysostom. These things were not unadvisedly, rasshely, or without cause
ynacted or decreed of the apostles, that the dead should be remembered in the
dreadful mysteries. For they do know that much good, and profit comes unto
the^ thereof. For whem the people Hebr. 5.
shall stand holdyngvp their hands with the priests, and the dreadful
sacrifice is set forth, how shall we not obtain gods favor prainge for the^?
Again he says. We must traueile as much as may Homi. 41. in 1. Cor. 15
be that the dead may be helped, not with weapinge, but with prayer,
supplicatio^s, almesses, and sacrifices. This thing was not inverted without a
cause nor we do not in vain remember the dead i^ the mass, nor we come not in
vain thither, praynge for the^ unto that la^be lyinge there, and taking away
the sins of the world, but there does come there of unto the^ some comfort.
Ambrose affirms the same, when he says. A la^be was offered before, and a
calfe, now Lib. 1. cap. 48. officioru^
christ is offered, but he is offered as a man, and as it were receyuinge
passion, and he himself does offer him self, as a priest, that he migt remite
our sins Oratione de obitu fratris sui Satyri.
Again speakinge of his brother Satyrus departed hence, he says I co^me^de
unto the o god almyghtie, the innocent soul of my brother now dead. I offer to
the my sacrifice. Take mercifully, and gladly the present or gift of a brother,
the sacrifice of a priest. Again he says vntoone faustine co^forti^ge him
lame^ti^ge the death of his suster. I judge that she is not so much to be
lamented, as to be prayed for, nor so much to be wept for, as her soul to be
co^me^ded unto our lord with sacrifices. He says also thus. We have seen
the prince of priests In psalm. 38.
coming unto us. We saw him and hard hi^ offeringe for us his blood. Let
us priests follow, as we may offer sacrifice for the people, although we be
weak by our deserving, yet we are honorable through the sacrifice, for Lib.
de heresibus. haeres. 53.
albeit christ is not seen to be offered, nevertheless he is offered upon the
earth, when his body is offered. Yea he is declared plainly to offer it in us,
whose word makes holy the sacrifice, which is offered. Saint Auste^ reproved
Lib. 3
Aerius for an heretic as also Epiphaphanius did, because he said) as my
lord, and his sect does (that men should not pray for the dead, nor offer
sacrifice for the^ and S Auste^ said thus in that In Enchir. cap. 110. and ad
Dulcimu^ 4 ^e. 2
matter. It is not to be denied, that the souls of me^ depted, are relieved
through the godlynes of their friends alive when the sacrifice of our
mediator Lege Aug. ser. 11. de sa^ctis.
christ is offered for the^ or else alms be given for the^ in the church. But
these things do profit the^, which did deserve, when they lived, that they
might afterward profit the^. Anon after he says thus. Therefore when
sacrifices, either of the altar, or else of any manner of al-masses are offered
for all the dead, which were baptized, they are thanks geui^ge Note this.
for the^, that be very good people, and for the^, which are not very badde,
they are propitiations, or purchasinges of mercy and favor of god. But who^
they do profit, either they profit unto this thing that there may be full
remission, or else at the least, that the pain should be made more tolerable.
What can, ye, my Tolerabilior fiat iposa damnatio.
lord, say now to this? For says not here S Auste^ plainly, that the
sacrifice of the mass is a sacrifice propitiatory for the sins of the
dead? Why deny ye it the^, and yet say that your doctrine is approved of the
old doctors and agreeable unto the faith of the primative church of christ? I
do remember well, At lambeth
my lord, that about three years sense, when ye reasoned with me i^ this matter
of purgatory, and I did allege this place of s. Auste^, ye said unto me,
that Austen was disceaued here, because he sayedvt tolerabilior fiat ipsa
da^natio that their damnation, or pain might be made more easy to be borne,
but ye did not understand s. Austen, for he spoke not those words of the
damned in hell (as ye then said, that he did) but only of the^, that depart not
very il, and had deserved whiles they lived here, that such sacrifices might
profit the^ after their death (as he says) for as concerning the damned,
who^ he calls very badde, he affirms that such things help not the^.
Austen says also sermon. 32. deverb apost. It is not to be doubted but the
souls departed are helped by the holy churches prayers, and the sacrifice of
salvation, and alms, when they are given for them, that god should deal more
mercyfully with them, than their sins had deserved. He says Epist. 44.
yet ones again, thus. We must believe that sacrifices do help verily some
what the souls departed out of this life. Hear now S Alexander that holy
martyr, which was within lxxxxx years after christ's death, and writes thus.
Our lords passion must be recited in all solennites of masses, that are offered
unto our lord, that his passion, whose body and blood are made, may be
celebrated. The masses sacrifice is propitiatory.
For crimes and sins are put away through these sacrifices offered unto our
lord, and therefore his passion must be also remembered, and often recited Mark
reader.
and this body and blood offered unto our lord. With such sacrifices our lord
will be delited and pacified, and will for give great sins, for emonge
sacrifices there can be nothing greater than our lords body, and blood.
There is no sacrifice better than this, but this excels al other, which must
be offered unto our lord with a pure conscience, and received with a clean
mind, and worshipped The honor of the holy sacrament of the altar.
of al me^. And as this sacrifice is better then other, even so it ought to be
rather much made of and worshipped Here are i^proued three of my my lords
errors. The first against the maki^ge Here are.
of christ's body in the sacrament, and the real presence of it therein. The
second Three errors confuted.
that the mass is not a sacrifice for sin, and that the priest makes no
more sacrifice at mass, then a lay man does, but only ministers the sacrament
unto the people. The third against the worshippinge of the holy sacrament. But
Lib. 4. ca 14
noue hear s. damascene, saying. This is the pure, and vnblouddie sacrifice,
which our lord says by the prophet Malach. 1
is offered unto him from the aeste unto the west, forsooth christ's body and
blood for the establysheme^t of our soul, and body. Now to let pass many
other writers sainges, I will speak of cypria^s mi^de, Cyprianus* De coena
dmini.
and of one or two moo, and the^ so end this chaptre and book Cypria^ says.
After our lord had said, this is my body and this is my blood, do ye this in
my remembrance, as often as the thing is done with these words and this
faith, the bread Mark.
and the cup made holy with a solemn blessinge, profits unto the life and
salvation of the whole man, being both a medicine, and a sacrifice also to
heal sucknesses, and to purge sin. The same holy Lib. 1. epi. 9
martyr witnesses tgat the bisshops had made a decree before is time that he
should not be prayed for of te priest at the altar nor any sacrifice made for
Mark.
his soul departed hence, that did make a priest executour of his testament,
because that he deseruerth not to be prayed for at the altar, or that any
sacrifice should be offered for him at the altar, which calls priests from
the altar. Does not this ordinance of those bysshopes, whichwere before saint
Cyprians time, and the allowynge of the same by Cyprian, declare playnlie, that
the sacrifice of the mass was then judged to be available for the dead, and
Homi. 37. incuangelia
propitiatory for their offenses? Who then now sees not manyfestly, that your
doctrine, my lord is not approved (as ye say it is) of the au^cie^t doctors
but that they are utterly against it S. Gregory, which was above D ccccxl
years passed, writes thus also agrinst your doctrine. Let us send, brethren,
unto god our ambassadors, by weapi^ge, gyuinge of alms, and offeringe of holy
hoostes. For the sacrifice of the holy altar, offered with weapinge and
devotion of mind, does syngularly help unto our absolution from sin. For
as often times as we offer unto him the sacrifice, or host of his passion, so
often we do repare unto us his passion, for our absolution. Again, after he
had recited a story, that a man's chains, which was in preson, were lo used by
ones sainge mass for him, he writes thvs. Whereof then gather ye, most dear
brethren, how much the holy host offered of us may louse in us the ba^t of our
heart, if it offered of an other could louse the bands of the body in an
other. Many of you, dearly beloved brethren, have known cassie the bishop of
the cite Naruia, which daily used to offer sacrifice to god, in so much as
that no day almost of his life passed away, upon which he offered Haymo in ^.
Cor. 11
not unto god hostiam placationis, an host of pacyfiynge, or a sacrifice of
appeasinge gods wrath. Hitherto S. Gregory. This confirms Haymo a bishop,
which was above seven hundred Mark
years passed. That flesh, which christ took of his mother, and the bread,
that priests do consecrate, are not two bodies, but they make one body The
real presence of christ's body in the sacrament.
of christ, in so much that, whiles this is broken and eaten, christ is
offered in sacrifice and eaten, and yet he abides still whole alive. And as
that body, which he offered upon the cross, was offered for our salvation
and redemption, even so is this bread daily offered unto god for our
salvation and redemption, which is christ's body, althought it seame bread.
For our The mass is a sacrifice for sin
lord, and redeamer prouidynge for our fraylnes, because he knew us frail to
commit sin, has given this sacrament unto us, that for as much as he can not
now dye, and we do sin daily, we should have a very true sacrifice by which
we might be made clean from sin. Wherefore I letting pass now many
authorites of the ancient doctors, that do set forth this matter plainly,
exhort me^t nothing to doubt of this, doctrine, but to believe with S To. Io.
se^igi. de tempore.
Austen that says thus. What so ever and who so ever he be, he is no christian
man, that is not in christ's church. For yt is only the church, by which our
lord receaueth gladly sacrifice. In one house the la^be is eaten, for as much
as in one catholic church vera hostia rede^ptoris Exo. 12.
immolatur, the very host of our redeamour is offered in sacrifice. Unto whom
with the father and the holy ghost be honor and glory for ever. Amen.

Certain faults.
Leaf, Page, The line, read 2 1 5 of the 2 2 5 worthynes 2 2 11 bishop 2 2 18
Author 2 2 21 adjoined 3 1 1 bishop 3 1 12 plainly 7 2 15 savior 10 2 6
sytteth 22 1 the last wythyn 24 2 23 an altar 25 2 23 our 26 1 22 sacrifice 30
1 8 precious 32 2 21 Tra^substa^ti 39 1 21 sits atio^ 41 1 10 after 45 1 1
these words 45 1 11 mention 45 2 9 great 46 2 1 for 46 2 24 apostles 52 1 14
raze out the^ 60 2 4 the selt 60 2 5 which 63 2 11 Appointed that 71 1 20 your
every 72 1 18 but how 72 1 22 if they 72 2 24 bread 73 1 3 contraryly 78 1 11
altar 79 2 6 plainly 87 2 3 makes 88 2 20 in 88 2 24 nor the 89 2 12 which he
91 2 3 in all 94 1 9 there are 94 2 4 Almighty 94 2 22 them 95 2 8 which 117 2
17 the other that 118 1 1 ynt out these worlds for ever 118 1 16 also has 119
1 20 sacrifice 119 1 1 to god 119 2 21 of 120 1 15 whether 120 1 20 out 121 2
24 which 127 2 9 cauillinge 133 2 13 life 133 2 15 through

THE END.
A UN SEVL DIEV HONNEVR ET GLOIRE.
Est Jesus Christ pain vif an sacrement:
Ses fills par grace, en mangent dignement.
Quant plus l'article a croire est difficile,
Cheoir en erreur tant plus yest facile.
Christ dit son corpse estre an sacrement: voire
Sans autre prouue, a son dire fault croire.
DEVM COLE.
De tout ton coeur, de ta force, and puissance,
Rends gloire a Dieu, honneur and reverence.
Encontre tous par parolle notable,
Dois soustenir ce qui est veritable.
Deuant toute oeuure, en toute place, and lieu,
Done louenge, and gloire a un seul Dieu.
En chaschun cas judge par equite.
L'homme prudent aim le verite.
FIN.

