A brief treatise setting forth diverse truths necessary both to be believed of
christen people, and kept also, which are not expressed in the scripture but
left to ye church by the apostles tradition. Made by Rychard Smyth doctor of
divinity, and reader of it i^ Oxford. I will kep^ ^a^ faith being an old man,
in the which I was borne a child. S. Hierome to Pa^machius and Oceanus.

Enter ye in to cou^sayll, and it shall be dasshed, speak ye a word and it
shall not be done, because god is with us.

Esaye.viii. M. D. xlvii. Cu^ priuilegio ad imprimendu^ solu^.

What is the argument, or matter of this book.
IN this book, good christen reader, I do handle that matter, which is now in
this our time undoubtedly one of ye most special points, that are in
controuersye, question, and debate between us the catholics, and them that be
our adversaries. For upon this point hangs nyghe all their whole hold, to
abolish, extincte, and take clean away sundry and diverse godly and necessary
things, which not only now are / but have been also, even from the apostles
time believed, and kept in christ's catholic church.

For many men now commonly ask where we find in scripture, that man is bound
to fast, to keep any holy day, to honor the most blessed sacrament of
the aultare, and so almoost of every good thing in like wise. Therefore, when I
saw what, and how great dycay of the faith, and of christen religion, comes
of that ungodly opinion / which affirms that every necessary truth is
written in the Bible, or holy scripture, I thought it good, and nedeful, to
confute, and reprove that perilous belefe, and to declare the clean contrary,
which is that many things necessary both to be believed, and also observed of
us christen people, are not expressly written in the new, and the old
testamente, but are left to us by the holy apostles, and other the ancient
fathers, and godly men's tradition.

Wherefore take well in worth, gentle reader, this mine endeavor, and labor,
which I have taken to auaunce and set forth the truth of Christ's religion,
that thereby thou myghtest be confirmed in the truth / which have not yet fallen
from it, and they, that are gone from any one point of truth herein expressed,
may see their error, and return again unto the truth, through gods
styryng, and grace / to whom be all honor, and glory world with out end.
Amen.

Vnum est crimen, quod nunc vehementer damnatur ac punitur, diligens obseruatio
traditionum patru^ D. Basilius epistola.lxx. One offense or fault there is,
which is now sharply condemned, and punished, the diligent obseruyng or
keeping of ye fathers traditions. Saint Basyll.
The preface to the gentle reader.
Our sauyoure Jesus Christ, good chryste^ reader, came in to this wretched and
miserable world, taking our nature on him in the womb of the most blessed,
and glorious virgyn Mary his mother / to bear witness unto the truth, as he
affyrmed, saying to Pylate. Ego in hoc natus su^, et ad Johan. 19.
hoc veni in mundu, vt testimoniu^ perhibe^ veritati. That is to say I am
borne therefore, and I came therefore in to the world, that I may bear
witness unto the truth. Seeing therefore that christ the truth it self came
to testyfye and defend the truth, suffering for it death most sharp and
shameful, to the end that we might know the truth, and the truth at the
length might deliver us from all error, and miserye, Johan. 9.
as he him self does say, Is it not mete that we follow his example therein, and
defend the truth to the uttermost of our power, not fearyng to dye therefore If
need shall require, as our sauyoure has already done? For the dyscyple is not
above his Mat. ^0.
master, nor the seruante greater then his lord. If we be the folowers of
Christ, we shall be partakers of glory and honor with him, which he obtained
Romans 9.
through death and passion sufferynge (as saint Paul witnesses) Heb. 2.
and upon the other side if we deny him, being the truth (which we shall do
not defending the truth) he will denyvs before his father As he seyth Mat. 10.
him self. Lactancius a very old writer said to Tullye the great Orator.
Quid profuit Lib. 2. de Orig. errotis. ca. 3.
vidisse te veritate^, qua nec defensurus esses, nec secuturus? What has it
profyted the: says he^ to have seen or perceived the truth / which neither
thou should defend another follow? Socratis carce te^ times ideoque
patrociniu^ veritatis no audes suscipere. At morte^ vt sapiens conte^nere
debuisti. That is to say. Thou do fear Socra tes preso^, and therefore thou
dare not take on the, the defense of the truth But thou ought to have
dispysed death, as a wise man. Are not, good christen reader, many men now
among us christen people, in like dread? Do not we greatly fear to defend
the truth, lest we should suffer for it ympresonynge, yea y^ less is, lest we
should either lose thereby our goods and promotions or else not come unto them?

We do forgette the great and dreadefull thretnynges of God set forth in
scripture against them, that will not teach, preach maynteyne and defend ye
truth Said not the holy prophet Esaye, Ve mihi, quia taecui. Woo Cap. 6.
to me, because I kept silence, and did not boldly reprove the wicked king
Ozias. How many men now fear this gods curse. Woe to you, that say ill is
good and good is ill, puttyng darkness Cap. 6.
light, and light darkness, putting bitter in to sweet, and sweet in to
bitter. Do we not so, I pray the, good christen reader, as often as we do hyde
and dyssemble the truth for fear or any other carnal affection / and set it
not forth to the edifyenge of ye people. God also curses the^ Hiere, 23.
by the mouth of his Prophet Hieremy saying. Vae pastoribus qui dispergunt,
et la cerant gregem pascuae meae. That is to say. Woe be to the shepeherdes,
which do scatter abroad, and rent the flock of my pasture. This curse
touches not only ill p^achers, whi do feed their flock with erroneus doctrine,
but also al other that do suffer heresies to be taught the people, and do not
again say ye teachers of the^, neither defend ye truth according to that
grace, which God has given them. Whom the prophet Ezechiell in the person
of god thus curses, terribly sayng. Ve pastoribus Cap. 34.
Israel, qui pas^ebant seme^ipsos. Woe be to the shepeherdes of Israel, Beware
yt that are ^^ sent from your ^ures or being there preach not the word of god
to the flock.
which did feed them selves It follows. Does the sheep feed the shepeherdes?
Ye have eaten the milk and are clothed with the wolle, and ye have killed yt,
which was fat, but ye have not fed my flock. Ye have not made strong that
which was weak and ye have not healed the sick. Ye have not bound together
ye broken, niether brought again yt which wa^dered away. Ye sought not yt which
was lost, or peryshed. Ite^ my sheep are scattered abroad, or dyspersed,
because they had no shepeherde, and they are devoured, of all beasts of the
field. Hitherto god by his prophet has cursed all ill pasturs, or
shepeherdes, which do not feed their flock with the fode of gods holy word,
according to their bounden duetye, but do feed them selves, spending the
goods of their promotions with out preaching to the people, which are due only
as a stypend to the^ that do preach gods word or ministre his sacraments as it
appears not only here in this place of the prophet, but also in this Paul's
saying. Who warreth 1. Cor. 9.
with his own stipend or upon his own wages? Who does plant a vine, and
eats not of the fruit? Who fedeth a flock, and eats not of y^ flocks
milk? Meant not S. Paul here, that like as the man of war ought to live by
his wages, if he do go to war, or else not, and as he that planteth a vine
should eat of the fruits of it, or else he ought not to eat of them. Finally
many now lyu^ of the te^^hes and churches goods against this doctrine. of
saint Paul.
and as the herdman or shepeherde, which fedeth the flock ought to eat of ye
flocks milk or else not, even so he that preaches and teaches the word of
god warring manly against the enemies of the truth, plantyng the vyneyarde of
Christ the church, and fedynge the lambs and sheep of god the christian
people, ought to live with, and by his the tenthes and other the revenues and
fruits of his promotion, benefice, or byshoprich, which thing if he do not,
let him beware lest he take ye fruits unjustly to his dampnation, as which are
due only to him yt labors i^ preachi^g, teaching, sacraments ministryng
and praying for the people, prouydynge for them all things necessary for
their souls health, defe^dinge them from the wolfes devouring, and geuyng them
a good example of virtuous living as it appears in John's gospel, and the
first of saint Peter's epistles. Io. 21. 1. Pe. 5.


Saint Paul preached the gospel freely, and took not so much as meat and
drink of certain people to who^ he preached, and yet he said. Woe to me if I
1. Cor. 9.
preach not the gospel, but many of us priests, and bishops, clean
contrarylye to that his godly example, do live meryly upon the tenthes and
other the goods due to preachers and teachers for their wages, stypende, and
sustentation, another preaching nor teaching, and yet we think no thing upon
that woo, which god so often times threteneth to them, that do not their duty.

Comes not by this means. I beseech the, good reader, a wonderful decay unto
Christ's religion, faith, and virtuous living? Are not the wolfes bold then to
enter in to the flock of sheep to disperse them / to take some of them, and
to devour the^ when the shepeherd is either absent from the^, as many now are
other to get mo promotyo^s or else to spare their purses, or else being present,
barketh nothing at all against the^? Why do we not open our eyes closed with
covetousness, and other carnal affections / and se how much hurt rises Ezec.
19. 34
upon this defaulte, and remember that the blood of all the sheep / which do
peryshe through our negligence, shall be required of us. For we shall make a
rekeni^g to god for every soul committed to us, as Paul says to the
hebrews, Heb. 13.
where he writes thus. Obedite praepositis vestris, et lubia cete eis Ipsi
enim pervigilant quasi ratione^ pro ai^abus vestris reddituri. That is in
english. Obey your overseers and be ye obedye^t to the^ for they watch for you
as though they should give an acco^pte for your souls. Upon the which text the
great clerk saint Chrysostom thus writes dre^dfullye to withdraw men's
ambitions minds through fear of yt danger / i^ the which curates are, from
the desire of promotions, and taking charge of men's souls Quid dicamus
infaelicibus illis, et miseris, qui semetipsos ad alios regendos precipitant,
et se in tantoru^ supplieiorum abyssum iactant?

Oi^m quos regis, mulieru^ pueroru^ atque viroru^, tu ratione^ redditurus es,
tato igni tuu^ subiicis caput. Miror si potest saluari aliqu is rectorum.

That is to say. What may we say unto those unhappy and wretched men, yt do
throw the^ selves hedlyng to rule other: and do cast the^ selves in to the
boto^les depnes of so great ponyshementes? Thou shall make an acco^ptefor all
women, children, and men / which thou do govern: thou put test thy head
under so great a fire. I merueyle if any of the rulers can be saved. Hit
herto. s. Chrysostom, whose words may and ought also to fear every man from
the desire of any promotio^s whereby he should be charged with the cure of souls.
Are not they worse the^ pyuyshe, and blinded with ambition, which do not only
covet bysshopriches, / benefyces and other like promotions / byndi^g the^
selves to make answer for all their souls, that be in their cure, but also
do make friends: for the obtaynyng of the^, go to service, and give money very
largly for the^: For benefices are now common marcha^dise, and sold to the^
that will give most for the^: with out all regard, and respect had unto the
learning, and honesty of the priest, to whom they are sold Whereby aryseth
great decay in christ's faith, and much leudnes among the people, through
the ignorance of such persons, and vycars. For when the blind leads the
blind: both do fall in to the den as christ says. Let the patrons and gyuers
of such benefyces Mat. 15.
beware in time, reme^brynge that they shall make an acco^pte to god for the
souls, which do perish by their promoti^ge the unworthy, and unmeet persons
unto their benefices, according to this saying of saint Panl. Not only To. 1.
they that do such things, are worthy of death, but they also, which do
consent to the doers. In the beginning of Christ's church men were promoted,
that were apt to rule the people and not the unworthy for money, as they now
commonly be. Tertulyan, which was within. CC. years after Christ's birth thus
In apolog. aduersus gentes. Religioni ac doctrine opprobriu^ nascitur quod
sacerdocia vel ministeria, ambitione pot^us et gr^a, quam meritoru^ iudicio
deferuntur Greg Naza^ in apoligitico sermon de spy. sancto.
writes. President probati quique seniores, vel presbyteri, honorem istum non
precio, sed testimonio adepti. That is to say, every proved or tried elder, or
priest does rule, or is in authority, which have gotten that honor or
dignity not with money, but by witness borne of their learning and virtue.
Our lord would it were so now, for then honesty, and learning should much more
florysh, then now they do, and thereby heresies, and errors should very little
prevail, where now they prevail greatly through the ignorance of curates.

Let therefore sellers of benefices mark what the holy martyr S Cypryan, says
of such marchaunte men by these words.

Spiritus sanctus Giezi mercenarium lepra condemnat, et Iero boam vendentem
sacerdocia cum apostatis locat. Which is thus much to say in english. The
holy ghost condempneth Giezi with a lepry which was an hired servant made
marchandyse taking money for his masters curing of Naama^s disease, and
places Jeroboam, selling benenefices, Sellers of benefices are compared unto
apostatayes
with them, that do forsake Christ's religion. Lo here saint Cypryan says,
that the holy gooste sets sellers of benefices with them that do for sake
Christ's religion, which thing declares manifestlye how great sin it is
to sell benefices, though men now these days do esteem and judge it no fault
at all, such is their blyndnes therein, rysyng of covetousness. What vengiau^ce
god has taken upon them that came to their promotions by any unlawful means.
It apeareth by many hystoryes. Of the which I will allege a few to withdraw
men from the bying and sellyng of spiritual dignities. First we read in the
second of the Machabeis, Cap. 7.
yt one Alchimus by Demetrius thrust into the office of the high priest lived
wonderfully ill, as all do for the greatest number which are promoted by money,
and he was stryken with the palsy, and made dome departed without any testament.
Jason also boughte a benefice of Antiochus, but he escaped not 2. Math. ^ 2.
Match. 4.
unpunished therefore, for he wa^deryng and fleyng from city to city departed
this life without lamentation of the people, and was cast away with out burial.
Menelaus suppla^ted Jason biyng 2. Match. 5.
his benefice of Antiochus, but he paid dearelye for it, when he was cast do
^^ne headling from the top of a tower, and turned into ashes. Antiochus
which 2. Match. 13
sold the preests benefice to Jason and Menelaus escaped not clear, as the
which rotted being alive, and his flesh was full of vermyne or worms. Wherefore
let both the biers and the sellers also of benefices beware of gods
ve^geaunce, which thus grievously has punyshed these men for our ensample, and
that we should be assured nothing doutyng, but if we like offend, we shall
suffer like punyshmente in this life, and much more in another, except we
repent, and amend in due season. To be short the sellers of benefices unto the
unlearned or ill living priests for money do sin deadly by respect of
person, which is forbidden Jacob. 2.
in sundry places of ye scripture, but specially in saint James ye second
chapter. I speak here nothing at all of them that do give their benefices, and
dignityes unto their servants, chaplyns, kynsfolke, or any other being unapt
to preach and teach gods word unto their flock, leauyug them vnpromoted,
which both for their virtue, and learning also are very worthy to be preferred
thereunto and should do therein much good where the other do very little, yea
some times much hurt.

Is not this acceptio vel respectus personatum the regard of persons against
gods law? This vice does almooste as much harm in Christ's church, and is
nygh as ill, as is the sellyng of spiritual promotions. I let pass at this
time, their abominable covetousness that do give their benefices unto block
heads, not mete for their little discretion, and less learning to any such
thing, and do take them selves a part and portion of the fruits belongyng to
such promotions. These men are bound to make restitution of that goods,
which they have inioyed against gods law, which declarethe that the
tenthes of benefices are dew only to them that do preach, and teach 1. Cor. 9.
the scripture, rulynge, and gouernyng well the people to them committed. For
our Lord has ordained (says Paul.) That they live by the altar, that do
serve it, and live of the gospel, which do preach the gospel. Therefore ^.
Cor 9.
he that neither serves the altar, nor prcacheth the gospel can not iustlye
live by the tenthes and other the revenues and fruits perteynynge to the
ministers of the altar, and the gospel. Let me not have a just occasion to
say unto you, that has or do offend in this point, as Christ said unto the
Jews. Si veritatem dico, Johan. 9.
quare non creditis mihi? If I say the truth, why do ye not believe me? He that
is of god hears the words of god, therefore you do not hear, because ye are
not of God. I am well assured that to no good man I shall be rekened an enemy,
telli^g the truth Gala. ^.
as Paul was esteemed of the Galathyans because he taught them the truth. Now
to finysh this preface, I most humbly be sech every patron, and gyuer of any
benefice, and other spiritual promotions to chose freely with out money apt and
mete priests thereunto, laid aside all carnal affection, both for the
discharge of their own consciences, and also that by the study and labor of
learned, and godly beneficed me^ the truth of Christ's religion and virtue of
life may the better go forward, and flourish, preuaylyng against falsitie, and
vice. Also I do exhort all priests to cast away their inordinate ambition,
and desire of promotions, neither procuryng them to them selves by money, or
any other unlawful means, nor yet receyuyng them being offered, except they
be apt, and able to discharge the same cures. And if they so be, and do
thereupon take any such dignity of Christ's church, let every one of them
bear in his mind the strayte account, which he shall make unto God for the
souls committed to him to be ruled, and taught, ever following saint Peter's
lesson, saying to all bishops and priests having cure of soul. Feed ye the
flock of god, which is among you, prouidynge (for the^) not as constrained,
but willyngly according to god, Neither for fylthy lucres sake, but
voluntaryly, another rulyng like Lords over the clargye, or else 1. Petri. 5.
christen people, but heartily, being come an ensample of the flock. And when
Christ the chief of the shepeherdes shall appear, ye shall receive the crown of
glory, that ca^ not be corrupted. The which our lord god grant unto us, for
Christ his sons sake, head of all shepeherdes, that boughte the same for us
with the shedyng of his most precious blood, to who^ with the father, and the
holy ghost, be impery, glory, and honor world without end.

Amen.
The first chaptre touching bryefly, and as it were by the way, the
aucthorytie of bysshopes to to make laws. etc.
ALbeyt that the holy scripture is perfect Deuteronomy, 32.
as all other the works of god are, good christen reader. Yet there be sundry
and diverse things theri^, not set forth expressly and namelye, which every
christen man is bound to receive, as true and necessary, beleuynge and
obseruinge under the pain of everlasting da^pnation, as it shall be hereafter
proved, not one lie by Gods word, but also by certain general councils. The
auctoryte of ye catholyke church of christ, and the ancient doctors,
expou^dyng the scripture. Whereby it shall appear manyfestlye how they are
deceived that will believe nothing: that is not put forth manyfestlye in the
scripture, ever demau^dynge where that is found in the scripture: or how can
ye prove it by the scripture / which ungodly doctrine was brought up by the
walde^ses, Johan wicleph John^ hulse, and Martyn Luther to no small decay of
the faith, and Christ's holy religion: which every good catholyke man both
sees, and also lamenteth very greatelye. But once to begin this treatise /
I will allege some textes of the scripture to prove that the holy apostles of
Christ left diverse things in christ's church to be believed, and kept / of
the which the scripture makes no mency on at all: but they be aucthoryzed by
tradition and custom only without the scripture. Of the which places this
shall be the first of saint Mathews the.xxiii. Chapter. Then spoke Jesus
unto the multitude or assembly of people / and to his discyples. The scrybes
and pharysees have sytten upon Moses chair, seat: or benche. Therefore all
that ever they bid you, observe: and do, but do not after their work es: for
they say, and do not. Saint Hylarye, which was above.xii. C: years past:
expou^dynge the second psalm of ye sawter, understands by these Quare
fremuerunt gentes.
words that our sauyoure gave commandment to the people and his disciples to
observe the tradicyons which the scrybes and pharyses should teach the^ beside
the law of God written. Hylaries words be these in latyne. Qua^uis Moises
veteris testamenti verba in literis condidisset, tamen se peratim queda^ ex
occult is legis secretoria mysteria septuaginta senioribus, qui doctores
deinceps manerent, intimauerat. Cuius doctrinae etiam du^s in euangeliis
meminit, dice^s. Super cathedra^ Moisi etc Doctrina ergo horu^ mansit in
posteru, que ab ipso scriptore legis accepta, in hoc senioru and numero, et
seruitio, co^seruata est. Which words are this much in english. Though
Moses had writtte^ ye words of ye old testament, yet he opened severally or
apart unto ye lxx. elders, which should remain afterward doctors or techers,
certain more secret mysteries of the hid things of the law, of the which
doctrine our lord also made mention saying. The Scrybes and Pharyses have
sytten. etc. Wherefore their doctrine has remained afterward, or to the world
to come, the which being received of him which wrote the law: is kept both
in this nombre and service also of the priests or elders. Hitherto saint
Hylarye whose words do declare sufficyentlye that those things / which were
then practysed: and had in use among the faithful / were not then nor are yet:
all written, but even given from one to another as by hand, and so are comen
to our tyine.

Moreover saint Clement saint Paul's co^panyon in preaching Episc. i. A.
the gospel, affyrineth that saint Peter the Apostle did teach that men ought
to obey the bishops commandments in all lefull thiges though they did other
wise live, bearing in remembrance our Lords precepte sayng. Do ye the
things / which they say or bydde you do, but do ye not as they do / for they
say: and do not, Also he says. Our hearts and bodies must be prepared unto
the holy obedience of gods commandments, and his bishops and preachers /
that we may escape the pain of hell, and come to everlasting glory.

These words saint Clemente testifyeth that he learned of S. Peter's mouth,
and showed the^ to saint James the apostle.

About the end of that epistle written to saint James saint Clement thus
says. Hec ergo praecepta nequis credat absque sui periculonegligenda, aut
dissimula^da, quia iudicio del ignis aeterni corme^ ta sustinebit, qui
ecclesiastica decreta neglexerit. That is to say in our speech Therefore let no
man believe that these co^mau^deine^tes are to be despised, or dissembled
without his peril: because that he shall suffer by gods judgment the pains or
tourme^tes of fire everlasting: which shall dispyse the churches decrees: or
determiniations. Here we se that saint Clement affyrmed that he learned of
Saint Peter's own mouth that the dispysers of ye churches ordinances should
be dampened for ever therefore, and Marten luther following other heretykes being
before his tyine / as Joha^ wycleph and Johan Husse, was not ashamed to teach
that no inennes ordinance should bind us to the observing thereof upon arye
such pain, and that nothing was necessary to be done of us, except it were
commanded in the holy scripture, Whether ought we to believe of these two /
Luther or saint Clement the apostles Paul's co^panyon in preaching which
learned this lesson of saint Peter? But now as touching the tert of saint
Mathewe / which is before alleged. Luther and his scolers do understand it
only of those things that are wryte^ in the scripture, and that in these
things only obedience ought to be given unto the minysters of the church, and
not when they command any thing to be done / which is not contained in the
holy scripture. To that I answer that saint Hylary: and S clement: yea saint
Peter, of who^ S. Clement learned yt that text made for the observing of the
churches ordinance: did better perceive what Christ our savior mente by
those his words, then Luther and his disciples. Again I say that the words
immediatlye following in that chapter will not suffer that letter to be
understand only of obedience to be given to the ministers of the church
preaching gods law. For anon after it follows thus. They bind heavy, and
intolerable burdens, and lay them upon me^nes shoulders. Which words do
declare that our savior commanded the people and his disciples to observe and
do those things, which the scribes and pharisees did bind, and lay upon
me^nes shoulders them selves, and not only those things, which god him self
did bind, and lay upon Lib. 4. Aduersus martionem.
men's shoulders. Also Tertulyan understands by those heuye and intolerable
burde^s, men's precepts, and doctrynes, which they taught for their own
profit. Saint Bernarde testyfyeth Homili^. 66. in c^^^.
the same saying upon this text of. S Matthew. The scrybes and pharyses, etc.
Qui non audierint eis tanqua^ episcopis, inobedientie reifuerunt, etia in ipsum
dominu^ praecipie^te^ and dicente^ Que dicunt, facite. That is to wit. They
which have not obeyed the^ as bishops, have been gyltye of dysobedye^ce, yea
against our lord him self co^mau^dyng and saying. Do ye that thing which
they bid you do. Whereof it is manifest yt the scrybes and pharyses: of who^
Christ spoke there, though they were very ill men, had auctorite not only to
teach, and instruct the people with gods holy word, but to co^mau^d also the^
to observe, keep: and do such things yt they should judge necessary to edifye
ye congregation of christyans, albeit they did abuse yt their auctorite, of
Christ declared, when he said. They bind heuye and intolerable burde^s / and
Math. 23.
lay the^ upon men's shulders. The holy doctor Chrysostom after this manner
does understand Cap. 13.
this text of Matthew saying upon these words of. s. Paul to the Hebrews obey
your rulers, or the^ that are cheyfe in office: and be ye subject to the^. If
he that is in auctorite or a ruler be ill / shall we obey him? He answers you
if he be ill in any cause of the faith, fly from him / and avoid him, not
only if he be a Gala. 1.
man, but also if he were an angel co^mi^g from heaven, because. s. Paul says.
If we, or an angel from heaven should preach unto you otherwise the^ that which
ye have received, let him be separate from your company. Also. s. Ioha^ says
If any man do come to you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not. But if
you do call hi^ wicked i^ his desire and manners: or if he be called ill, or
wicked in his desire and manners, search not. I say not this of my self but of
the scripture saying. The scrybes and pharyses have sytte^ upon moises seat,
or stole, do ye those things that they bid, but do not after their works. For
they have a dignyte or great auctoryte though they be of an unthrifty living.
But nevertheless look not upon their manners / but to their sermons or saynges.
Hitherto. s. chrysostom declarynge that ill bishops ought to be obeyed in
their leful commandments, with out regard had unto their ill life. Is it
not as conuenyent, and more, that the people obey their bishops
commandments, decrees de^minatio^s, and ordinances being good and lefull,
according, the auctorytie and power given the^ to edifye, and not to stroye
as, s. Paul affyrmethe, then that servants ^. Corin. 13.
should obey, and fulfill their masters byddynges in all things pertaining to
their office, and that children should obey their fathers and mothers, since
the bisshops are masters and pare^tes of the soul, and these other of the
body, and is therefore as much dyffere^ce between those kinds of masters and
pare^tes, as is between the soul and the body? And does not Saint Paul
command the servants to obey their masters per oi^a hollye or in every
their honest and lawful bydynges, Eccle. 5. Ephe. 6. Ti. ^^ P^.
and likewise the sons to obey their fathers in all their commandments in
domino in our lord? This may not be understand of those things only which god
expressly commands to be done in the scripture. First because Paul says
per oi^a through al things, not only if they command those things that the
scripture wylleth to be done.

Secondly because that as touching things set forth by the scripture the
master is as well bound to obey his servant, as the seruau^te the master,
and the father the son, as co^trarily, not for as much as they bydde August
a^ casulan^^
that to be obeyed and done, but because god does command it. Thyrdly who
doubtethe that if the master command his servant to do any thing
apperteynynge to his duyte, and in like manner the father the son, but he
synneth disobeyng it, though it be a thing indifferente of it self, and not
commanded in the scripture namely? Moreover co^maundethe not saint Paul that
we should obey our kings commandments, laws, and ordynau^ces, no^ solu^
propter ir^, sed etia^ propter co^scia^m. That is not only to avoid his
worldly and temporal ponyshement, but also to escape gods vengeance, and Roma.
13.
eurrlastyng peynes: as Saint Ambrose expounds that letter? August.
bonifacio.
Saint Austen ^sayeth that he which disobeyeth Emperors and rulers
co^mau^demetes gets him self thereby great ponyshement. Therefore subjects
are bound to obey and fulfill the princes laws, which are not contained in
gods law / being not against it, as chryste^ people be bound to obey, and do
that, which their bishop bid death them to do being an honest thing, and
making for the setting forth either of the faith, or else of good and virtuous
lyui^g though gods law make no me^cyon thereof, and saint Ioha^s dyscyple
Ignatius says. Dignu^ est et Epistola. 2.
vos obedire episcopo vestro et in nullo ei co^tradicere. It is mete yt you
also obey your bishop, and say against him in nothing, For it is (says he
there) a terryble thing to say contrary unto any such. For a man does not
despise this visyble man the bishop, but he co^temneth in him god invisible,
which can not be dispysed of any, because he has his promotyon not of any
man, but of god For god says unto Samuel of his dyspysers. They have not
despised the but me. And Moses said unto the people grutchynge against him.
For you have not murmured against me but against the lord God. Hitherto saint
Ignatius S. Johan the euangelystes scoler has set forth the obedience due
unto a bishop, whose godly catholyke doctrine ought rather to be believed,
obeyed, and followed then Luthers ungodly and erroneus teaching, which is clean
contrary to it. Hitherto I have entreated of ye auctoryte of bishops in making
of laws and ordynau^ces, which the people ought to obey I did not entend, when
I began to make this treatise, to speak any thing of bishops laws, but
only to declare that many and diverse things are to be believed, and kept of
us christen people, which the holy scripture puts not forth expresselye, by
the which it might appear manifestly, how ungodly a thing it is to believe
utterly, nothing not set forth plainly and namelye in the scripture, and to
ask where that is found in gods word, or in the bible. This I say was,
and is my chief, and principal purpose, and therefore I will now set upon it,
lettyng pass other things not apperteynynge to the same, most heartily
besechyuge the, gentle reader, of charity to accept and to take i^ good worth
this mine endeavor, labor, and peynes taking only (as god well knows the
searcher of my thoughts) to auaunce, defend, and set forth the truth of our
religion to gods glory, the honor of our most dread soueraygne lord
King Edward the syxte, and to the edifiyng of this our country. That thereby
the ignoraunte may be taught the truth, the faithful and catholic confirmed
and made more steadfast in ye truth, and they yt have wandered from the truth of
things here publyshed and declared, may, (if they will learn the truth and list
not still to abide in the falsitie to their undoing both in body and soul,)
se here the truth openly proved, and thereby recule back from their errors
and return again to the embracing of the truth, to the great honor of god,
and their own souls health. The which to do if I may perceive but one only
man or woman it shall be unto me a great comfort, gladness and joy, and no
little cause to think this my labor well spente, though it shall not content
and please every body, another persuade them, which may be more easelye
overcome, then persuaded, as saint Hierome makes mention that Lucifer
confessed of his fellows, and disciples saying. Vnum tibi confiteor, Lib.
aduersus luciferianos.
quia mores meoru^ apprime noui, facilius eos vinci posse, qua^ persuaderi. I
confess one thing to the, for as much as I know chefely the conditions or
manners of mine (disciples or scolers) that Such are al heretike^ commonly as
says saint Ch^isostom upon Matthew.
they may be more easelye vanquyshed or overcome then persuaded or induced to
believe the truth. But ones to begin this treatise, I will allege a few textes
of ye scripture, to prove that the holy scripture contains not manefestly
and namely all the things which we are bound to believe, and to do also, and
this in this next Chaptre now following.

The second Chapter co^taynyng in it certain places of the Verities unwritten.
scripture, prouyng that Christ and his apostles taught and left to the
church many things without writing, which we must both believe steadfastly,
and also fulfill obedientlye, under pain of damnation ever to endure.
OVre savior Christ said unto his apostles, I have yet many things to say
unto you, but ye ca^ not now bear them. When that the Io. 16.
spirit of truth shall come, he shall teach you al truth, the.xvi. chapter of
Iohans gospel. Do not these words of Christ show openly that he taught not
his apostles before the coming of the holy ghost upon Wytsonday all the truth,
because they were not able before that time to bear and perceive sundry
points pertaining unto the truth of his religion, which things the holy
spirit of the truth taught the^ afterward, and they the church without any
writing, so that the same came from them to other the faithful from time to
time unwritten, of the which the acts of the apostles do make mention the.xv.
chapter saying. Paul Act. 15.
and Silas walked over Syria and Cicilia co^firmynge the church Act. 16.
and co^maundynge them to keep the precepts of the Apostles and the elders.
Also the.xvi. chapter we read that when saint Paul and Tymothye had gone over
the cities, they gave to the people the determinations, or ordinances to keep,
which were decreed of the Apostles and the elders / that were at Jerusalem.
Such ordinances are not written in the scripture, but delivered and taught
the church by mouth, and by the lively voice of the teachers, which is a
stronger instrument to teach both the faith and good manners also, then is the
writers hand. For (as Quintilian says truly. (Viua vox alit before, et
veheme^tius ac acrius afficit. That is to say in englysh. The quycke voice
fedeth more fully, and moves affecion more Paulino de oi^bus sacre scripture
libris.
myghtely and sharply. With him agrees well saint Hierom writing thus. Habet
nescio quid latentis energiae, viue vocis actus, in aures discipuli de authoris
ore transfusa, fortius sonat. That is to say. The deed of the lyuelye voice
has, I can not tell what of a preuye strength, efficacye, or operation, and it
powered out from the mouth of the maker or autour, into ye learners ears
souneth more strongely. But now some will say here to me that these decrees,
ordinances, and determinations of the apostles, and the elders are now
written, and set forth in the bible, as Bullinger says, with diverse other of
that sect, but he says it only without all probation, and that against not
only all the holy, and old writers minds, (with who^ he can no better be
resembled, and compared / either for learning or else for virtue, then with the
swiftnesses of an hare the slowenes of a snale) but also against ye canons, or
book of rules let forth by the holy apostles, for ye churches erudition, and
learning both in the faith, and honest living also, though Bullynger be not
ashamed to deny them utterly, as unworthy to be judged written by the
apostles, in that point preferryng his own opinion, fantasye, and judgment
before saint Damascenes, which was above. M. years before Damas. lib, 4. ca.
19, The ceno^s of the apostles do to^teyne many verities not written in the
bible.
fore Bullyngers days, and allows them as a part of the holy word and
scripture of God, saying that they were gathered together, and written by
saint Clemente, which was conuersaunt with the apostles, and therefore no man
ought to doubt, but he knew well that those canons were made by them. In
these canons are diverse things set forth which the church now practyseth, and
uses necessarylye for the honorynge of God, and the edifienge of the people,
which are not written in the bible, as here after it shall appear at large, by
gods grace. These In autentitis.
canons of the apostles were accepted / regarded, and esteemed as the holy
apostles doings of the emperor Iustinia^, ye which beside the long and
constaunte opinion of Christ's catholyke church, the syxt council also did
acknowledge to be set forth by the apostles, whe^they were douted Lap. 25. 40
43.
much of, whether they were the apostles, or not. Therefore Bullyngers
judgment herein ought to be judged erroneous, which is against so many and
so weyghtie witnesses, which I have now recited, and therefore those canons
must be taken for the apostles doctrine, and teaching by a lively voice, and
the mouth only without putting them into the body of the holy scripture,
and we ought as well to believe, and keep the^ as that which is contained
expresselye in the scripture, for as much as both of them two comes from the
holy ghost, the author of al truth, which taught ye apostles all truth,
according to our saviors promise made unto the^. Johan. 16.
But I will go forward to the rehearsal of other textes, which do prove that
the holy apostles taught the church, or the beleuynge people then being, many
and diverse things to believe, and to observe also only by mouth without
leauyng them behind them in wryttynge. The which done men may be ashamed
hereafter to say, that they will believe nothing / not expressed in the holy
scripture, when they dose the contrary to that sufficiently proved by the
scripture, and so amend their belefe in that point, lest they at the length
repent it, when it shall not avail them. The holy apostle saint ^. Cor. 2.
Paul writing to the Corinthians, after he had spoken much of the blessed
sacrament of the altar, conteynyng in it the very natural body, and blood of
our savior Jesus Christ, and not a sign of them only, as I have declared of
late in a book set forth of that same matter, thus streighte writethe
concludynge that treatise, and finyshinge that eleue^th chaptre. Caetera au^t
cu^ venero dispona, that is, but I will set other things in an order, when I
shall come. The greek 1. Cor. 2.
letter has. Ta de lipa, os an eltho diataxomae. Which may be thus turned
into latin. Reliqua vero, cu^ venero, de cerna^. But the things remaining,
when I shall come to you, I will ordeyne.

These words of saint Paul do show manifestlye yt he wrote not to the
Cori^thians the hole manner, and form of receyuynge the blessed sacrament of
the altar, but left some things unwritten, which he taught them by mouth
only without writing, when he came to them, and was present with the^, and
therefore this text does prove that all things, which a christen man ought to
believe, and keep, are not set forth in the holy scrip ture, but diverse things
are comen to us by the holy apostle Paul's tradition. That saint Paul thus
here mente the holy doctor saint Austen saying to January. Epistola.cxix. By
these Traditi^^ of the apostles perteynyng to the mass and the blessed
sacrament o^ the altar.
words of saint Paul / I will when I shall come set other things in an
order, we may understand, that it was much that he should show in an epistle
that hole order of doing (in receyuyng the sacrament of the altar,) which
the whole church through the world keeps / to be disposed of him, that is
varyed with no diversity of manners.

Do not these words of saint Austayne show that after his judgment (which
was almost in every point of divinity most excellent of al doctors, which
wrote upon the scripture) saint Paul did not describe, and set forth the
whole manner and order of receyuynge the sacrament of the altar in that his
epistle, nor any other writing, but only by mouth taught it the Corinthians,
Tertulian writing to his wife speaking of a woman married to a heithen man
says of receyuyng the sacrament of the altar before other meats fasting.
Non sciet maritus, quid a^te oe^m cibum gustes? Ets^ scierit, non pane^ illu^
credit esse, qui dicitur.
which now remains in Christ's church as come from him by tradition. With
the which agrees right well that the which saint Austayne writteth in that
same epistle saying. Though our lord Jesus Christ gave his blessed body and
blood unto his apostles after supper, yet the whole church may not be blamed,
that the holy sacrament is ever taken of men yet being fasting. Ex hoc eni^
placuit spu^i scto^, vt i^ honore^ ta^tisacra me^ti i^ os xp^iani prius corpus
dominicu^ i^traret, qua^ exteri, vel ceteri cibi. Na^ ideo per vniuersu^ orbe^
mos iste seruatur. Thus it is in english For after this time (of Christ's
maundy) it pleased ye holy ghost, that to the honor of so great a sacrament
our Lords body should enter into a christian man's mouth before outward or
other meats. For therefore this custom is kept through ye whole world. In
these words, good christen reader / there are two things specially to be
noted, the one is that saint Austayne (a man of such deape knowledge in
gods word as none has been since the Apostles time) affirmed that it
pleased the holy ghost the spirit of truth, that we christen people should
receive the body of Christ in the sacrament of the altar before we eat any
other meat, and so fasting. The which thing is not expressed in the holy
scripture, but rather the contrary, for as much as in it we find yt Christ gave
his body to his discyples after supper was done, when they Math. 26.
had eaten the paschal lamb, and so this custom came in to christ's church by
the tradition of the apostles, whom the holy gooste taught not this point
only for the edifyeng of christ's church, but all other truths necessary
thereunto, accordyngly as christ had promised them before his death. Johan the
euangeliste wytnessynge it in his Gospel plainly, Is not even this one thing
touching the receyuyng of our hosle fasting, taught by the holy ghost without
puttyng it in the scripture, enough and sufficye^t to make us to believe yt al
truth necessary to be known, believed, and observed is not expressed i^ the
scripture, and to leave ungodly to ask where that or this thing is set forth
in gods word, snpposynge that except Johan. 16.
it can be proved by plain scripture, we should never believe it as truth: nor
keep it as profitable. The second point worthy to be marked in. S. Austens
words above recited is yt he says, it pleased the holy ghost that to the
honor of so great a sacrament the body of our lord Jesus Christ should
enter in to a christen man's mouth before other As does Luther.
meats, which is against them, which deny that the blessed sacrament of the
altar should be honored of us christen men. Again to saint Austen, which thus
writes in the same epistle Christ gave his body last after souper to his
apostles that thereby he might commit unto them more strongly the hyghnes of so
great a mysterye / and for that cause he would last fyxe or faste^ that
thing in the hearts, and memory of his dyscyples, from who^ he should depart
to his passyo^ Er ideo non precepit quo deinceps ordine sumeretur, vt
apostolis, per qnos dispositurus erat ecclesias, seruaret hu^c locum. That is
to say in english, And therefore christ commanded not after what order the
sacrament should afterward be received, that he might keep or reserve this
place or rometh to his apostles, by whom he should dyspose the churches: or
companies of the faithful people. See thou not here, chryste^ reader, that
christ did not command how and after what manner the sacrament of the aultare
should be received of us, that he might leave yt to his disciples, which
afterward taught the church the form, order, and manner how Christ's
blessed body should be received of chryste^ people? Is then all truth set forth
in the scripture, and nothing by the apostles tradicio^? Where read we in all
the scripture the manner and order in receyuyng this sacrament, which order
christ left to his discyples to make and publysshe? To be short saint Auste^
recytethe strehghte way there, saint paul's words. Caetera, cu^venero,
ordinabo. I will order other things, when I shall come, to prove that the
apostles, of the which. s. Paul was one though not of the.xii. did set forth
the fassyon / order, and manner of receyuynge christ's blessed body in the
sacrament. This custom and manner to receive the body of Christ fasting was
before saint Austens days spoken of Socrates, which was one of ye three, that
made the historye called Lib. 9. cap. 38.
in latin tripertita historia.

For he thus writes. Aegiptii vero Alexandriae vicini; and thebaidos
habitatores, sabbato quidem collectas agunt, sed non sicut moris est,
sacramenta percipiunt, na^ postqua^ fuera^t: epulari, et cibis oi^bus
adimpleti, circa vesperam, oblatione facta, co^municant. The english may be
this. The Egipcyans nygh or neighbors to Alexandria, and the inhabytans of
thebays a country of Egypt gather collectyo^s for ye pore: upon the saturday,
but they receive not the sacraments as the manner or custom is, for after they
have eaten at feasts or banketes, and are filled with all meats, they do take
their hosle or ryghtes about the euentyde, when the sacrifyce of the mass is
done. But to let this pass, who can deny but that it comes by the apostles
tradicyon that christen people do receive the sacrament of the altar only of
the priests as Tertulyan testyfyed with in C.lxxiii. after Christ's passion
Tertulianus de corona militis,
saying. Eucharistiae sacrame^tu^ nec de alioru^ quam praesidenti i^ manu
sumimus. We do receive (sa^ith he) the sacrament of the alter of none other
men's hand the^ of theyrs; He means the priests.
that have auctorytie or rule.

This he wrote entreati^g of tradicions; and customs observed then without
scripture. Also it comes by the apostles tradicyo^ without writing that water
is myxed with wine in the chalyce when a preyst says mass. For christ him
self took (as saint Damascene witnesses) the cup or chalyce mengled with
water and wine / and gave it to his apostles sayng unto the^, Drink of this
al. Where find we this truth, and thing (that Christ did) in the scripture:
Did not christ teach his apostles to me^gle water and wine together at mass,
and they taught the church the same by mouth without writing? The blessed
martyr S. Cyprya^ above. M. ccc. years has testified that thing thus writing.
But brother know Lib, 2. eps. 3
that we are admonyshed, that in offering the chalyce our lords tradicyon be
kept, another an other thing be done of us, then that which our lord did
before us. That the chalyce, which is offered to his remembrance, be offered
myxed with wine. When the water is myngled with the wine in the chalyce, the
people is joined to christ as one with him, and the multitude of the beleuyng
is coupled: and knyt to hi^, in whom they have believed. The which couplynge,
and conyoinyng together of water and wine is so myxed in our lords chalyce,
that the water and wine so mengled can not be separate or disseuered. Whereof
the church, that is the people set in the church, faythfullye and stedfastlye
contynuyng in that which it has believed, nothing can separate from christ,
that it cleave not and abide always in gods love. In that same Epistle he
wrytethe much more largely of this tradityon, whereby water and wine are myxed
together at mass in the chalyce, and what it betokens, of the which I also
have spoken more plenteously in my book of the sacrifyce of the mass, yet I
will not let pass untouched this blessed martyrs words written in his sermon of
washyng of fete, where he declares that Christ did instytute the holy
sacrament of the altar hi^ self, and that the apostles inspyred with the holy
gooste, did add thereunto other diverse things. For thus he says. Ipse su^mus
sacerdos sui est sacrame^ti institutor, et author, i^ caereris hoies spu^m
sa^ctu^ habuere doctore, and sicut par est spu^i sa^cto et chricto diuinitas,
ita in suis institutis aequa est autoritas, et potestas, nec minus raru^ est,
quod dicta^te spu^ s^cto Alias ^^tum.
apostoli tradiderunt, quam quod ipse tradidit, et in sui co^memorationem fieri
praecepit. That is to say, The highest priest him self was the ordeyner and the
first maker of his sacrament, in other things men had the holy ghost a
teacher, and like as the deite or godheade of Christ, and the holy ghost are
equal, eue^ so they have equal authority and power in their ordinances, and
that is as excellent, that the apostles have taught or left by traditions as
yt, which he taught, and commanded to be done in his remembrance. These
words of saint Cyprian do show that after his mind, (which was a man both
excellently well learned, and virtuous also,) christ did institute, and first
make the holy sacrament of the altar, and the apostles taught of the holy
gooste ordained the other things belonging to the comelye and semely
consecratynge of his body and blood, and receyuynge of it, which they left
to the church of Christ unwritten, as it is already proved by saint Austen.
Finally Cyprian says that the apostles traditions perteynynge to this
sacrament are of like auctorite, power, and excellency, as Christ's own
ordinances are, and therefore they must needs be shamefullye deceived, which
will believe nothing except it be expressed plainly in the scripture. Another
tradition of the apostles belongyng to this holy sacrament is that the blessed
body of Christ is kept, and reserved in the pyxe or box at church, because
that custom is and has been in Christ's church kept through all the
world, where good christen men be, and therefore being not, as in deed it is
not, ordained and inacted by any council, it must needs come by tradition
from the church after saint Ianuatio epist. 118.
Austens mind. Of this custom we read in the historye of the church compiled
by the ancient wyrter Eusebius, which recytynge Lib. 5. cap. 25.
certain sentences out of Ireneus the disciple of saint Polycarpe saint Johan
the evangelists scoler says, that the bishop of Rome did use to send the
blessed sacrament solemly to strange catholyke by shoppes, which came thither.
Now should any such costome be so sone after Christ's departing, and the
apostles death, (of the which S. Johan the evangelist wrote. IX. years and
above after Christ's ascension, after the which time Ireneus was within less
then an hundred years) except the apostles had tanght the church that lesson?
Of this custom to reserve the body of christ in the pyxe, saint Nierom, and
saint Ambrose wrote, as I have more largelye declared in my book of Hiero
Rustico. etambrosius in ora funebri de obitu fratris su^ satyri,
the sacrament of the altar. Add yet to these another tradition of the
apostles belonging unto the mass, and sacrame^te of the altar, which is yt
at mass the priest prays for the souls departed out of this world, which
thing the holy apostles did ordeyne to be done, as saint Damascene Sermon^ pro
de^^^tis.
witnesses saying. The apostles our saviors disciples have commanded or
ordained, that a remembrance should be made of the^ that were dead, in the
dreadful and lively sacraments. Saint Chrysostom also affirms in diverse
places of his books that the apostles ordained that the Ad anto^h. pop homilia.
69 et in priore^ ad corinth, ho. 41. epipha. 3 3. Doinis. de eccle hierat. cap.
7.
priests at mass should pray for the dead. Epiphanius in like wise affirms
that it is a tradition received of the fathers to pray for the dead, and saint
Dionise saint Paul's scholar testifies that that custom came from ye apostles
of christ by their tradition, which I have declared sufficiently in ye later
end of my book of the sacrifice of the mass the.xxx. leaf, and therefore I
need not again to rehearse ye auctorities, which are there set forth at large.
It is therefore great fooly of men to deny ye holy, godly, and charitable
tradition of the apostles. Dionise Paul's disciple publishes and puts forth
many and diverse other ceremonies, and vsages of the mass / which no doubt he
levned of his masters Paul, and Hierotheus, and ye holy apostles, De eccle.
Hierar. ca 3 parie 3. etc.
With the which he was often co^uersau^t, but I will not recyte the^ at this time,
intending to be short in this treatise. Now let us se what yet S. Paul
says further for ye defense of traditions. He wrytinge to ye Corinthians 1
Corin 11. Arbitror apostolicum esse, etsa^ no^ scriptis tradetionibus inherere.
Paulus eni^ inquit, laudo vos etc 1. cor 11 basilius de spiritu scto^ ca. 29
her in literas r^tulit.
thus makes for the furtherau^ce of my purpose in this book I pray you
brethren, yt in all things ye remember me, and keep my commandments, as I
have delivered the^ unto you. Beside that y^ paul speaks here of his
commandments, and not of christ's, and says he had delivered, or taught
the^ by tradition unto ye corinthians, which thiges do show ye he spoke of
certain thiges, which he taught the^ him self by mouth without writing, besides
this I say, ye holy man Chrysostom thus writes Chrisost.
upon this text for traditions Ergo sine litter is multa tradider at, quod
alibi sepe meminit. Therefore he delivered or taught many things without
writing, the which thing he often remembers else where. Thophilactus also upon
the same text thus says. Liquet ex eis, cu^ Paulu^, tu^ apostolos reliquos
haudquaqua^ oi^ a ma^dasse, litteris precepta, que populis tradidisset. It is
euidente by these Paul's words, ye partly Paul, and chefely the other apostles
wrote not all the commandments, which they delivered, or taught the people.
Lo these two great learned me^, and ancient good fathers judged ye Paul and
the other apostles wrote not all the commandments, which they gave to the
people, and Bullinger we diverse other of luthers scholars affirm ye contrary
weout any good ground, whether pertie ought we to believe, ye younger or ye
elder? ye better in living or ye worse? ye better learned, or the worse? But now
to paul again which says to the philippia^s. You ought to bear in
remembrance ye things, which ye have perceived, had and seen, and not those
things only, which were written to you, and to timothy he also says 2. Timo.
2
Thou, my son timothy, be strong in ye grace that is in christ Jesus, and
commit ye things, which thou have hard of me by many witnesses, to faithful
men, that shall be apt to teach also other. Who sees not ye here Paul spoke of
traditions not written of him, but taught ye bishop timothy without writing by
mouth only, which he so delivered to other that should teach the church of
christ? These places above recyted out of s^ Paul are plain against them
that deny tradycyons, and say that every truth 2. thesso. 2.
is expressly put forth in the scripture, but yet this now following 2. pe. 1.
oi^s prophetia i. scripture sacre enara ratio, propria interpretatione non fit.
No^ enim volu^tate etc.
is most manifestlye against the^, which is even thus written of Paul.
Fratres state, et tenete traditiones, quas didicistis, sieve per sermone^, sieve
per epistolam nostram. That is to say. Brethren stand ye fast, and keep the
tradicyons, that ye have learned, either by Luke. 24. apparuit illis senso^ etc.
our preaching, or by our epistle Though that this text be so plain upon our
side, which do defend traditions of the apostles, and Christ's holy church
that it ca^ not be wrested to any other sense then that saint Paul commanded
the Thessaloniens, and all other chrystened people in and by them to observe
not only his tradicions written in his epistle, but also other not wrtte^,
but preached and taught them without writing by mouth one lie, yet Bullynger
Luthers discyple labourethe to wrythe it against his nature unto another
meaning, affyrmynge, but weout any proof, reason, or auctorytie If that
Bullingers understanding were good. what dyfference should there be between a
sermon and epistle? Had S. Paul's epystles nothing out of Moses law, and the
prophets? How much of the^ has the epistle to the romans? How to the Hebrews?
and how the other? It is therefore a very folysh e^asyon to expownde traditions
received by Paul's sermon or spech, doctrine of the gospel taken out of Moses
wrytynges and the prophets, and not tradicions unwritten. De Bullinge^o recte
dici potest illud flacci. Et nescire pude^s pra^^: ^discere ma^^lt.
well taken that Paul me^t by tradicions, which the Thessaloniens learned of
him by his word or preaching, things written in Moses law and the prophets,
which afterward that he had preached them to the people, the holy
euangelystes and apostles did write. But yet here I beseech the, good reader,
Bullyngers probacion ye Paul me^t nothing else there to the Thessaloniens but
only his sermons of ye gospel taken out of Moises law and the prophets
after written by the euangelystes, and other the apostles. For he (says
Bullynger) speaking of his sermons and preachi^ges before Agrippa does witness
that he taught nothing but that which Moses and the Prophets had taught
before. Is not this a learned probatyon, good reader, Paul before Agryppa
said, he taught nothing over and above that which Moses and the Prophets
had taught before ergo by his tradycyons, which the Thessaloniens learned of
him by his word, or preaching, he meant nothing else but his sermons made out
of Moses and the Prophets, which the eua^gelystes / and other the apostles
afterward did put in writing? Does not he show by this reason his little
reason, and less learning? What mad man will make this argument, which is
much like unto his. Paul said before Agryppa that he taught nothing but that
which Moises law and the prophets had, ergo he taught utterly nothing beside
the contents of Moises law and the Prophets? Are there no things wryte^ in
Paul's epystles which be not written in Moises law and the prophets? Does the
first his epistle to Hare^^^^ sunt arrogantes, ac putant quod possint sapere
et loqui abstrusius quidda^ quam alii, adorna^^^ verbo^ pugnas C^ril Lib. 2.
dialo goru^.
the Eorinthyans especyally the vii. xi. the xii. and. xiiii. Chapiters of it,
comprehend nothing else but that which was written before of Moises and the
prophets? Where do we read in Moses law the form of choosing a bishop
or a priest, and a deacon, and diverse other things written by Paul to the
bysshoppes Timothy and Tite? Paul said verily and truly that he taught
nothing before the Jews but Moses law and the prophets, which they had
received as true doctrine, and by which he trauayled to induce them to believe
in Christ, and to repent their ill life that they might be saved. But wylt
thou gather, good reder, thereof that s. Paul taught to the faithful people,
which believed in Christ and were christened, nothing utterly beside things
contained in Moses law and the Prophets? Nay I suppose, except thou dote,
Why then would thou gather thereupon that Paul's traditions learned by word or
preaching of the Thessalonians, were taken out of Moses law and the holy
prophets? Again Bullynger alleges s. Paul's words Gala. 1.
for that is ungodly purpose, which are these. I make known to you brethren
that the gospel, which I have preached, is not after man. For I have not
received it of man, nor learned it of man, but by the revelation of Jesus
Christ. But the revelation of Jesus Christ (says Bullynger wisely) dissenteth
not from itself, but Mathewe. Mark Luke, and Johan wrote of that same
revelation, wherefore it is necessary that saint Paul delivered with a lively
voice in his sermons the same things which the evangelists afterward did
write, and in writing left to the church of Christ, and therefore it is not
necessary to understand by the tradycyo^s, which Paul said the
Thessalonians had learned by his sermon or word, tradicions not written,
hitherto babbling Bullynger, vtterynge his shameful blyndnes and ignorance, I
will not say his malice conceived against the truth. For must not he be very
blind and ignorant in the scripture, which would reason thus. Saint Paul
learned the gospel of Jesus christ by revelation, the eua^gelistes wrote of and
by the same revelation, which dysse^teth not from it self. ergo it must
neades follow that Paul taught the Thessalonians nothing by mouth, nor
understood any thing else by his traditions delivered unto the^ by his word or
preaching, but only those things, which the eua^gelistes did write? Did not
the four eua^gelistes all write by one inspiration and revelation of Jesus
christ, and yet one of the^ wrot^ that, which another wrote not? Peter, James,
Johan, and Judas wrote al by one revelation of Jesus christ and the holy gooste,
which never does ne can dissent from it self, ergo they wrote all one thing,
and none of them wrote any thing, which ye other wrote not. Is this a wise
argument, being like Bullyngers? Therefore though saint Paul received, and
learned the gospel by christ's revelation, by which the.iiii. eua^gelistes
wrote their gospelles, yet that proves not sufficiently that paul wrote
nothing but yt which they wrote, nor that he preached nothing by mouth only
without putting it in writing afterward, but that alonely, which was
written in the evangelists. But lettynge this pass, let us se what saint
Chrysostom and other say upon the text of saint Paul above recyted, that
thereby it may evidently appear that Bullinger and other of that sect do mysse
construe and understand that said letter for the mayntenau^ce of their
deuelish heresy against traditions. Saint Damascene thus wrytteth. Quod autem
plurima Lib 4. ca. 17
sancti apostoli tradiderint sine scripto, scribit Paulus gentium apostolus.
Ergo fratres state, et tenete traditiones nostras, quas edocti estis, sieve per
sermonem, sieve per epistola^ nostra^. That is thus much to say in our tongue.
But that the holy apostles taught very many things without writing, Paul
the apostle of the gentles writes saying. Therefore brethren stand ye fast,
and keep ye our etraditions, which ye are taught, either by our word or
sermon, or else by our epistle. Tha^ he allegeth for that purpose this text of
saint paul I praise you brethren, because in all things ye remember me, and
ye do keep the traditions, as I have taught you them. Chrysostom also holds
1. cor. 11.
with the same thing writing upon that text of saint paul to the
thessalonians with these few words. Hi^c patet quod non omnia per epistolam
tradideri^t, sed multa etiam sine literis. Eadem vero fide digna sunt tam illa
quam ista. Itaque traditionem ecclesie fide dignam putamus. Traditio est, nihil
quaeras amplius. The englysh may be this. From thence it is open, that the
apostles did not teach all things by an epistle, but also many things with
our writing. But as well those as these are worthy ye same faith or credence.
Therefore we think the churches tradition worthy to be believed. It is a
tradition, search or demand nothing more over. What could ye have written
Mark this well redrr.
more plainly against the lutherans, and all the hole rablement of them, that
deny traditions, and defend that nothing ought to be believed but ye only,
which is put forth manifestly in scrpture? Truly he is not well advised, nor
godly disposed, that will not rather give crede^ce to this ancient godly well
learned doctoure then to the lutherans, writers of late, ungodly and
unlearned. Theophilactus also upon this same paul's text Basyll co^fyrmeth this
sayengArbitror apostolicum esse: etia^ no^scriptis traditionibus inherere
paulus enim inquit laudo vos quod mea omnia meministis and que^ admo dum
tradidi vobis, traditiones obtinetis, quas accepistis sieve per sermonem sieve
per epistola^ de spiritu s. capi. 29. That is, I do judge it perteyning to the
apostles doctrine to cleave un to traditions, yea not written. For paul says
^ praise you that ye have remembered al my lessons, and kept still the
traditions that ye have received either by speech or an epistle, as I have
delivered them unto you,
shows him self to hold with the doctrine of traditions, saying thus. Hic
sane perspicuum est pleraque paulum sine scriptis ser moan duntaxat, hoc est,
viua voce, non epistolis solum, his tradidisse. Non enim secus illa atque haec
fide digna sunt. Itaque et ecclesie traditionem dignam existimemus, cui
prestanda sit fides, vt si quid ab ea sit traditum, nihil vltra perquiras. The
which words may be thus turned in to english. Thereof it is verily plain that
paul taught them many things by speech only that is with a lively voice
without writing, not only by epistles. For those are no other wise worthy of
credence then these. Wherefore let us judge the churches tradition mete or
worthy, to whom credence must be given, so that if any thing be taught or
delivered of ye church, thou search nothing further. Hitherto Theophilactus.
The greake scolies or short expositions set forth upon this place of saint
paul do expowne it as saint Damascene, chrysostom, and Theophilactus do,
whose words are these into latin, translated. Eteni et scripta, et no^
scripta precepta tradiderunt apostoli, et vtraque obseruatione digna. Igitur et
ecclesiae quoque et non scripta traditio obseruanda est. Thus it is in our
speech, because the apostles did deliver, or teach commandments both
written, and also unwritten / and both two worthy to be observed, therefore the
churches also tradition, yea not written must be kept. Are not all these
witnesses sufficient to stop their mouths which do babble without all reason
and good learning against traditions? Saint Basil, which was nygh Basilius de
spiritu scto^ ca 29.
twelfe hundred years paste, and an excellent clerk thus writteth. Arbitror
autem apostolicu^ esse etia^ 1. Cor. 11.
non scrrptis traditionibus inhaerere. Laudo, inquit paulus, vos quod per oi^a
mei memores estis, et quemadmodu^ tradidi, vos traditiones obtinetis, 2. Teffa.
2.
quas acceptistis sieve per epistola^, sieve per sermonem. That is to say in
english. But I judge it apostolic or perteyninge unto an apostles doctine to
cleave or stick to traditions also not written. I praise you (says paul)
that through al things ye remember me, and do reteyne still the traditions, as
I taught you, which ye received either by an epistle, or by speech. See
thou not here, chryste^ reader, that S. Basyll affyrmeth not only that we
ought to stycke fast unto traditions not written, but he says it belongs
unto the apostles teachinge, and allegeth two textes of saint Paul to prove
the same? Wherefore I beseech the should not we rather give faith and credence
unto this holy and great clerk saint basyll then to Luther or any of his
scole? Let this, that is now already said, and that which shall be said
hereafter be to the (gentell reader) which have any regard unto thy souls
health, sufficient utterly to abhor, deteste, and forsake this pestilente
error, set up against traditions, of the which many are very necessary
for the maynteynannce, and increase of Christ's religion, and man's salvation,
as it shall hereafter appear more at large by gods help and grace. But now
I will go to the rehersall of a multitude of things observed and believed of
christen natyons through ye hole world, which are both necessary to be
believed, and kept also, and yet they be not expressly set forth i^ ye
scripture, but are only come i^ to the church of christ our blessed savior by
tradition of the holy apostles inspired and styrred of ye spirit of truth to
ordeyne the^, and to deliver them unto the church by mouth with out writing,
which as ever se^ce their time have been among all catholyke people believed,
and observed, even so shall they be until the worlds end, though many do
bark never so much against the^, as they do against diverse other truths
expressed in the scripture.

The third chaptre comprehendynge A number of traditions, that came from the
apostles in to the church of christ without writing by mouth only.
the nombre of tradicions coming from the apostles to us without writing.
IN the last Chaptre, good reader, I touched bryefly, and by the way, as we
are wont to say, four tradicyo^s pertaynyng unto the sacrament of the
altar, that is to say. Water to be myxed with wine in ye chalyce at mass,
which our sauyoure him self did, as saint Cypryan says, of who^ his apostles
taught the same, left it without writing to the church. The second to
receive the sacrament fasting. The third to keep the sacrament in the pixe or
box in the temple. The fourth is to pray for the dead at mass, which thing
the apostles taught the church, as I have proved in my book of the sacrifice
of the mass. Now let us se what other tradicions there be, which are
unwritten in the scripture and yet necessary to be believed, kept, and observed
of all christen people, and first of all I will recite certain tradycyons
apperteynyng unto baptism, of the which the chyefe is that infantes, or babes
that ca^ not yet speak, are chrystened when they can not believe, and baptysme
auaylethe the^ through the churches faith to the obtaynynge of remyssyon of
original sin, and the gettyng of heaven. What scripture proves this truth?
Is not the scripture rather against it then with it? Do not the heretyckes
called in greek anabaptiste, because they christen men again, when they can
believe, which were chrystened being infantes, utterly deny this veryte for
that, that they saw no scripture expressly make for it? What will or can they
here say, that ask and require for every doctrine, that they will believe,
manifest scripture? To. 3, Li. 10 in genesi.
Saint Austen thus wrytethe upon the chrystenynge of children. Consuetudo
matris ecclesiaei^ baptizandis paruulis nequa quam sperne^da est, neque vllo
modo superflua depuranda, nec omnino credenda esset, nisi apostolica esset
traditio. That is to say. The custom of our mother ye church in chrystenyng
of children is in no wise to be dispysed, another by any way to be rekened
supenfluous, nor it ought utterly to be believed, except it had been Note
reder.
the apostles tradicion. Loo. S. Austen says that the baptysme or christenyng
of children should not be believed except it had been the tradicion of the
apostles, and therefore he found no scripture for it. Also in another book he
writes thus of ye same matter. Lib. 4. cap^ 24. Aduersus dona^istas de
baptist. paru^loru^.
Et si quisquam in hac re autoritate^ quaerat diuinam, quamquam quod vniuersa
tenet ecclesia, nec concilii^s i^stitutum, sed semper retentum est, non nisi
autoritate apostolica traditum rectissime creditur, tame^ veraciter coniicere
possumus, quid va leat in paruulis baptismi sacrame^tu^ ex circumcisione
carnis, qua^ prior populus accepit. Thus it is in english. Albeit any search
or asks the auctoritye of God or the scripture in this matter of chrystenynge
children, though that which the whole church keeps and it is not ordained
by councels, but ever retained, it is believed of most good right or reason,
not delivered or taught but by ye apostles auctorite, yet we may truly
conjecture, what strength the sacrament of baptysme is of in children, by the
circumcisyon of the flesh, which the first people received. Lo ones again
saint Austen does confess that the chrysteni^g of children came by the
tradicio^ of the apostles without express word or commandment of the
scripture. Therefore what madness and blyndnes are they in, that require
manyfeste scripture for every thing, that should be believed and kept of us
chrystened people? They do open the door and give an occasion by that their
fond opinyon, to the heresy of the Pelagia^s, Armenes, Albanenses, and the
anabaptists which deny that children should be baptized and chrystened before
they can believe in christ. Origin also, which was with Origines Li. 5.
co^me^t in episto. ad romanos.
in less the^.cc. years after christ's birth, testifies that it is a
tradicion of the apostles to christen children saying. Pro hoc et ecclesia ab
apostolis traditionem accepit, etiam peruulis baptismu^ dare. That is to say.
For that original sin the church also has received a tradicion of the
apostles to give baptism unto children. What can be more plainly written: the^
this is to prove that it is a plain tradicion of the apostles to christen
infantes, or children? But to be short, saint Dionise the apostle Paul's
discyple affyrmeth manyfestly that it came from the apostles to baptyse
Dionisi. de ecclesiastica hierar. ca. 7 ^artez.
tyse children, whose words are these. But that ye children / whican not yet
understand godly things are made partakers of the holy baptism and of ye
highest signs of the hallowed communion, it appearethe to the paynems a thing
reasonable to be scorned, (as thou saidest) if the bishops do teach godly
things to herers not mete, and they teach in vain the holy tradicions to
them that do not understand, and that which is more to be laughed at (as they
think) other do renounce or forsake the devil for the^, and do go in to or
begin y^, the holy couenau^tes. Then anon after a few words thus he says.
Verum ea de re ista quoque dicimus, que sancti praeceptores nostri ex pristina
traditione edocti ad nos deriuaueru^t. Aiunt enim, quod est verissimum,
infantes, si scta^ lege forme^tur, ad sacrum prouehendos habitum, omni errore
liberos, et vitae exortes i^purae, istud cu^ piissimis ducibus nostris in
mentem venisset, visum est admittere infantes hoc modo etc. That is thus much
in our tongue. But of this thing we also say these things, which our holy
masters (saint paul and Hierothe) instructed of the old tradition have
brought unto us. For they say (the which thing is most true) that the
infantes or children that can not yet speak, if they be formed or made in
facio^ with the law of life, must be aduan^ced or promoted unto an holy state,
being free from all error, and without part or out of felowshyppe of
unclean life. When this thing came to the mind of our remembrance most
godly ducers capiteines or leaders (ye apostles) it seemed to the^ to admyt ye
infa^tes and children after this manner to be christened. Then straight he
declares how they are christened, and shows that the godfather does answer
for the child saying I renounce the devil / and believe / promising that he
will teach him to believe and forsake the devil when he shall come to
understanding. Which words do declare that it came also by the apostles
tradition, that godfathers do answer for the child when he is christend, and
not only that infantes are christened. Therefore we do no we se plainly that
the baptism or chrystenynge of children was taught the church by the holy
apostles without any scripture or writing, and it ought to be beleuedand
kept as well as any other thing, which is manifestly set forth in the
scripture, and therefore as many men as will not fall headlynge in to the
damnable heresy of the anabaptists, which deny that children should be
christened, let them leave demanding and requirynge in every point of our
belefe express scipture, sense this necessary thing hangs only upon the
apostles tradition without any scripture, that can prove it sufficiently,
which thing Luther, Melancthon, and other the lutherans are compelled to
grant, though they never so much cry out scripture, scripture, and say that
nothing ought to be believed, and kept necessarylye without manifest
scripture setting it forth. For when this matter of christenynge children is
laid to their charges, they have nothing to answer, but are straight
enforced to grant it to be a tradition of the holy apostles. But of this I
have now said, I suppose, sufficiently, and therefore I will rehearse yet moo
traditions of the apostles to the full confusion of them that will believe
nothing with out an auctoritye of the scripture. Saint Hierom says, To. 2.
^0. 50 Pa. 4.
(which thyngethe church does practyse) that in time of necessity lay men and
women may baptyse children, which thing comes by tradition, because it is
generally used through christendom, and was not first made by any council.
Also it August. Jann.
comes of the apostles tradition that the water in the font stone is hallowed
before the child be christened in it, for saint Dionyse Paul's disciple being
with the apostles, and instructed De eccle. Hierar. ca ^ part. 2
of them, as he says often him self, thus speaks of that matter. The
bishop going to the temple, in the which is the font, eius aquas sancta
prece, et inuocatione sanctificans, itaque in eas ad crucis effigiem
sanctissimum infu^dens vngue^tum, illas hocmo do perficit. That is to say. He
hallowed the fontes water with an holy prayer and with an invocation, and
powrynge into them thryse the most holy oyntemente after the form of the
cross by this way or fassion does make them perfect. These saint Dionyse
saint Paul's scolers words do show plainly that then the bishop did use
to halowe the water in the The font is hallowed upon Easter eue^ because that
baptism has his virtue of christ's death. to. 6 quicu^que etc and upon
witsonday even because the virtue of baptime comes of the holy gooste which
came down at witsonday Math. zille vos baptizabit in spi etc Basilius de spi.
s, ca. 27 Ciprianus lib. 1. epist. 12. Quomo do aute^ mu^ dare et sa^crificare
aqua^ potest, qui ipse imdus est, et apud que^ soi s^no^ est? Lege Augst lib.
6. d^ bap co^tre donatistas trast in Io. 80 et ad Januariu^ e^pi 118 Cleme^s
lib. 3 recogni.
font, and put in to it oil thryse making a cross therein, which no doubt
was caughte by the holy Apostles without writing, as saint Basyll, and other
ancient doctors do witness, whose words shall be anon alleged, and
therefore men that would not yt the font should be hallowed before children should
be therein christened, and will believe nothing not contained in the scripture
are far deceived, and ought to forsake that ill, and peryllous opinion, lest
they perish at length thereby for ever, which our Lord forbydde. Saint
Basyll also rehersynge certain traditions in his book of the holy gooste thus
writes of the halowynge of water in the font stone.

Consecramus autem aquam baptismatis, et oleum vnctionis. Praeterea ipsu^, qui;
baptismum accipit, ex quibus scriptis? Nonne a tacita secretaque traditione?
The englysh may be this. But we do consecrate, or halowe the water of
baptism, and the oil of anonyntynge, and beside that him, that receives
baptism, of what wrytynges? Comes it not of a still, and a secret tradition?
Moreover ye custom is that he, which is to be chrystoned, should renounce or
forsake the devil either by his own words, or else his Dionise
godfather for him, of the which Dionise paul's disciple speaks as I have
touched before and also Tertulia^ (which was very nigh De corona militis
the apostles time) saying. Aqua^ adituri, ibide^ sed et aliqua^to prius sub
po^tificis manu contestamur nos renu^tiare diabolo, et po^pae, et a^gelis ^ius
When we will go to y^ waterof baptism (says Tertulian) but, there also a little
while first we under ye hand of ye bishop do protest that we do renounce or
forsake the devil, and his pomp, and angels. In like manner saint De spiritu
^^to^. ca. 27.
Basyll says of that custom as follows. Reliqua item, quae fuerint in
baptismate, velut renu^ciare satanae, et angelis eius, ex qua scriptura
habemus? No^ne ex priuata, et arcana hac traditio^e? No^ne ex doctrina, quam
patres n ostri in silentio, quod curiosos, et otiosos submouet, seruarunt? The
remenant also (says he) which is done in baptysme, as to renounce the devil,
and his angels, of what scripture have we? Have we it not of a pryuate, and a
preuye tradicion? Have we not it of the doctrine, which our fathers, or elders
have kept in silence, the which remoueth, or caryeth far of idle men, and
curious? The priest asks of hi^, that is christened, whether he do believe or
not but what scripture have we for that? Saint Hierome speaks To. 2. Aduersus
lucifer^anos Ciprianus lib. 1. epist. 12. Ipsa inter rogatio, quam fit in
baptismate, testis est very tatis. Credis in vita^ eternam et remissione^
peccatoru^ y sanctam ecclesiam?
of it saying. Praeterea cu^ solemn sit in lauacro post trinitatis
co^fessione^ interrogare. Credis in sanctam ecclesiam? Credis peccatorum
remissionem? Moreover when it is acustomed in baptysme after confession of the
trinite, to ask, Do thou believe in the holy church? beleuest thou
remyssyo^ of sins? The child that is chrystened is thryse dypped in ye water
by an ancient custom and tradicion without scripture, of the which Basyll
thus writes. De spiritu scto^. ca. 27.
I am ter imergi hominem, vnde est traditu^? Now a man to be dypped thryse i^
the water, from whence it is taught, or delivered? Mo^ne ex priuata, et arcana
hac traditio^e. Comes it not of this pryuate and secret tradicion? Of this
speaks De corona militis
keth Tertulyan saying, Dehi^cter mergitamur, aliquid amplius respondentes qu^
dominus in euangelio determinauit. That is. Ifterwarde we are dypped under the
water thryse, aunswerynge some what more then our lord has determined in the
gospel. Note well these words, god reder, against them that will nothing
should be believed, and done but y^ only which is commanded or set forth in
the scripture. But s. Hierome shall say his mind in this matter of baptysme.
Thou askeste of me where it is written. I say in the acts of the To. ^
aduersus luciferianos.
apostles. Et si scripturae autoritas no^ subesset, totius orbis in ha^c parte^
consensus instar praecepti obtineret Nam et multa al ia, quae per traditionem
in ecclesiis obserua^tur, autoritatem scriptae legis sibi vsur paueru^t,
veluti^ lauacro ter caput mergitare, die dominico, et per omnem pentecosten nec
de geniculis adora re, et ie iunium soluere, multaque alia scripta non sunt,
que rationabilis sibi obseruatio vindicauit. That is. Although there were no
auctoritye of the scripture, the consent of the whole world upon this part
should opteyne like a co^maundeme^te. For many other things also, which are
observed in the churches by tradicio^, have usurped or by use taken to the^ the
auctoryte of a law wryte^, as in y^ lauatory of baptism / to dip the head
thryse / upon sunday and all the time between Easter and wytsontyde neither to
honor god knelynge, nor to fast: and many other things ar Note this.
not written, which a reasonable obseruatyon has challenged to her. This saint
Hierome has spoken to the great reproach of al those that say nothing should
be believed, and kept except the scripture made thereof some me^cyo^. Also here
we se that it is not a new thing to ask where it is written in scripture, and
that s. Hierome thought the custom and tradicion of christ's church sufficyent
for the auctorite, and defense of sundry things without the scripture. But to
saint Dionise s. Paul's disciple, which thus writes of this matter. Pontifex
ter illu^ a quis imergit, hac trinaillius mersione, et emersione tres
beatitudinis diuinae personas inclamans. The bishop dyppeth him thryse under
the water De ecclesi. hierar. ca. ^. part. 2.
calling upon the three persons of y^ godly bliss with this threfolde dyppynge
in to the water, and dryngeth him out again. Though the saing of s. Dionise
Paul's scoler be sufficient to prove that it came from y^ apostles by
tradicyon that in baptysme the child is put under the water, because he was in
the apostles time, and learned the truth of christ's religion of the^ of S.
Paul and Hierotheus his masters, yet for a fuller prouffe, I will bring
hither the apostles own words out of their canons, Cap v^^^.
which are even these. If any bishop, or priest do not use three mersions, or
dyppynges of one mysterye / but do ones dip the child in baptism, which
seems to be given in our lords death, let him be deposed. For our lord said
not to us baptyse or christen ye in my death, but you going teach all people
baptysige them in the name of the father, De eccle Hier ca 2 part 3
and the son / and the holy ghost. Finally saint Dionise Paul's scoler
declarethe what is signyfyed by the dyppynge the child thryse under the water
i^ the font saying. Proprie, et co^uenie^tissime mersio illa, qua totus homo
aquis operitur, ad imaginem mortis ac se pulturae informis accipitur. That is
to say in englyssh. That dydpynge, by the which the whole man is covered with
water, properly and most conveniently is received to the image, or form of
christ's death, and buryall, which was without form, or shape. The putting
of the child, when he is chrystened, thryse under the water, betokens
christ's death, and three days buryall, as the taking of the child out of ye
water, sygnifyeth to us christ's rysyng up again Except the child be very
lyk to take death thereby, or any ^^^able harm.
from death. Therefore as christ's body was hid clean in his grave or
sepulcher, so ought the child, when he is chrystened, to be put wholly under
the water, and covered hole with water (as S. Dionise here affyrmeth) y^ thereby
Christ's burial may be fullye represented. The which thing some gentle men
will not suffer to be done unto their children, though it might right well be
done without any ieoperdye of the child. In which thing they do not well,
breaking the laudable custom of the church coming even from the apostles,
and especially being so reasonable, and agreyng with the scripture, and
representynge the buryall of Christ very perfectly.

But I will go forward to the rehearsal of mo traditions of the holy Apostles.
It is a custom that when the child is christened at the font, anon is put
upon him a white cloth called ye chrysome, the which came from the apostles by
tradition, as it shall straight appear by the old writers witnesses, of the
which one is the historye called in latyne historia tripertita, where we read
these words. Praeparabatur baptisma, Lib. 11. ca. 14.
et vestis conueniens baptiza to. Baptism was prepared, and a vesture mete for
the baptized.

Also Lactantius, which was De res. D
above twelve hundred and forty years past, thus writes of this white clothe
which is put on the child christened.

Rex sacer ecce tui radiat pars magna trophaei
Cum puras animas sacra lauacra beant
Candidus egreditur hitidis exercitus vndis,
Atque vetus vitium purgat in am ne nouo.
Fulgentes animas, vestis quoque can dida signat,
Et grege de niueo gaudia pastor habet.
The english of the verses.

Behold O holy king a great part of the victory sends forth beams like
the sun. When the holy lauatoryes do make happy the souls clean. The
white hooste goes forth of y^ bright waters, And purges y^ old vice in the
new river. The white apparel also signifies the shynyng souls, and the
shepeherde has joys of the white flock. This Lacta^tius declarynge the
custom to put upon the person baptized a white garment, and that it shows
as a toke^ that the soul is made white from the filthiness of sin Ambrosius
de ^^s, qui mysteriis initiantur lib. 1. ca, 7. Ide^ habet.
in baptism. That white clothe also may signify the manumissio^, or the
deliuerau^ce of ye soul from the bondage of the devil to the fredome of
christ, which is gotten in baptism. For Tertulia^ in his book, recytyng in
an order De res. carnis.
the tokens of manumissio^ or making a man fre of a bond man, reherseth a
white vesture among the^. They that were baptized at Easter did use to wear
all the easter week yt white vestures and upon y^ so^day next following they
did put the^ of, and for y^ cause that weke and sunday were called of the old
fathers. Septimana et dominicai albis, y^ weke and so^day in albis. That this
usage and custom to cloth ye child christened with a white vesture came by
tradition from ye apostles, Dionise paul's scholar declares making me^tio^ of
it with these words. Assume^tes baptizatu^ sacerdotes, i^duu^t Dionisi. de
ecclesie hierar,
cum vest mu^diciae co^grua. That ^s. The priests taking to the^ the party
baptized do put on him a De ecclesie hierar ca. ^ par. 3.
vesture agreeable with cleanes. Again he says. Deinceps ita initiatu^ cande^
tes induu^t vestes. After ward theyputon him, so instructed in things
concerning religion, white vestures. Where should this paul's disciple learn
this but of him, and the other apostles, who^ he often called duces suo^ his
leaders? Is it to be supposed, I beseech the good reader, y^ this custom
received of y^ church in the apostles time, came from any other teachers then
the apostles? Therefore embrace, and gladly receive this and other as ye
apostles traditions, and cease for shame y^ ungodly bablyng / that nothing is
to be believed, and done except it be set forth and expressed in the scripture.
This ancient doctoure Dionise speaks also of co^secratyng and halowing oil
and cream, and of the anoyntynge of Cap. 3. per. 3. et ca. 4. perte. 3. lib.
1. aduersus Mar.
the^ yt are christened we it, and Tertulia also saying, god wassheth his with
water, and anoynteth the^ with oil. Dionise thus has of that De ecclesie hierar
ca. 4 par. 3
oil. Vnde, vt opinor, i^ ^ta sacratiore^ se^su^ traditione diuina, sancti
nostrae sacerdotalis fu^ctionis duces, honestissimu^ illud vngue^ti co^secran
di munus telete^ ab effectu rei, quae in eo perficitur nomina^t. That is to say
Whereof (as I suppose.) the holy leaders of our priests office after a more
holy sense by gods tradition or teaching do call that most honest office of
co^secrating oyntme^t a perfection or making a thing perfect, of ye effect of
the thing, which in it is made perfect. Lo here Dionise plainly affyrmeth y^
the apostles gave a name unto y^ priests office, by y^ which he does halow y^
oil, and therefore it must needs follow y^ that thing was in use, and brought up
by the^ through christ's instruction or ye De spi. ^^^ cap. 27.
holy gooste. Basil speaks also of ye anoyntynge the^ y^ are baptized saying.
We do halow y^ oil of anointing. No^ne a tacita secre taque traditione? Do we
not of a still, and a secret tradition? Ipsam porro olei i^u^ctione^, quis
sermo scri pto proditus docuit? That is. Further, what speech put forth by
writing has taught y^ innoynting lib. 1. epi, 12.
of oil? Cipria^ in like facio^ writes of y^ anoyntinge of the^ y^ are
baptized, saying. Vngi quoque necesse est eu^, qui baptizandus sit, vt accepto
chrysm ate, id est, unction esse vnctus dei, et habere in se christi gratiam
possit. It is also (^ayeth he) necessary y^ he, which must be baptized, be
anointed, y^ anointing being taken, he may be the anointed of god, and have in
him the grace of christ. As if he had said, except he be anointed with oil
when he is christened, he can not be the anointed of god, nor have in him the
grace of christ, whereby he declared how necessary a thing it is to be anointed
with oil in baptism receiving, and yet there is no scripture setting any such
thing further, you see therefore, good reader, yet ones again some thing
necessary to be both of us believed, and kept, of the which scripture speaks
nothing at al. Moreover there are yet diverse other things not expressed in the
scripture, which we are bound both to believe, and also to keep, of the which
this is one y^ the bishop haloweth the aulters before mass be said upon them,
of the which Dionise makes me^tio^ saying. Diuiui altatis conse cracione^
sanctissimoru^ mysterioru^ lex, sanctissimi vngue^ti castissimis infusionibus
perficit. That is. The law of the holiest mysteryes, does make perfect y^
halowing De ecclesie hierar ca. 4 par. 3.
of gods altar with most chaste powrynges on it of most holy oil, many men
can not abide that hymns and psalms should be song in the church unto the
honor of god, and the styrryng of the herers unto greater devotion, when at
the beginning of christ's church in the apostles times christen people did
use to sing songs unto the honor of god, and to encorage the^ selves to be
the better disposed, as we may read in one Pliny, which Before secundus in
epist. ad traianum.
was not chrystened, and yet he spoke of that thing saying. Affirmabant autem
hanc fuisse su^ma^ vel culpae suae, velerroris, quod essent soliti stato die
ante lucem conuenire, carmenque christo, quasi deo dicere secu^ inuicem. This
in englysh. But they affyrmed that this was the chyef point either of their
faut, or of their error, that they were wounte to assemble and come together
before day upon a day appointed, and say with them selves one to another a
verse or a meter un to christ as to God. And to co^fyrme this matter more
surely, I will bring forth the wytnes of one Phylo which was a iew^ borne and
turned to Christ's faith. He being in christ's time, and his apostles thus
testifyeth of christen men's songs, and hympnes, said and song unto god, as
Eusebious has written Euse (...) secu^do ^^. 17: Agathense consilium, cap. 30.
about twelfe hundred years passed. Vnus ex ii^bus in medio co^surgens,
psalmum honestis modulis concinebat, et praecine^ti vnu^ versicu lu^omnis
multitudo respondebat That is. One of them al rising up i^ ye mids did sing a
psalm or a song with semely measures and all the multitude did answer him
syngyng before or first one verse as a chau^^ does in a qurie. Hither Philo
setting forth the beginning of chryste^dome / the ordynaunces of the church
when it first begone, and dyscrybed the beginning of the apostles tra dicions,
and therefore the custom of syngyng verses, psalms, hines, and other songs is
not to be set at naught having their beginning of the apostles by tradicion.
Add to these verytes unwritten this also y^ the priest at mass uses certain
prayers to consecrate the host, and to turn it through the almighty power of
god, and the workynge of the holy ghost in to Christ's very body, which
words are not in the scripture, but came up by the apostles tradicion, and
teaching De spi. s. cap. 27.
by mouth only. They are thought of saint Basyll to come (as I said) by
tradicyon, Lib. 2. ca. 19
whose words are these. Inuocationis verba, quu^ ostenditur panis
eucharistiae, et poculum benedictio nis, quis sanctoru^ nobis in scripto
reliquit: Nec enim his contenti sumus, quae co^memorat apostolus, aut
euangelium, verum alia quo or et ante et post dicimus, ta^quam multum habentia
mome^tiad mysterium, quae ex traditione citra scriptum accipimus. The words
(says Basyll) of invocation or calling for help, when the bread or fode of
the sacrament of the altar is showed (over y^ priests head to the people at
mass) and the cup or chalyce of blessyng who of the holy men has left
us in writing? For we (priests) be not contented with those words, which
the apostle saint Paul does remember or the gospel, but we do say other
also both before the (co^secratio^) and after, as having much pythe or bcynge
of great effect to the mysterye or sacrament, which words we have received
of tradicyon without writing Hytherunto S. Basyll plainly disprouyng their
opinion, which say yt all thing, which we are bound to believe or do, is
contained in the holy scripture. Of ye words De ettle. hierar. ca. 7 patte. 3.
of consecracyo^ the holy Dio nise saint paul's dyscyple thus writes. At vero
efficientes consecrationis preces fas non est scripto interpretari, neq ipsaru^
arcanum, sieve illas, quae ex deo fuerint virtutes, e^secreto in publicum
efferre. Sedsicut nostra habet sacro sancta traditio, vbi eas sacratioribus
instructionibus hauseris, at q ad sacra tiore^ habitum, capatiore^ q
intelligentiam diuino a more, sacris q actionibus co^summatus euaseris, ad su
prema^ ipsarum sciam subueheris, di uina lu ce radiatus. That is this much to
say in english, But it is not lefull before god, to expowne or translate by
writing the prayers which made the con secratyon, another to publyshe or utter
openly the pryupte of the^, either ye virtues which are done, Eherfore the masie
eughte not to be in the engiysshe tongae.
but like as our holy tradicyon has, after that a man has learned them with
very holy or hallowed institutio^s, and being made perfect is comen unto a
holyer state, and an vndersta^dige more apt to perceive through or by the
love of god, and holy deeds, he shall be carried up, or promoted to the highest
knowledge of them, when he has been made bright or shynyng like ye sun
beams with Gods light. Do not thou here se plainly, good reader, that the
prayers used of the priest when he does consecrate the host of bread at mass
came of the holy tradicion of christ's apostles, and yt it stands not with gods
law to utter abroad among the lay people the prpuyre of the^ by expownynge or
translatynge them with writing? Saint Dionise dyscyple testifyeth that the
holy apostles used certain signs and ceremones in the celebracyon of the
blyssed sacrament, of the which scripture speaks not, these are his word;
tra^stated out of greek in to latin, Ne in ipsa quide^ scti^ssimoru^
sacrame^torum celebratione sancti illi nostrae ceu legalis traditio his
magistri, diumis at q honestissi mis abstinuere signis. That is to say. Chose
mayiters of our tradiction belonging to the law did absteyne from godly and
most honest signs no not in celebratynge of the most holy sacraments.
Upon the which text of saint Dionise Pachymeres, which was above. M. years
sense, thus has. Theologiam quae per figuras diuinis oracu lis ttadita est
Telestice^ asserit di onisius vt quae per sacerdotum institutione^ ceremonias
tradat sacramentoru^, co^prehensas, signoru^ involucris dionise: He affirms
that divinity which is expressed by tokens, or taught in the holy scrip ture by
figures, tobe figurative because it teaches or delivers ceremonies of the
sacraments by the priests institution, which ceremonies are co^prehe^ded or
contained in couerynges of signs. The heads of the aulters are set toward
the east and we do pray tournynge our faces toward the east, the which
thing comethe by the apostles tradicyon, as diverse autours do wytnes, of the
which saint Damascene is one saying. We do pray toward the east, not by
chance but because god is light that may be understand and the sun of
ryghteousnes, and christ is called in the scripture orie^s ye east, the east
must be appointed ^a^ha. 6.
or dedicate to him for prayer or worshyppyng of him. Anon after damascene
shows another reason and cause, why ye we pray toward the east / sayng.
Because God made Paradyse toward the east, in to the which he brought Ada^,
the which offending he banished out thereof and made him dwell in the west
contrary to the east. Antiquam igitur patriam requirentes, et ad ipsam
suspirantes, deum adoramus scz ad orientem. Therefore we requyryng the old
country (Paradyse of heaven signified by the earthlye paradise a place of much
pleasure,) and fervently desiring to come unto it, do worship god, or pray
to hi toward the east. After certain tokens of the excellencye of the east
taken out of the scripture rehearsed in the end of that chap tree, Damascene
thus has. No^ e^ au^t scripta haec apostoloru^ traditio, nam multa sine
scripto nobis tradita sunt. That is to say. But this ye apostles tradition is
not written, for many things are delivered to us, or taught us without
writing. Are not these plain words of this ancient doctor to the confusion
of all them, that are not ashamed to speak against traditions, and affirm
that nothing ought to be believed and kept, that is not expressed in the holy
scripture? Hear now what saint Basyl says De spi. s. cap. 27.
of this matter? Vt ad oriente^ versi precemur, quae nos docuit scriptura? That
is. what scripture has taught us to pray turned toward ye east? Athanasius
like wise which was above. M. CC. year since, affyrmeth that the holy apostles
did teach christen men to pray toward the east. These are his words. Why do
we christen people pray toward the east, and the Jews toward the south? He
answers thus. We must defend this thing other wise to the Jews, and other
wise expowne it to the Gentiles. To the Jews we say, that we pray toward ye
east, because the holy ghost so taught us by the prophet David saying.
Adoremus ad locum, vbi steterunt pedes tui domine. That is. Let us O Lord
worship the or pray to the toward that place, where psai.
thy fete stood. And the prophet zachary says. And our lords fete shall
stand in the mount or hill of olyuete against Hierusalen (which is in the
east.) This may be a short answer (says he) to the Jews. But to the
gentiles we say that we do pray toward the east not that god is closed in
there, or is only there, but forasmuch as he is named light, for that cause
we having a respect to the ligi^ of the sun created, do now worship not
that same light created, but the maker of it by the lokynge toward it. This
is the annswere to the gentiles, but let the faithful people of Christ
learn yt. Hac de causa beatissimi apostoli fecerunt Christianorum ecelesias
intendere versus orientem, vt ad Paradisum respicientes, vnde cecidimus,
scilicet ad veterem patriam, et regionem nostra^, petamus deum, et dominum
nostra^ reducere nos illuc, vnde eiecti exulamus. The englysh may be this. The
most blessed apostles for this cause have made ye churches of chryste^ people
to bid or look to ward the Cast, that we lokynge toward Paradyse, from
whense we fell, verily should desire God, and our Lord to bring us thither
again, to the old country and our region, from when^e we cast are
banyshed. Lo this holy and blessed ancient writer Athanasius, a man of
excellent virtue and learning, affyrmeth that the apostles taught christen
people to pray toward the Cast, and shows the reason, why we so do, as
saint Damascene has done. Saint Basyll moreover De spi. t. cap. 29.
says. Ipsam fidei professionem, qua credimus in patrem, et filium, et
spiritum sanctum, c quibus habemus scriptis? That is Of what scripture have we
the profession of the faith, by which we believe in the father, and the son,
and the holy gooste? He concludes that it comes by tradition only. I pass
over many traditions of the Apostles now used i^ the mass, as that ye priest
senseth with frankenceuse the altar washes his hands at mass, says
confite or, shows the body and blood of Christ over his head to the
people, of the which Dyonyse speaks, that was saint Paul's scholar. De
ecciesie hierar ta.; par.. 2
Also that the people seeing the body and blood of Christ showed them, do
worship the same. Saint Dyonyse also writes. Lap.3. qte 3. de spi.s. cap.27.
Another tradition yet! is rehearsed of saint Basyll saying. Vt signo crucis
eos, qui spem collocarunt in Christum, signemus, quis scripto docuit? That we
do mark with the sign of ye cross them, that have put their trust in
Christ, who has taught by writing? Tertulyan writes also of this
affyrmynge that it is a tradition, and not writing in the scripture. Whose
words De corona militis.
are these. Ad omnem progressum at q promotum, ad omnem aditu^, et exitum, ad
vestitum, et calceatu^, ad lauacra, ad mensas, et lumina, ad cubilia,
etsedilia, quacun q nos conuersatio exercet, frontem crucis signa culo terimus.
That is to say in english. At every going forth, and aduancynge, profytynge
or mouynge forth, at every access, coming to or entry, and going out, at
apparelyng, and showyng or putting on of shows, at bathes or baynes, at the
tables, and lyghtes, at the entering in to the chambers, and seats, or places
to sit on, what so ever conversation sets us on warke, we make a sign of
the cross in our forheade. Saint Athanasius says that Lib. 2. de incat. ver.
Saint Athanasius says that by the sign of yt cross al witchcrafte, or
sorcerye, and the act or craft of poysonynge is put away, if it be used in
faith and Lib quest quest. 38.
deuoutely. Also he says. Legem Mosis videntes daemones, non timent neque
tremunt, quod ea non sit operata salutem. Crucem autem videntes, saepe tremunt,
fugiunt, euanescunt. That is to say in english. The deuylles seeing Moses
law fear not, nor tremble not, because it has not wrought man's health, but
seeing the cross they often quake, flee, vanysh away. Of the which it first
came that meat / drink, and other diverse things are blessed with a sign or a
figure of the cross. Damascene also Lib. 4 ca. 22
says. The cross is given to us upon our forhead, and that it is a shield, a
buckler, and a cote of armure against the devil.

Adorandum igitur est hoc signum, Of the sign of the cross.
therefore this sign (says he) must be worshypped of us gyuynge to god the
reverence, and ye devout honoryng. Qui ha^c adora^t, participes si^t christi
crucifixi They that do worship this figure of the cross, let them be (O lord)
partakers of christ crucified. Hitherto saint damasene. Let men, that despise
the figure and sign of the cross, and shame not to call it an ydoll
abhorri^ge it almost as much as the deuel does, read old and auncyente
histories, and they shall find strange and wonderful things wrought by it
of god. Sozomenus Lib 2. ca. 19
one of ye three that made ye storye called tripertita historia, tellethe that a
dead ma^ne was reised up again by the touching of the cross, and that one of
the sybilles, which were hethen women having the gift of prophesyng, said no
doubt styrred of the holy ghost. O ter beatum lignum, in quo deus extensus est.
That is to say. O thryse happy wood, in the which God was stretched forth
Also he reherseth there, that when saint Helene had found three crosses, and
not me^ douted which of the^ was christ's cross, and which the thieves, that
were crucified with him, Macaryus then being bishop of Jerusalem thus did
put away ye doubt. He brought one of those three crosses unto a noble woman,
which was long sick, and praing devoutly he perceived ye might of our
savior. For by and by after that the crossehad touched the woman, it drive
away the passion of that most sharp disease, and restored health unto the
woman. Eusebius moreover tells that i^ Alexandria al breast plates of serapis
the god of the Egiptians, which stood in every houses walls, entryes, posts,
and wyndowes, were so cut away that no prynte nor the name either of him, or
else of any other deuell remained, and every body set up instead of the^ ye
sign of our lords cross i^ the posts, entrynges in to their houses, the
walls, windows, and pillars The which thing when the painoms, that were left,
did se, they were reported to have comen un to the remembrance of a great
thing by a tradicyon to them selves of old committed. The Egypcyans have a
sign of our lords cross among their alphabete letters, and say it signieth
the life to come. Wherefore they (says Eusebius) which by the wonderynge at
the things which were done, were turned to the faith, said that it was so of
old taught or left to them. that these things, which are now worshypped,
should so long stand, as long as they should se that sign to have come, in
the which life was. When in Jerusalem the jews nyghe all were slain of God
with a bowl or thing of fire very round, and the rest were with fear of
death enforced and constrained to confess christ Jesus to be god, least that
thing should have been thought to have happened by chance, the night
following the sign of the cross did so evidently appear i^ all their
garments, that he, which for his unfaithfulness would have taken it away
could not in no wise. Therefore let men beware that do despise the pycture of
ye cross or ye crucifyx of christ, lest like ve^geau^ce of god do light upon
them. The good, and godly Emperor co^stantyne, when he was Histo. tri^ lib. 1.
ca. 5.
turned to Christ's faith, and hard much preaching of ye cross, when he was
in warfare he commanded ku^nyng men to change his sign, or bainer that he
had, i^ to a baner of the cross made of gold, and precious stones. Hoc eni^
signu^ bellicum inter alia preciosius erat, eo quod i^peratore^ precederet, et
adorari id a militibus moris esset. For this sign of war was among other
more p^cyous, or esteemed better, because it went before the Emperor, and the
custom was it to be worshypped of y^ soldiers ^herof chyefly I suppose
constantyne the noblest honor of ymperye of Rome to have changed it in to
the sign of ye cross, that his subjects by often seeing it and regargynge it
might be dysused, or brought out of custom from the first manner of belefe
in honoring ydols, and judge him only god, whom the Emperor did worship, or
who^ as a captain, and an aider he used against his enemies, This figure of
the cross was carried upon men's shoulders through the whole host: and when
the bearer of it through great fear of the enemies delivered it to another and
fled away, he was slain suddenly, and he that carried the cross among
many sharp weapons, quarelles, and darts escaped harmeles, all the darts
wonderfully by gods power, stuck in the sign of the cross and did all flee
from him that bare the standerde or baner in the field. It is more reported
(says Eusebius) that none the bearer of that standard was either wounded or
taken prisoner in batell. Hitherto Eusebius declaringe the great virtue of the
sign of the cross, how it aided constantynes soldiers, and how much the
godly Emperor co^stantyne did esteem it. We christen men for a great nombre
of us are very far gone from the old regarding of the figure, or image of
Christ crucyfyed for us, so yt we be not ashamed to call it an ydoll. The
Emperor constantyne after many and diverse notable victories optained of his
enemies accustomynge his soldiers to honor god as he did him self he made
their armur to have the sign of the cross. Maxima^ cultura^ sacratissimae
Tri^. histo lib. 1. ca. 9.
crucis habebat. He did most honor the holy cross, as the historye says,
both for the good luck / which he had in war by the help of it, and for
the sign, which god showed thereby. Sozomenus wrote this above twelfe Li^
^^sto tri^. ca. 4.
hundred years paste, the which tells also that when this Emperor
consta^tyne was in great care and thought, how he should obtain vyctorye
against his enemies, he saw in a dream the figure of the cross brightly
appearing in the fyrmament, and the angels sta^di^g by him wo^derynge at the
sign saying to hi^, O Constantine in hoc vince.

That is to say. O Consta^tyne vanquyshe / or overcome in this or by this
sign of the cross It is also (says the story) reported that christ appeared
unto him and showed him a sign of the cross, commaundynge him to make a like
figure, and take this help in battle, whereby he might get the victory of his
enemies. Eusebius Pa^phily says yt he hard the Emperor him self telling it
with an oath that about the mids of the day when the sun did go lower, a
sign of the cross made of the bryghtnes appeared and the writing which was
in it, saying to him In hoc vince. Win the victory by this sign of the
cross, This Emperor also caused y^ figure of the cross to be made in the
coin and images. To be Histo trip. lib. 7. ca^. 34.
short, Theodoritus tellethe that it was the manner to put on the^ that were
chrystened, the sign of the cross, so much did men at that season esteem and
regard that holy sign, the which is now most abhorred o^ us, in that
point much like unto the infideles, and the deuels, which can not abide it.
Unto whose great confusion it shall appear at the day of judgment, as saint
Mathewe testifyeth saying. Math. 24.


Tunc parebit signum filii hominis in caelo. Then at the day of dome the sign
of the son of man shall appear in the fyrmamente, that is to say, the cross
of Christ, says Teophilactus, glisteryng, and shynynge much above the
sun, to the reproach and condemnation of the Jews.

Is concerning the worshyppyng of the cross, I have alleged already saint
Damascenes words, and now will saint Hieroms, Austens, and Chrisostoms that
thereby men may se their blyndnes and error, which can not abide yt picture to
be honored of christen people, and saying their fooly may forsake it in time,
ere it be to late. This says saint Hierom upon these words of David.
Adorate scabellu^ pedu^ eius, quo niam sanctu^ est. Honor the low Psalm. 9^.
settle or footstool of his fete, for as much as it is holy. There are many
opinions of this footstool. For some refer it unto christ's humanity, or
manhood, upon the which the godheades majesty stood, and this humanity the
apostles did worship. Ad crucem dominicam, et ad anima^ sancta^ haec
referenda sunt. These words of saint Dauyd must be referred (says Hierom)
to our lords cross, and his holy soul. And therefore after Hieroms mind, ye
holy ghost by David's mouth commanded christen men and women to honor the
cross, though we very ungodly do dishonor it never so much. Saint Austen
says. Quid seruat fideli suo, qui Tract. in Joa^. 36.
tale^ honorem dedit supplicio suo? Denique modo in paenis reorum non est apud
Romanos. Vbi enim crux domini honorata est, putatu^ e^ quod reus honoraretur.
That is to say, What does god reserve for his faithful, which has given such
honor to the cross, upon which he suffrred death? To conclude now the cross
is not among peynes of the gyltie at Rome.

For after the cross of our lord was honored, it was thought that the
guilty was honored.

This saint Austen full godly Lib. 6. aduersus Iulianum.
touched ye honorynge of christ's cross. Cirillus also making answer to
Julian, which mocked christen people for worshypping the cross, said unto him
after he had rehearsed the great, and sundry benefits that came to us, by
the cross. Haec oi^a recordari nos facit salutare lignu^, et suadet, vt
cogitemus, quod sicut dicit diuus Paulus. Vnus pro oi^bus mortuus est, et
resurr exer it. The wholesome wood makes us remember all these things, and
moves us to think that (as s. Paul says) one is dead for all, and has
risen up again. This ancient doctoure saint Cyril wrote against the apostata
Iulia^ scornyng christen people for honoring the cross, and not against him
only, but against al other in like manner derydynge and mockyng men for the
same worshippynge. But of this matter I mind (god wylling) to entreat more
largelye in a book of worshyppyng images, of the which in this book I thought
to say nothing at all, and therefore now I will pass over it to the rehearsal
of other the apostles unwritten traditions, of the which the obseruyng of the
sunday is one. For though saint Johan in the Apocal. cap. 10.
apocalypsis makes mention of it, yet there is no commandment in The
obseruyng of the sunday comes by the apostles tradition.
the scripture to keep ye day holy day, more then al other days of the weke.
Of this days honourynge before other spoke saint Damascene above a thousand
years paste, saying. We do celebrate holy ye perfect rest of man's nature, I
say the day of Christ's lib. 4. ca. 24 Crip. hist. cap. 9.
resurrection. The valiant, and noble Emperor constantyne made a law that
upon our lords day the sunday all men should cease from gyuyng judgments,
and from the doing of other matters of the world, Ambros. ser. 6. de pe^
tecoste dominica est venerabilis atque Cole^nis, quia eo die chritus resurrexit.
and to be occupied that day only in prayer. Honorabat autem diem dominicum,
qnia in eo Christus resurrexisset a mortuis, alium vero scz veneris, quia in eo
fuerit crucifix us. That is to say. But the emperor Constantyne honored the
lords day, (sunday) because Christ rose again upon that day from death to
life, and he honored the frydaye because christ on that was crucified.

Hitherto the storye Ignaiius saint Iohans disciple writes of this holy day,
saying. Christ Epist. 1. ^
upon the sunday rose from death to life. Pro sabati zatione celebret omnis
christianus diem festum dominic^ resurrectionem, regalem et eminentissimum
omnium dierum. That is in english thus much to say. Let every christian man
keep holy ye feast day of the resurrection of our lord instead of the
saturday, a royal, or a kings day, and most excellent of al days. Would our
lord that all men, which do think every day of ye weke like, and none
rather to be observed holy day tha^ another, would look well on these holy
martyrs words, which was saint Johan the euange listes disciple / taught the
truth of and by which, whom christ him self scholed in the truth. This same
holy father commanded the people to keep holy days deuoutely saying to
them. Dies festos Episto. 4.
nolite inhonorare. Do ye not dishonor the holy days.

What say thou Luther, or lutheran, are all days equal, and after like
sort to be honored, observed, and kept holy day? Is thy judgment more to
be regarded the^ this blessed martyrs saint Iohans scholars? Saint Austen make
the mention of the sunday to January, and says christen men keeps it holy
day Episto. 118. Dies d^^icus (inquit august) no^ iudeis. sed christianis
resurrectione d^i declaratus est. et er illo suam: festiuita ^ habere cepit
rursus ad casulanu^ epist. 86. preponitur dies dn^icus sabbato, fide resurrec
tionis. Hieronimus epist. 53. ide^
in the honor of christ's ressurection. To be brief could this feast come
otherwise in to the church of christ then by the apostles tradicyon, and
teaching by mouth, since saint Ioha^ in the apocalipse the first chaptre
speaks of it? I grant to Bull linger that the sunday is mencyoned in the
holy scripture, but ye pueth not it to be set forth by commandment i^ the
scripture, as now it is, and has been sense the apostles time Ignatius
bearing wytnes. Thefore ye so^daies feast came up by the Apostles tradicyo^.
It comes also by tradicion that we do not fast upon ye sunday, of the which
thing saite Ignatius writes sayng. Quicu^que Epist. 4.
dominica^ ieiunauerir, ipse est inter fector christi. That is. Who soever shall
fast upon ye sunday, he is ye murderer of Christ. From whe^se came this custom
/ if it came not by mouth from the apostles? Of whom should this S. Iohn^s
discyple learn this point but of his master saint Johan? Tertulyan, which was
with in little more then. C. xx. after christ's death affyrmethe plainly that
this cnstome came by tradicyon without scripture. For he recytynge certain
tradicyons thus writes. Die dominico ieiunium nefas ducimus. That is. We do
think or suppose fasting upon the lords day sunday to be unlawful before
god. Also Hierom Aduersus lu ciferianos.
has the very same his words. It is therefore not lefull nor sta^dynge with
gods law to fast the sunday, except a man fast many days together. as Moses,
He. lias, and christ did in ye which this is included, and yet it is aganyste
no law of god written, wherefore it must neades follow that it is against gods
law unwritten, coming by the holy apostles tradicyon unto christ's church.
Which taught the christen people to forbear fasting on that day in honor
of Christ's ressurection, which brought unspeakable toys of gladness in to the
vorlde, and therefore it is mete that christen me^ yt day abstain from
fasting, which is a kide of mourning as christ said. Mathewe, ix. But of
this I have said, I suppose enough, the learned men may read of this matter
more in S. Austens book, and in other of of the old doctors: Moreover that
Easter day is kept, it is a tradicion of the apostles. For Socrates thus
wrytethe in the Histo trip, lib. 9. ca. 38.
history called in latin tripertita historia Nec apostolus, nec eua^gelia
accedentibus ad predicationem iugum seruitutis imponu^t, sed festiui tate^
paschae et alias celebritates honorandas esse dixeru^t. That is to say. Neither
the apostle, nor the gospelles do lay the yocke of bondage upon them that
come unto the preaching of the gospel, but they have said that the feast of
Easter and other solemn days are to be honored Anon after he concludynge
the treatise of ye matter thus says. Men's namque fuit apostoloru^ non de
diebus sancire festiuitatu^, sed co^uer sationem recta^, et dei predicare
culturam. Mihi ergo videtur, quod sicut multa alia per prouincias ad co^suetu
dinem venerant, sic and paschae festiuitas tradita sit, eo quod nullus
apostolorum hi^c aliquid sanxisset. That is. For the apostles mind was not to
make any law concerning feasts, but to preach good co^uersaryon, and the
worshyppynge of god. Therefore it appears to me, that as many other things
through the provinces, countries, or realms came unto a custom, so also the
feast of easter is taught, or delivered by tradition, because non of ye
apostles did inact, or make any law thereof. But the canons of ye apostles the^
selves declare that this feast of Easter was of their ordinance, though they
wrote no law and did co^stitute none ordinance of it in their episties. For
these are their words Si quis episcopus, presbiter, aut diaconus Canone. 8.
sanctu^ paschae die^ ante aequinoctium vernale cu^ iudae is celebrauerit,
abiiciatur. That is to say in our tongue. If any bishop, priest, or deacon
do keep holy we the jews the feast of easter before the day be as long as
the night in the spring time, let hi be cast away, despised, or renu^ced. Do
not these words manifestly show that ye apostles assygned what season of ye
year Easter day should be kept, yt must neades hereof follow ye they instructed
by the holy ghost, or else of our savior christ him self ordained that feast
to be observed of us christen people, and they left the same by tradicyon unto
the church without putti^g it into ye scripture. Of this feast Ianuario episto.
118.
and certain other speaks S. Austen saying. Quae non scripta, sed tradita
custodimus, quae quidem toto terraru^ orb obsernantur, da^tur intelligi vel ab
ipsis apostolis, vel a plenariis co^ciliis, quoru^ est in ecclesiis saluberrima
autoritas, co^mendata, atque statuta retineri, sicuti quod domini passio,
resurrectio, et ascensio in caelu^, et aduentus spiritus sa^cti de celo,
anniuersaria solemnitate celebrantur per vniuersu^ orbe^. In the englysh this
it is. Those things which we do keep not written, but delivered or taught by
mouth, the which sothelye are observed through the whole world they be to be
understand that they being committed and decreed, or ordained either of ye
apostles, or of the full and general councels, the autoryte of the which is in
ye church most wholesome, as that our lords passyo^, his resurrection, and
ascensyon, and the coming of the holy ghost from heaven, are kept holy day
yerelye through all the world. Here it appears plain lie by saint Austen
that these holy days, which then were, and yet are observed and kept through
all christen nations, were ordained either by the holy apostles, or else by
general counsayls, whose aucthoryte is most wholesome in christ's churches, or
co^gregatyons of the faithful, though we now set very little by them, because
they pluck our heresies by the roots, but these feasts were not set up
first by any general council, as it appears in the councils, and
espicyally Easter day, when christ rose, of the which the apostles before al
councels not written in ye scripture, spoke, as I have declared already, and
therefore they must needs by saint Austens rule above mentioned come of the
apostles tradition. With the which that agrees right well that saint Iohans
scholar Ignatius commanded the people not to set naught by their holy
days, saying. Dies festos no lite ihonotare. Do ye not dishonor Epist. 4.
the holy days, meaning no doubt the days chiefelye before here recyted,
apperteynynge to christ's death, resurrection, asce^tion and the coming of the
holy gooste upon whytsonday, of the which saint Gregory Nazia^zene Sermon de
pencecoste.
S. Hieroms master thus writes. Honoremus diem in aduentu spiritus sancti.
That is to say. Let us hononr the day in ye co^ymng of the holy ghost. Also
saint Cipryan says. Celebramus ta^ nos, Sermon de spi scio^.
quam iudaei quinquagesimu^ diem, sed illi in typo, nos aute^ in veritate, non
tam significamus, quam agimus. Pentecoste^ igitur celebrantes commemorauimus,
que olim sub Mose in veteri testame^to sunt acta, et quae sub Christo facta
sunt, post cuius assensione^ in caelos spiritus sa^ctus visibiliter super
apostolos in linguis igneis aparuit. That is. As well we christian people as ye
Jews do keep solemn the fyfty day after Easter, but they i^ a figure, we i^
ye truth, do not so much signify, as do it in deed. Therefore we keeping
whytsondaye holy have remembered the things / which were, ones long se^ce done
under Moses in the old testament, and also the things, which were done under
Christ, after whose ascension in to the heavens, the holy gooste appeared
visiblye upon the apostles in fyry to^ges. Finallye saint Hierom expownyng the
epistle of saint Paul to the Galathians thus writes Cap. 4.
after he has declared yt Paul commanded the Galathians not to keep the
Iewysses feasts or holy days. Dicat aliquis. Si dies obseruare, et menses, et
tempora, et annos, non licet, nos quoque simile crime^ incurrimus, quartum
sabbati obseruantes, et parascheuen, et dic^ dominicam, et ieiunium
quadragesimae, et paschae festiuitatem, et pentecostes laeticiam, er pro
varietate regionum, diuersa in honor martyrum tempora constituta. The englysh
may be this. Some man may say. If it be not leful to observe days, and
monythes, and times, and years, we christian men do run in to like fault,
obseruyng the wensday of ye weke, and the frydaye, and the sunday, and the fast
of the lent and the feast of Easter, and the mirth of whytsondaye, and after
the diuersytye of regions diverse times co^stitute or ordained in the honor of
martyrs. To that he answers, saying. To the which he that will plainly make
answer, shall say that the Jews feasts are not the same that ours are. For
we do not keep holy the Easter or pasouer of sweet bread, but the Easter of
the resurrection, and the cross. Nec septem iuxta morem Israel numeramus
ebdomadas in pentecoste, sed spiritus sancti veneramur aduentum. Another we do
number seven wekes in whytsontyde after the manner of the chrldren of Israel,
but we honor the holy goostes coming. Hitherto the holy and ancient
doctoure saint Hierom declarynge plainly that albeit all days in the weke be
like, and equal by their natures, yet some of the^ are appointed before the
other to serve god upon, and cease from worldly business, and therefore they
that do believe the contrary, are deceived shamefully / but of this sufficient,
now I will go forward on mine enterprise, and rehearse yet mo traditions. It is
a tradition of the apostles not written in the holy scripture, that he, which
was baptized or christened of an heretyke or a schismatike divided from ye
church of christ should not be baptized again afterward, because the baptime
of an heretic, or a schismatike is effectual, and of strength as y^ is,
which the catholics, being not separate from ye church do mynistre and give,
of the which thing saint Austeyne a clerk most excellent of christ's church
Lib. 2. ca. 7. con^ta ^^^^tistas.
thus speaks. Saluberrima^ tenet ecclesia consuerudinem in his schismaticis,
et haereticis, corrigere, quod prauu^ erat, no^ iterare quod da tum fuit,
sanare quod vulneratu^ est, non curare quod sanum. Quam co^suetudinem credo ex
apostolica traditione venientem, sicut multa non inu^niuntur in literis ^orum,
neque in conciliis posteriorum, et tamen quia per vnsuersa^ custodiuntur
ecclesiam, non nisi ab ipsis tradita, et commendata creduntur. That is. The
church keeps a custom most wholesome in these schismatickes, and heretics,
(that is to say, in their christenynge or baptising) to amend yt which was
ill, not to give again yt, which was given, to heal that, which was wounded,
not to cure the thing hole or sound. The which custom I believe came of y^
apostles tradition, like as many other things are not found in their
wrytynges, nor in the councils of the^ that came after, and yet for as much as
they are kept through the hole church, they are not thought or believed to be
committed, and delivered or taught but of them. Are not these words enough to
stop al bablers mouths, that say they ca^ not tell well what, against
traditions, utterly refusing to give any faith and credence to things not
expressed in y^ scripture. Will they be so folish to believe Luther before
Austen? The holy apostles did condemn the^ yt would be baptized, or christened
of heretics, and yet they commanded ye he, which was baptized or christened
with the baptism of the church should not be baptized or christened again, as
it apereth in their canons. Wherefore Auste^ Cap. 46. ^. 47.
judged right well yt it is a tradition of ye holy apostles not written in yt
scripture, yt who soever was ones baptized of an heretic or schismatike
should not be baptized again, but only yt amended / which Eusebius lib. 7.
ca. 8,
was ill done of the^. This knew well the old bishop of Alexandria called
Dionyse, which in his fyfth book of baptism tellethe that a christen man came
unto him, and said that he had received baptysme of heretykes otherwise the^
he saw it given to other by y^ catholyke minysters, and that he durst not
lift up his eyes to god for that fault, and therefore he desired to be made
clean with baptism of ye church, whereby he might receive ye grace of ye holy
ghost. But the holy man Lege aug. lib. 1. ca. 33. Aduersus cresconium
gra^maticu^.
said he durst not baptyse him again in any wise, knowing that the apostles
tradityon and constitucyon was against that thing to be done. Another
tradicyon of the holy apostles is to have pyctures and images in our temples,
as saint damascene has witnessed above. M. years before our days, which
thus Lib. 4. ca. 7
writes of them. Because (says he) some me^ do ymbrayde or lay to us in
reproach that we do honor and worship our saviors image and our queen his
mothers, and moreover the images of other saints, and Christ's servants, let
them hear that god made man at the begynni^g after his image. Therefore for
what cause do we honor one another, but in as much as we be made unto gods
image? For as the godly and great Basyl says. Imaginis honor ad exemplaris
transfertur honorem. That is. The honor of the image is referred, or carried
over from the image unto the honor of the sample. A little afterward when he
had said that in ye time of the old testament there were but few images,
because christ was not then incarnate, but after his incarnatyon, death and
ressurection, for as much as all men know not lerning nor give them selves to
readyng he says That our fathers did agree and consent to represent the
incarnatyon, death, and ressurection by images as certain tokens of vyctorye
for ye ready remembrance of christ's benefytes. For often we think not on
christ's passion through neklyge^ce, seeing the image of christ stryke^ through
we come again unto the remembrance of christ's death, and we falling down
do worship not ye matter of the cross, but christ represented by the image.
Like wise our lady christ's blessed mother, says he, is honored by her
pycture, and that her honor is referred unto Christ her son borne of her.
For as we have said like as the honor given to christ's good and kind
servants shows a token of good will toward all men's lord, sic et imaginis
honor, ad prototypu^, ex emplar, imaginisque veritatem tra^sfertur That is to
say, even so the honor of the image is carried from the image unto the first
example or pattern, sample, and truth of the image, Est aute^ haec traditio non
scripta. But this is a tradicyo^ not written. Anon he adds that the apostles
taught and delivered many things with out writing, and to prove that he
allegeth.ii. textes of.s. Paul the one. ii. These.ii. state. etc: stand ye
fast, and keep ye the tradicions, which ye have learned either by our speech,
or by our epistle, the other Corin.xi. Brethren I praise you, that ye do
remember me in all things and do keep y^ tradicyons, as I have taught them to
you. All this has that old writer Damascene to declare that ye setting of
images i^ y^ churches came by y^ apostles, and how they ought to be used and
what profit comes of the^ if they be well used. In the which same place he
does recyte a very strange historye, which is this. It is said in a storye
that Abagarus king of the Edesenes sent a pai^ter to paynt an image This king
wrote unto out savior, and our sauyoure unto him again as Eusebius has.
lib. 1. ca. 15.
like to our lord, the which when he could not do for ye bryghtnes of his face
shynynge, our lord him self puttinge a cloth to his godly, and lyuelye face
whype of in the cloth his own image and so sent it the king Abagarus desiring
it. This historye shows manifestlye that images do please christ, and not
displease him, though many me^ do call the^ ydols. The seventh general counsel
kept at Nicaea bithiniae recytynge many anncyent doctouis sentenses touching
images, allegeth these words of S. Basyll. I do honor the holy apostles,
Nicenum consilium.
marty^s, and confessors, which do humblye pray for me unto god, that by
their medyacyon our most beou^teous god may be merciful, and frelye give to
me remission of my sins.

Qua^ ob causam, et historias imaginu^ illoru^ honoro, et palam adoro: hoc eni^
nobis a sanctis apostolis traditum, non est prohibendum, sed in oi^bus
ecclesiis nostris eorum historias erigimus. That is in english thus much to
say. For the which cause I do honor, and openly worship also the stories
of their images, for that delivered to us of the holy apostles, is not to be
forbydde, or prohybited, but we do set up ye stories of the^ in all our
churches. Here we se that after s. Basils mind, the holy apostles taught and
left by tradicyon the setting up of images in the temples of chryste^ people,
and therefore this is also a veryte not written in the holy scripture. And to
the intent me^ may se their blind error, which rail against the image of
christ, his blessed mother a virgyn most honorable, of the holy apostles and
other saints: I will recyte here certain stories concerning images both
auncye^t Lib. 7. capi. 14.
and profitable also to the godly disposed people. The auncyente writer of the
churches stories, Eusebius tellethyt the woman, who^ our savior healed of a
bluddy flyxe, as Matthew does witness Capi. 9.
dwelled in a City called caesare^ philippi, and that in his time, which was
about.ccc. years after christ's birth, her house was seen there and before ye
doors of her house a pyller was showed set in a very hye place, i^ the which
the same woman's image graven in brass appeared as it were knelyng upon her
knees and humbly holding up her palms of her hands. There stood also another
image graued i^ brass, like a man apparayled clenly with a robe or alonge
garmente, reachynge forth the right hand to the woman. At the foot of this
image out of ye pyller did grow a certain herb of a new kind. The which
when it was spro^ge forth, was wont to grow out still to the hemme or
skyrtes of that robe the brazen clothing. The which hemme or skyrte of that
brazen garmente, when the herb growyng up had touched with the hyhgest top,
it got strength thereof to put away all diseases, and fayntnes or faylynge of
strength, in so much, that what so ever the sickness of the body it were by a
little draught of the joyce of yt wholesome herb it was put away, having no
strength at all, if it were broken of before it had touched by growing the
highest part of that brazen hem. They said that this picture was made like to
Jesus countenance, which remained until our time, as we saw with our own
eyes. And no marvel if they, which had believed of the gentiles did seem to
offer such things as a gift, for the benefytes, which they had obtained of
our savior, since we se also now ye apostles Peter, and Paul's, and our
saviors images to be drawn, and painted in tables. But we also have seen
their old images kept of certain men. Hitherto Eusebies in his storye, by
the which men may se, if they be not all blind, that it is no new nor late
invented thing to have images in the temples, and what god has wrought by
them. But of this sufficient for any purpose, which is to declare only that
many things come by tradition of the apostles and other the eldest fahers,
without any express word of the holy scripture. This not wythstandynge it
shall be a thing both worth my labor, and also the readers or hearers, to
recyte here a wonderful miracle done by the image of Christ, of the which
Athanasius makes mention, saying. Lib. ^e passione imaginis do vel exhortatio
ad mona. vt quida^ co dices habe^^ ca. 1. 23.
It chanced that the image of christ was found of the Jews in a city
called syria in the time of constantyne the elder.

The which they cast down to the ground, and said one to another. We have
hard that our fathers did mock and scorn Jesus of Nazareth many ways, let
us do so to this image. Tha^ they began to spyt in the face of our lords
image, and they stroke it with buffettes, saying. How great things our
fathers have done to the Jesus of Galile, so bygge let us do to this picture of
him. Then they crucified our lords image, naylyng the hands, and fete of it
with sharppe nails, putting unto the images mouth vinagre, and gal, as they
had done to Jesus thrist him self ha^gyng upon y^ cross. After y^ they put a
crown of thorns on the images head, strekynge thereon with a staff, and
mocking it spite fullye. And at the length, (as they had learned ye their
elders had done to christ upon ye cross) they do streke the side of the image
with a spear. When this abhomynable malycyus act was done, there ensued
straight a wonderful miracle. For the side of y^ our savior Jesus christ's
image suddenly began to run with water and blood, and the other miracles then
were done, which chanced when christ was crucified upon y^ cross. Then the
Jews caused a great vessel to be set under the place of the wound, and
anon it was full of blood and water. There upon they said that they would prove
whether any miracles should be wrought thereby, for as much as christ's fre^des
said y^ many miracles were done by him. They brought the water and blood to
their synagoge, and caused sick folk to be washed with it, among the which
there was a very aged man, which had the palsy or the losyng of his members
eue^ from ye time of his birth. He as soon as he was washed with y^ water and
blood was straight hole, and rose out of his bed, and went home. The^ y^ people
brought thither al diseased and sick persons, ye blind, ye halt, ye lame, ye
deaf, ye dome, ye lepers, with all other, and as soon as they were washed with
ye water and blood, they were forth with delivered from their diseases The which
when y^ people saw, they believed in our savior jesus, and praised him highly,
After this A thanasi: which wrote above. M. cc. years passed, tells y^ a
christian man had this image of christ, and leftit through negligence behind him
in syria, when he departed thence, when he was examined of the of the
Metropolitaine of y^ city, he confessed ye Nicodemus, which came to jesus by
night, made it with his own hands, and gave it to gamaliel paul's schole
scholemaister, when he died, and gamaliel when he saw y^ his death approached
and drew nighe, gave it to James, James to symeon, symeon to zacheus, and so
from time to time it continued in Jerusalem nigh until y^ city was destroyed,
which was the.xliii. year after christ's asce^sion in to heaven. For about ii.
years before ye destruction came by Titus and Vaspasianus the faithful, and
disciples of christ were advertised by y^ holy gooste to depart from
Jerusalem in to the kingdom of king Agrippa, and so they did carrying with
them all the things, that did belong unto christ's religion, among the which
was that christ's image which remained in syria til this day, and when my
father and mother dyed, I received it by the right of an heir, and do now
possessee the same. Hitherto I have recyted saint Athanasius words,
entreatyng of this marvelous storye, which I have rehearsed here ye me^ may
se both that images have been long in Christ's church, and ye God has
wrought by them great and strange miracles to the great comfort of christen
people, and finally that men should be wise that they do not mysuse the image
of christ, and his saints, lest they feel gods vengeance thereby. Now to go
forward, I will recyte yet a few things moo that are received and used by
tradition in christ's church without writing, of the which this is one, that we
The lentes fasting.
do fast the lent. For albeit it has authority (as saint Austen Aug. Ianu.
epist. 118,
affirms) of Moses and Helias fasting in the old law, and also of christ's
in the new, which fasted fortye days, yet it comes to the church by the
apostles tradition, y^ it is commanded to be kept, and observed fasting. For
saint In epist. ad Marcellam
Hierom this writes. Nos vnam quadragesima^ secu^du^ traditione^ apostoloru^,
toto a^no te^pore nobis co^gruo ieiunamus. That is. We do fast one le^t
according to ye apostles tradition, in a time most mete for us of al ye hole
year. Lo hiero^ says ye the holy apostles did or dayne and institute the
fast of the lent, and we following Luthers blyndnes say that the apostles
taught nothing which they wrote not afterward, and do despise this fast
utterly, preferrynge herin our own carnal judgments, and flesshely, yea
bestly lusts before the auctoryte and judgment of s. Hierom, which as he
said him self fasted wonderfullye much, even so he says the apostles taught
the feast of lent by tradicyon. Of ye which one theophilus wrote thus before
S. Hierome, whose book Lib. ^.
he translated out of greake in to latin. Nequaqua^ diebus quadrage simae,
sicut luxuriosi diuites solent, vini poculu^ suspiremus, neque in procinctu, et
prelio, vbi labor, et sudor est necessarius, carniu^ edulio delectemur. Qui
aute^ legu^ precepta custodiunt, vini vsum repudiant, et esum carniu^. That is
in our language. Let us not sight for, or greatly desire wine in the lent
days, as riot ous rych men are wont, neither let us delight i^ eating of flesh
i^ ye state of an army when they be ready to give battle, and in battle,
where labor and sweat is necessary. They that do keep the commandments
of laws, do refuse or forsake the use of wine, and the eating of flesh.
This we se that lent was above twelfe hundred years since fasted, and that
deuote me^ did absteyne both fro^drynkyng of wine, and also from eating of
flessh in it. How well this is now kept of christen people it neadeth not me to
tell, but rather to lamente, and bewail the great and exceadyng ryote and
gluttonye which is now used both in eating of flesh, and dryukynge of
wine, of the which I have spoken more largely in my book of fasting. But that
lent fasting came from the holy apostles saint Johan the eua^gelistes Epist.
4.
dyscyple Ignatius may witness saying. Quadragesima^nolite pro nihilo
habere, imitationem eni^ continet dei co^uersationis That is to say. Esteem not
lent for naught, for it conteyneth the following of gods conversation. Where or
of whom learned Ignatius saint Iohans scoler this commandment of the lentes
fast, if he learned it not of his master saint Johan, or of the other
apostles? This blyssed martyr saint Iohans discyple byddeth or commands us
to fast ye lent, Luther and his scholars like be lie gods, or whose belly is
their god, and ryotous epycures, do teach us to break it, whether party
ought christen people to believe, and follow? Saint Ignatius commands us also
to taste the wensday and friday sayng. Quarta vero, and sexta feria ieiunate,
reliquias pauperibus porrigentes. Fast ye the wensday and the frydaye, gyuyng
the remenaunt or scrappes to ye poor. See thou not, good christen reader,
that the frydaye ought to be fasted and the wensdaye after the apostles
doctrine, which this saint Iohans discyple wrote? Why therefore say you, that
ye apostles taught nothing, but that only which they wrote afterward in the
holy scripture? Cease for shame that fo^de babli^g. Leave of that ungodly
doctrine, which poysoneth the soul, and brings it to utter confusyon, if it
be not forsaken in time. Theophylus says. Habemus quadragesimam ab apostolis
institutam, et ordinata^ We have the lent institute, and ordained of the
apostles. Wherefore ought not thou rather to believe him then lewd lyenge
Luther? was not he both godly and excellently learned, as saint Hierome was
which testifyeth the same, and that time when this matter was nothing deubted
of? were not these doctors nerer ye apostles time by more the^ M. c. years,
then Luther was, that thereby they might better know, then he could, what the
apostles did teach the church of christ by mouth only without writing? But I
will proceed in this treatise, and rehearse yet certain moo tradicyons.

The church of christ uses to make holy water, and to spryncle it abroad
upon ye people in a remembrance of our baptyme, and the water ye flowed out
of Christ's blessed side persed with a spear in time of his bitter passion,
and to put us in remembrance also of our death, which like water (as the
second book of ye kiges witnesses) do slide into the earth 2. Reg. 14.
undoubtedly. This custom is neither brought up of late nor yet worthy to be
(as of many it now is the more pity) despised lib. 9. ca. 34. ^rip. hist.
and naught regarded. For we do read in a storye made above M. cc. years
passed, that there was at apamia ye city a notable and a strong temple of
iubiter, which was worshipped then for a god. When the good bishop Marcellus
with another man being a head officer commanded it to be thrown down with
fire cast in to it, there appeared a certain black devil lettynge the flames
of the fire to burn. The which when the bishop Marcellus hard, he ran
thither speadely, and co^man^ded a vessel of water to be brought to him, the
which set under the alter, he lyenge down upon the pauyment made humblye
peticion to our lord, that he would not suffer that devil to use any longer
his tyra^nye, and a sign of the cross made i^ the water, he gave the water to
one Equitius deaco^ armed with faith, and A zele co^maundynge him to run
haste lie, and put the fire under and spryncle the water about there. Quod cu^
fuisset factu^, demon effugit, no^ ferens aquae virtutem. The which when it
was done, the devil fled away not sufferyng the virtue or strength of the
water. This water feading the fire like oil, the whole temple was burnte
clean. Does not this storye declare that hallowed water has power to drive
away from us wicked spirits? Why should not the holy water used in christ's
church among all christen natyons, that be catholyke, be of the virtue, power,
and might, that this water was of, si^ce it is consecrated and hallowed with
many mo prayers, and making of crosses over it, then this holy bishop
Marcellus used in halowynge that water, whereby the devil was chased away out
of Tomo. 2. co^tea hereses
the temple? Epiphanius also bishop of Cypers tells this storye of a certain
jew converted to christ's faith, whose name was Joseph. This jew being a
christen man, received letters, and aucthoritye of the emperor constantine,
went to tyberias a city in Galilea, and having letters to take al things
necessary of the kings cost, he began to build in tyberias. He had need
of lime and other stuff to build, and therefore he commanded many chymneys, or
fournayses to be made without the city. But the crafty jews began to bind ye
fire, and to scatter it abroad with certain charms. Wherefore Joseph meued,
troubled, or angry, and streken with a zele toward our lord, ran out of the
city, and after y^ he had commanded water to be brought to him in a vessel,
the vessel of water being taken before all men (for there was a great
multitude of jews, that came to see that syghte) he made with his finger a
sign of the cross over ye vessel with a great voice, and the name of Jesus
called upon for help, so he said.

Be made in jesus of Nazarethes name, virtue or strength in this water to ye
reprouffe or puttyng away of all charmyng, and wytchcrafte, which these jews
have made, and to make also the fire to have power to work, to perform our
lords house the temple, and so he took the water in to his hand and spryncled
with it all the fournayses, and the charms were dissolved, or destroyed, and
the fire braste out before all men. Hitherto that ancient great clerk
Epiphanius. Whose words do plainly make (as the other story did before
recyted) for the custom to make holy water or to halow it with signs of the
holy cross, and good prayers, that it may thereby have strength, virtue, and
might against ill spirits, and work against charms, and wytchcraft. This
also declares that the custom to bless meat, drink, and other creatures,
is godly and good. Especially since Paul affirms that every creature of god
is hallowed by gods word and prayer. But that this 1. Tom. 4.
custo^ to make holy water came up by the holy apostles. It may appear thereby
/ that the godly martyr Alexander, which was within less the^ an hundred
years after Christ's death, and alive before saint Johan the euangeliste
departed by diverse years, holy wate^
thus makes mention of holy water. A quam sale co^spersam benedicimus populis,
vt ea cu^cti aspersi sanctifice^tut, ac purifice^tur, quod et oi^bus
sacerdotibus facie^du^ esse ma^damus. That is to say. We do bless water
spryncled with salt unto the people, that all sprincled with it may be
hallowed, or made holy and clean, the which we command to be done of all
priests.

Anon he says, she wing a good cause why this should be done. For if the
ashes of an heffer spiyncled with blood, did sanctify or halowe ye people,
and make them clean, much rather water sprincled with salt, and hallowed with
godly prayers, does halow and make clean the people. And by salt sprincled of
Heliseus the prophet, y^ barraines of y^ water is cured, how much more it
hallowed with godly prayers takes away ye barraines of things belo^gyng to
man, and sa^ctifieth the defiled, makes pure, and purges, and increases
other good things, and puts away the deuilles wiles or crafts to entrap a
man, and defends from the wylynesses or crafts of men's pha^sye. For we
dout not but y^ by the touching of the skyrte or hem of our saviors garment
the sick have been healed, how much rather are the eleme^tes, (as water and
other like) hallowed of god by y^ virtue of his holy words, by the which
eleme^tes, man's weakness receives health of body, and soul? All this that
blessed martyr wrote of holy water above M cccc. years, and xx. passed, and
therefore no man ca^ justly doubt, but this thing (as I have said before (by
the holy apostles tradition in to christ's church, and therefore it ought not
to be despised of us, nor left undone, as a thing of no value. But let this go
by, as spoken of sufficiently. The apostles left to y^ church also by
tradition, y^ priests should not Cap. 27.
mary wives, as it appears by their words, in their canons, which are these.
Innuptis au^t, qui ad cleru^ prouecti su^t, p^cipimus, vt si vo lueri^t, vxores
accipia^t, sed lectores, cantoresque, ta^tu^modo. That is to say. We christ's
apostles do command, y^ they which being se^gle are promoted to ye clergy,
do take wives, if they will, but only the readers, and singers. Which were two
degrees in y^ church among y^ clergy at y^ season, who^ only y^ apostles
commanded to mary if they would, excluding clean from marrying, priests,
deacons and subdeacons. Also they ordained Cap. 20.
and commanded yt none of ye clergy should be warra^ters, or suerties saying.
Clericus fide iussionibus i^seruiens, abiiciatur. That is. Let the cap. 17. et
ca 18.
clerk, which is a suerty, be cast away. Likewise they taught the church yt
he, which had married 1. Tomo. 3.
two wives, a widow, an outcast, or a co^me^ woman should not be promoted
among y^ clergy to holy orders, though the apostle paul saying, a bishop or
preeste must Tertul. ad vrore^ Apostolus non sinit digamos p^sidere.
have one wife, me^t, (as tertulia^ says) y^ bigamus should not be chosen a
priest. Of their tradition it came also yt one bishop should not give holy
orders to clerks of another diocesis. Likewise y^ orders, and offices of ye
church should Cap. 36.
not be obtained by money, that a clerk, or a lay man co^tynuyng in Cap. 30.
playinge at dice, or hasarde, and a lay man puttyng his wife from him should
not be suffered to receive the blessed sacrament of the aultare. But to be
brief I will speak no more of them at this time, but will recyte yet a few
traditions, of the which this is one, that we believe that our blessed lady
christ our saviors The co^tynuall virginite of our lady.
dear mother was continually a virgin til her death, which Eluidius denied, and
ye because he could find no scripture to prove it, but rather (as he supposed
falsely) ye scripture was against it, and therefore saint Hierom in his book
made against him called him an heretyke, though it can not be sufficyently
proved by the scripture, that she was a vyrgen until her departing out of
this world.

The which thing ought to stop their mouths that affirm all thiges to be
expressed in ye scripture, which we are bound to believe under pain of
damnatyo^. I am very sure that no man is able to prove this veryte by any
text of the holy scripture, and yet he that believes it not is, if he stand
stoburnly in defense thereof, an heretyke, and therefore saint Hierome (as I
have said already) called Eluidius an heretyke, which maynteined that our lady
had other children beside christ, whom she conceyned without man by the holy
ghost. What will or can they now here say, that require scripture for every
thing, and ever ask where is that or this written The which they never can do
lernedly.
in the scripture? Let them answer to this one point, or to the chrystenynge
of children, as to diverse other put forth in this treatise before. Bullynger,
one of Luthers scholars, labors to prove by scripture that our lady
christ's most honorable mother was a contynual virge^, lest he should be
enforsed, and compelled to confess that all truth which we must believe is not
expressed in the holy scripture, but he labors al in vain, as anon
hereafter it shall plainly apere. For he abuses these words of the prophet
Ezechiell to that purpose. Porta haec clausa erit, et non aperietur, et vir non
pertransibit per eam. etc. That is in english this much to say. This Ezech.
44.
gate shall be shytte, and shall not be opened, and a man shall not pass
through by it. Loo (says Bulliger) has not the prophet discrybed here
aptelye enough the holy womb of the virgyn Mary Christ's mother of who^ ye
son of ryghteousnes is born to us? This Bullinger wresteth this prophettes
sentence from the litteral sense unto an allygory, (which al learned men, do
confess not mete to prove any doctrine being in controuersye,) for the
defense of his deuyllyshe heresy Proclus the bishop of Cizicene (says he)
does none otherwise expowne this ye prophets text. What then? he does
understand yt mystycally and by an allegorye. Is that sufficyent to prove any
kind of doctrine, or to persuade any thing in questyon, and co^trouersye?
Again S. Hierome does otherwise expowne it, yt is to wit, of the gate of the
law, and the prophettes. For he thus writes. What gate is this that is
always shytte, and only the lord god of israel enters by it? Truly that of
the which our savior speaks in the gospel. Woe to you scrybes, and pharysees
hypocrytes, and woe to you doctors of the law, which do take away the key of
eunnyug, ye enter not in your selves, and the^ that are about to go in, ye
prohibit. Of this gate (says Hyerome) the prophet writes under the name of
a book. Erunt verba libri istius, sicut verba libri signati. etc. The words
of this book shall be as the words of a book sygned or sealed and so forth.
No man could Apoca. 5. ^
open and louse the seals of this book, but he of whom Johan speaks in ye
apocalypse sayng Behold a lion of Judas trybe has optayned ye victory, which
opens the book, and louseth ye seals of it. For before Christ came the gate
of ye law, and the prophettes, and all knowledge of the scripture was shytte,
paradise was also shytte, which by christ's death were opened, the vele of the
temple brake, the vele In 2^. 2. Cor. 3.
taken away, al things were open, and manifest. Hitherto S. Hierome / whose
words declare that this text ought otherwise to be expowned then Bullynger
understands it, to defend his naughty and damnable heresy. Notwithstanding
saint Hiero^s exposition is mystycal, or allegorical, and not litteral in deed.
For to ye letter, by yt gate or door is mente a certain gate or door of the
temple, that was shytte and no man but the prince, which was gods vycar, might
enter into the temple at it, to offer sacrifices unto god, and therefore ye
prophet said. Vir non pertransibit per eam. A comen man, or any other then
the chyef or prince shall not pass through it. This is the true meaning of
the letter, as it shall easelye apeare to him, that will wey and examyn dily
gently the text without all affection, and corrupted judgment, and therefore
this place of the prophet ca^ not prove Bullyngers purpose, that our lady
christ our saviors blessed mother was a continual virgyn, though it be very
true that she so was, and Heluidius was justly esteemed of saint Hierom an
heretyke for the denyenge that she continued a vyrgyntyl her death. Moreover
saint Ciprian expownyng the apostles creed says that the prophet Ezechyell did
set forth the wonderful manner of our ladies bringing forth christ, and that
he called our lady blessed saint marye christ's mother a gate by a figure. In
ye which place the said Cipryan affyrmeth that our lady was a perpetual
virgyn. To be short in this matter Saint Hierome in his hole book compyled,
and publyshed of, and upon this matter against Heluidius, alleged not one
text of the scripture to prove this truth, but only did make answer to the
auctorities that Heluidius mysse took for his purpose, the which he did (as
Erasmus In argume^ to episto^e illius.
says truly) because ye scripture spoke nothing of that thing, but it was
set forth, and left to the church by the holy apostles tradicion. Certaynlye
if the prophet Ezechiels text alleged before of Bullynger could have proved
that our blessed lady was a virgyn to the end of her life, saint Hierome
would have alleged it to that purpose since he expowned that whole pphet, and
therefore for as much as he did not recyte it to y^ end, it may appear that he
saw that it made nothing at al to prove that thing. But this of this veryte
unwritten delivered from the apostles to us by mouth without any express word
of scripture, speaking thereof. Further we believe (as i^ deed we are bound The
creed of the apostles.
to do) that the holy.xii. apostles made a certain creed called in latin
symbolu^ apostoloru^ (as S. Cypria^ affirms expowning it) because every one
of them made an article thereof, and yet it can not be proved by the scripture
that they made any such. Rufinus aquiliensis, saint Austen, In expos^illius.
August sermo. 10. de penteco. etc. in ramis palmarum Lyprianus in symbo apost
ait. Tenet fidel traditio sa^cta^ ecclesia^.
and diverse other do witness, that the apostles wrote that creed, and this
article. I believe the holy church catholyke, which is contained in it, can
not be proved by any text of the scripture. If we should believe nothing, that
is, not expressly and namely set forth in the holy scripture, then we should
not believe that christ the son of god is equal with his father, of the same
nature, substance and power, for Arius denied it because he saw nothing in the
scripture namely to prove it, as saint Athanasius writing against him,
affyrmeth plainly. Lib 2 disp^ in arianos
Where find ye (said Arius) this word, homousios, that betokens one that
is of like, or the same substance, in all the scripture: Dasillus cp. 78. Si
vero quis dixerit exaiteta essentia et substa^tia esse filiu^, eu^ reprobat as
detestatur catholica, et apostolica ecclesia. O. did est satis ad illius
hereseos explosionem.
was he not as foolyshe, as many now are, and many now as then he was / which
do ever ask where fyndeste thou that in the scripture? Saint Athanasius, and
the great council holden at Nicea, with as many as have written against y^
heresy, which holds y^ the son is not equal with his father, have made
answer unto the arryans, that albeit this word or name homousios signifiynge
that christ the son is of one nature and substance with his father, is not
put forth expressly in gods holy word, yet the scripture allows, and
proves the thing it self in diverse places, the which they judged to be
sufficyent, as in deed it is, not in this matter one^^^, but in sundry other,
as that there be three persons in the trinity, though it be not expressed in
the scripture, and therefore Sabellius denied it, yet y^ scripture does fully
and plenteouslye set the thing it self forth. Also that the holy gooste
proceeds from the father, and the son is not namely expressed in the
scripture, and for that cause the grecians, and the Armenes denied it, and yet
the scripture proves that thing sufficiently, as it is expowned of the holy
doctors. Wherefore it is peryllous to demand for the belief of every thing
received of us, where it is written in the scripture, or how can it be proved
by the holy scripture, sith it is enough that the scripture is not against it,
being received of the catholic church, or that the scrypturs does set it
forth, as it is understand, and expowned of Tertulianus de corona militis.
the holy church, and her doctors catholic, In this matter concerning the
askyng of scripture for ye proof of every thing, I would that every man would
mark well what the eldest latin doctor of christ's church Tertulyan says
therein, whose words are these. Cum quaeritur, cur quid obseruetur, obseruari
interim constat, ergo nec nullum, nec incertum videri potest delictu^, quod
co^mittitur in obseruationem suo nomine vindicandam, et satis autoratam
consensus patrocinio. That is to say. When it is asked, whyany thing should be
observed, it is euydente, in the mean season, ye it is observed. Therefore it
may seem some fault, and a certain sin, that is committed against an
observation, which is to be defended by her name, and is sufficyentlye
authorysed by the defense of consent. These words do rub some men of this
our time upon the gall, as also do Tertuliande corona militis.
those which now follow in this old authoure. Quale est autem, vt quis tu^c in
questione^ prouocet obseruationem, cum ab ea excidit? et tunc requirat vnde
habuerit obseruatione^, cu^ ab ea desiit? But what thing is it (says he)
that any man should then call in to question, or doubt an observation, when he
is fallen from it? And then require from whe^se or whereof he had the
observation, when he has left it? Do not diverse men even after this sort now
among us chryste^ people? For we do forsake fasting, and diverse other things
long kept of al christen nations before we were borne / and then we call them
in doubt / and ask what authority they be of, and how they may be proved by
scripture. It is an easy thing to ask where is it written, that we should
fast the lent, observe any feasts, and keep many other things, not plainly,
and namely set out in scripture, but we may ask of them where is it written
that these things ought not to be observed?

Expostula^tesenim scripturae patrocinium So reasons Tertulian.
in part diuersa, praeiudica^t suae quoque parti, scripturae patrocinium
adesse debere. That is. For they / askyng a defense, or an eayd of scripture in
the contrary part, do judge before, that the scryptures defense ought to help
their part. Habemus obseruationem inueteratam, quae praeueniendo statum fecit.
Hanc si nulla scriptura determinauit, certe co^suetudo corroborauit, quae sine
dubio manauit detraditione. Quomodo enim vsurpari quid potest, si traditum non
sit prius? Tthus may be the english. We have an old observation, which
coming before, has made a state, or a certayntie in it. Though no scripture
has determined this observation, yet at lest the custom has stre^ghthened
it, or made it strong, which doubtless came of tradition. For how may any
thing be observed, or kept, if it be not first taught, or delivered by
tradition? Hitherto Tertulyan, which was above. M. ccc. years, and. xl. before
our days, whose saying makes much for traditions, and for things used in the
church of christ without manifest scripture for them. Now where some learned
me^ have supposed As Johan cecius, Bu^de rius, and other certain.
and set also forth in their books, that the goinge down of our saviors
blessed soul with his godhead in to ye place, where ye old fathers souls
remained before christ's death, called libus patru^, to comfort the^, to show
ye he was come in to the world by his birth, and had dyed for the^, and to
deliver them thense, is not expressed in ye scripture, I think that therein
they were greatly deceived, as no man is clear from all error, especially
they that write upon gods holy word, which only is without al lies, and
errors, as the writers of August ad hieroni.
it only were in that their deed not deceived in any one point, (I say ye
they, which affyrmed) that descensus Christi ad inferna, the descendynge down
of christ to hell, is a truth not written in the scripture, were plainly
deceived therein, because many textes of the scripture do prove that thing
euydently, of the which these are the chyefe. Dauyd says in the parson of
our savior Psalm. 19.
christ. Non derelinques animam meam in inferno. O father thou wylt not leave
my soul in hell. How could this have been truly said of christ to god his
father except his soul coupled with his godhead had descended in to hell or
the place where the fathers were before christ's coming and death? Also we
read these words in the sawtre. Abstraxisti Psalm. 29.
de inferno animam mea^. Thou have (O father) taken my soul out of hell, I
let pass other Act. 2. Ephe. 4.
auctorites, puing the same, because these two are sufficyent for to prove this
purpose, which is that the scripture makes me^ tion that christ defee^ded or
went down in to ye place where the fathers souls remained abidyng and lokyng
for his coming thither to them after his death, when his body lay in the
sepulcher.

Now to make ones an end of this treatise, I will breyfely declare that ye
certain knowledge of the holy scripture comes by tradicyon without any other
auctorytye then of the catholyke churches, and the fathers of christ's
relygyon, that learned of the apostles, which were the very true scryptures
written by the inspiracion and styrynge of the holy ghost, and which were not,
though they were putforth in ye euangelystes, or apostes names. Saint Austen in
diverse places of his The euangels and other the holy scripturs are not
assuredly known to be gods word but by the church of christ bearing
witness there unto.
works, and namely i^ these, that now do here follow, affyrmeth ye the
auctoryte of the holy scryptures depends, and hangs upon the judgment of
the universal or catholic church. First this has he, lib.vii. co^fess.

Scripturas sa^ctas ecclesiae catholicae co^mendat autoritas. That is to say.
The auctoryte of the catholyke church sets forth the To. 6. epist. co^tra
fu^da. Mani.
holy scryptures. Again more plainly this he writes. Quid faceres dicenti,
non credo euangelio? Ego vero non credere^ euangelio, ni Hiero contra
vigilantium. Quid necesse est in manus sumere, quod ecclesia non recipit.
si me catholicae ecclesiae authoritas co^moueret That is to say. What would
thou do to him, yt says, I believe not ye gospel? I trewly would not believe ye
gospel, except the auctorytie of the catholyke church should move me. It
folowethe anon there. I must neades believe the book of the apostles acts, if
I do believe the gospel, because the catholyke churches autorytie co^mendethe
to me of like sort both those scriptures. Tertulia^ also affyrmeth Tertilianus.
prescript.
the same thus writing. Quid apostoli predicauerint, id est, quid illis
christus reuelauit, et hi^c praescribam, non aliter probari debere, qua^ per
easde^ ecclesias, quas ipsi apostoli condiderunt, eis predica^do tam viua,
(quod aiunt) voce, quam per epistolas postea. That is. What ye apostles have
preched that is, what christ has reueiled, or opened to the^, I will note or
determyne also hence or thereof that it ought not otherwise to be proved then by
the same churches, or says full companyes, which the apostles them selves
builded, preachinge to them, as well with a lively voice, (as they say commonly)
as afterward by epystles. Beside this in another book he writes after this
manner. Tertilianus lib 4. aduer sus martia nem.
Habemus et Iohannis alu^nas ecclesias. Na^ et si apocalipsin Marcion respuit,
or do tamen episcoporum ad origine^ recensitus in Johan nem stabit autore^. Sic
et caeterarum generositas recognoscitur. Dico apud illas, nec solas a
postolicas, sed apud vniuersas, quae illis sacrame^ti societate confaederantur,
id eua^gelium lucae ab initio aeditionis stare, quod cum maxim tuemur. Eadem
autoritas apostolicaru^ ecclesiarum caeteris quoque patrocinatur euangeliis,
quae proinde per illas, et secundu^ illas. habemus, Ioha^nis dico, Mathaei, et
Marci. Thus may be the english of these words. We have also churches of. s.
Ioha^s scholynge, or bringing up in learning of the gospel. For though
marcion does refuse the revelation, or apocalipse, yet the order of bysshoppes
nombred or rekenyd to the beginning shall hold with Johan, that he is the
autour or maker of it. So also the nobilite, or strength of the other
scryptures is known perfectly. I say y^ that gospel has stand for Lukes
from the making or putting forth of it at these churches, another only with
them that were the apostles, but at or with all them holly, which are
confedered, or joined to the^ with feloshyppe of a sacrament, oath, or sign of
a holy thing, the which thing we do chyefly defend. The same autorytie of
the apostles churches defends also ye other gospels from iniurye, the which
therefore, and after or by them we have, I say, Iohas, Mathewes, and Marks.
Hitherte the ancient writer Tertulian, whose words declare, y^ the apostles
tradicyon teaches us / which are the gospelles of christ and the true
scryptures, where there is no scryptures, to prove them by, and therefore he yt
will believe nothing without scripture, let him tell me why he Mark this reader.
believes any one book of y^ scripture to be true scripture sith no text of ye
scripture can testifye, that it is scripture in deed?

Wrote not I pray the, reader, Bartylmewe a gospel, and Nychodemus another,
(as stories do tell) which are not received for any part of the scripture?
By what auctorytye is this done? wherefore do thou rather give credence unto
Lukes gospel which never saw christ: then to saint Bartylmewes, which was
one of the twelfe apostles? Eusebius testifyeth that an eua^gel Lib. 3. ca. 3.
or gospel was iuged to have been written by saint Peter, and a book of acts
with a revelation, which are not allowed to be scripture. Enoch wrote a book, of
the which Judas i^ his epistle spoke and also Tertulian. Many diverse De habitu
muli^bri.
other books were ascrybed unto the apostles, and euangelystes being put forth
in their names, and bearing their tytles, which in deed either they never
wrote, or else ye holy gooste moved not them to make them, or thought it not
good nor necessary to have them received and used among christen people, which
thing he opened and taught the holy apostles, and other the beleuynge people,
of and from whom the certain knowledge, which is the holy scripture, and
which is not, does come, as S. Cypryan says, thus writing. In enarr^ symbo.
ap^
Quae sunt noui, ac veteris instrume^ti volumina, quae secundum maiorum
traditionem per ipsum spiritu^ sanctum inspirata creduntur, etecclesiis
tradita, competens videtur in hoc loco euidenti numero, sicut expatrum
monumentis accepimus, designare. That is to wit. Which are the books of the
new, and old testament, that according to the elders tradition are believed
to be inspired by the holy gooste, and delivered unto the churches, it seems
mete to assign or note in this place by an euidente no^bre, like as we have
learned of the fathers records, or books. Then straight he recyteth the
number of the books, which are reckened to be holy scripture. Whereby it
appears yet ones again that we know not what books be to be judged, and
esteemed gods word but by tradition of the apostles, and our auncetours, or
elders, whom the holy gooste (says saint Cyprian that blessed martyr) taught
that thing by inspiratio^. It follows therefore that if thou will believe
nothing without witness of the scripture, that thou causte believe nothing of
the gospel to be scripture nor no other part called scripture, and so all the
faith wholly must neades at ones by that one deuellish opinion clean peryshe.
Wherefore cease asking where it is written in the scripture, in things at the
lest received generally of Christen nations, and give credence unto the
catholyque church, whose authority, as it is most certain and sure, so it
is very long, and great, as this chaptre shall prove to the by gods grace
sufficientlye.

The authority of christ's catholic churcch of and upon the Apostles
traditions and veryties not written in the scripture.
AS touching the authorite of christ's catholyke, or universal church, I
entende at this time to be very brief, and short. The old and ancient
writer saint Ireneus I^eneus lib. 5. cap. 4
which was scholar to one Polycarpe saint Johan the euangelystes disciple,
thus writes of the churches auctoritye. We ought not to seek yet the truth at
other, the which it is easy to take of the church, seeing that the apostles
have brought al things belo^gyng to the truth in it most ple^teously, as it
were into a rich treasure house, or store house, so that every man that will,
may receive of it water of life. Here this holy martyr sends us to the
catholyke church, to learn the truth, and says we may not seake it but
there only. This church neither does approve any thing against the faith
and good living, nor suffers any thing agayust either of the^ to be Tomo, ^.
Epist. 119.
kept, as s. Austen testifyeth. If this church through the whole world do
teach any thing, Epist. 118.
qui^ ita facie^du^ sit, disputare (inquit August.) insole^tissime i^saniae
est, y^ is, but that it must so be done, to reason or dispute, it is most proud
T^en was Luther mad, as many other are that follow him now.
madness, This saying of saint Austen declares many me^ both to be proud and
very mad also, which do reason stubbornely, and spytefullye against diverse
things observed, and kept through the whole church, these many hundred years.
Our Lord make them meke, humble, and wise, that they may acknowledge the
high, and certain authority of Christ's catholyke church, against the which
no Aug. de trinita. lib. 4. cap. 6.
quiet man has, or will, (as S. Austeyne testifyeth,) judge saint Austen
entreating of the christenyng again of them, that were baptized or christened
of an heretyke thus writes. Though there were no example of this matter taken
out of the holy scripture, yet the verity of the same ^ib. 1 cap. 33. contra
^resconium gra^maticu^.
scriptures is holde^ of us in this thing, when we do that which has pleased
the whole church, when the same scriptures authority comme^deth, and sets
forth, so yt for as much as the holy scripture can not deceive us, who so ever
fears to be deceived by the darkness of this questyon (whether one baptized
of an heretyke sh^^l^e be chrystened again or not) let him ask council of the
same catholic church, whom without al doubt the holy scripture commends.
Hitherto this great clerk saint Auste^ which wylleth us to ask counsel of
christ's catholic church in this doubtefull question of baptyme, of the which
the scripture speaks not, and therefore al things can not be proved by the
scripture, which we must both believe / and do also, though many men ungodly
/ and falsely say they may. The same Auste^ / which said he would not believe
the gospel / except the authority of the catholyke church should move him /
in another place defines / and declares / what is the catholic church,
saying. I believe Tomo. 10. sermone^ de te^pore. 131.
the holy church catholic, that is to say, which is spread, and dyspersed
through all the world, because the churches of diverse heresies, for yt cause
are not called catholyke, that they what church is called the catholic church.
are contained in their places, and countries. Hec vero a solis ortu usque ad
occasum usque vnius fidei sple^dore diffunditur. That is. This the catholyke
church is scattered abroad with the shynynge of our faith from the suns
rysyng until the going done. The donatystes, which were a certain kind of
heretykes in Numidia about the year of our Lord, three hundred fyftye and
three, affyrmed that the church, or congregation of christen people was no where
but with them as Luther, and his scholars are not asshamed to booste of their
flocks, which is against the nature, and name of the catholyke church, of the
which Vince^tius lirynensis, which was above aleuen hundred years before this
Vince^tius lirinensis gallus.
time, writes after this sort. I have often with great study asked of very
many men both well learned, and godly also, by what rule, or sign I might
discern the truth of the catholyke faith from the falsite. And I had almost
ever this aunsweare, that whether I, or else any other would espy out the
gyles, or deceytes of heretykes, and avoid their snares, and abide sownde, and
hole in a sownde faith, he ought two ways by gods aid to arm and defend
his faith. Primo scilicet diuinae scripturae autoritate, tu^ deinde ecclesiae
catholicae traditione. That is to say. First or chyeslye with the auctoryte
of the holy scripture, then further more with the tradicyon of the catholyke
church. Anon after he adds these words. But in the same catholyke church,
after whose rule y^ scriptures must be expownded, we Here it appears what is
called catho.
must see, that we keep y^ thing, the which has been believed every where, of
all nations, and always, for that is verily catholyke, as the strength of the
word declares. But that at the length Ille est get manus christianus, qui
quicquid ecclesiam catholica^ vniuersaliter antiquitus tenuisse cognorit, id
solum sibi tenendum Crede^du^^ decernit Vince^tins li^^mensis gallus.
is done only. Si sequamur vniuersitatem, antiquitatem, et co^sentionem, that
is. If we follow the generality, all or the hole, y^ au^cyentie or oldnes, and
the consent or agreyng of the faithful people. The first of these three shall
be done if we do confess y^ to be a true faith, which ye whole church through
the world confesses. The second shall be, if we go not from the fathers
senses, vndersta^ders of the scripture, or judgment. The third also then shall
be done, If in the auncyente we follow al, or nigh all, the priests and
masters, or teachers determinations, and sentences this liryndsis. Then anon
afterward he rehersynge how much, and how great ill, and myschyef came into
ye world by the arrians heresy, the subuersyon, ouerthrowyng, and destruction
of all good things, and godlymen, thus he writes.

Atque haec o^a nu^quid aliam ob causam, nisi vtique dum procaele sti dogmate A
notable saying of this old writer.
humanae superstitiones introducuntur, du^ been fundata antiquitas scelesta
nouitate subruitur, dum superiorum instituta violantur, du^ rescindu^tur scita
patru^, dum conuelluntur definita maioru^ dum sese intrasacratae, atque
incorruptae vetustatis castissi^os limitis profanae ac nouellae curiositatis
libido no^ co^ tinet. This is a very notable saying of this ancient doctor,
and the english of it may be this. Do al these euyls chance for any other
cause, but truly whiles that man's superstitions, Supstition is superfluous or
vain religion.
are brought in for heavenly doctrine, whiles the ancient well grounded, or
having a good foundation is overthrown, or cast down with an ungracious, or
myscheuous noueltye, or newnes, whiles the superyours ordinances, are broken,
whiles the fathers decrees, or statutes are taken away, or repelled, whiles the
determynatio^s of the elders, or auncetours are shaken out of their places,
whiles the lust, or sensualytie of the profane, ungodly or unlearned, and new
curiosite holds not it self within the most pure or honest bounds of the
hallowed and uncorrupted auncyentye, or age. These words of this old writer /
and excellent clerk declare very well that of heresye new New doctrine is
cause of al myschete.
doctrine, contempt, and breach of the elders traditions, decres / and
ordynau^ces comes al myschefe, and ungraciousness: which thing how true it is
diverse countries of chrystendome have and yet do / and contynually shall until
ame^dement be, feale lament, and bewail remedyles. Our lord will remedy it
when he shall se time, whom we must insta^tly, devoutly, and contynnallye desire
with our prayers so to do, ever remembrynge and cleauyng unto christ's
churches determynation, and faith, and then in and among al these sharp, and
rough storms of blusterynge heresies we shall sauely sail through ye seas of
this whretched world, and ariue, and come at the length unto the haven of
quietness: full of all ioyfulnes in heaven. God (says saint Austen) has In
psa. 47 De symbolo ad cateche. cap. 5.
builded this church ever to endure: why therefore do y^ fear lest the
foundacyon of it should fall? The catholyke church fights against all
heresies, she yet can not be overcome: or vanquyshed, hell gates against her
can not prevail. Eusebius says that Lib. 4. ca. 7 et. 8.
the devil the continual enemy of all goodness: of the truth, and of man's
health by his minysters the heretykes assayeth all ways to deceive gods church,
but the truth vanquyssheth: and suffers not the church to be corrupted with
the falsitie, being diverse men well learned: which should dysclose heretykes
ungodly gloses: reprove them: and open moreover the faith in the catholyke
church of christ: saying with the bisshoppe alexander (of who^ Theodoritus
speakethe. The church can not be overcome Histo tri^. lib. 1. ca. 14.
though all the world be against it. She vanquyssheth al ungod lines, our
savior assuryng us thereof, when he says. Be ye of good trust, I have overcome
the world. Haec docemus, haec predicamus, haec sunt apostololicae ecclesiae
dogmata, pro quibus etiam morimur, et destruere ea volentes nullatenus
formidamus. We do teach (says Alexander) these things we also preach these
/ these are determinations of the apostles church, for the which yea we dye A
godly bisshoppes saying.
and we i^ no wise do fear thiem, which will destroy them. Also saint
Chrysostom says thus of To. 2. homilia. 12.
the church. No^ cessat impugnari ecclesia, no^ cessat insidiaspati, sed i^
nomine christi, semper superat, sem per vincit. Et quantum alii insidia^tur,
tantum illa dilatatur. Sermo enim dei est i^mobilis, quia portae inferi non
praeualebunt aduersus eam qui impugnat, seipsum dissoluit, et fatigat,
ecclesiam au^t fortiorem ostendit. That is in our tongue thus much to say. The
church ceasseth not to be stryuen against or assaulted, it ceasseth not to
suffer wiles, to entrap her or she beware, but in the name of christ she ever
va^quyssheth, ever over comes. And as much as other beseige her, or work
craft against her, so much she is enlarged. For gods word is immovable,
which is, yt the gates of hell shall not prevail against her, he that fights
against her, does louse or destroy him self, and make him self weary, but he
shows the church to be stronger. How true this saying is, the stories, and
cronacles of things passed do so manifestely declare, yt I need to speak no
more thereof. This church was so much esteemed, and the auctorite of it so
greatly regarded of sayn e Lib. 2.
Gregory Iieroms master, that he said, teaching that god has no body. Ex
his, qui diuino munere afflati fuere, nemo hactenus se^te^tia^ vel pronu^cia^t,
vel pronu^tiatu^ approbauit and abhorret hinc nostrae ecclesiae doctrinae. That
is. Of these, which were inspired with ye holy ghost ^mora doctrine chritiane.
none hitherto either has pronounced this sentence, or approved it pronounced,
and the doctrine of our church discordeth from the^se. This great learned man
and holy father thought it enough for y^ improuffe of an heresye yt none of
the ancient doctors had either set it forth, or allowed it set forth by
other, and that it should be contrary to the doctrine of chyrstes church, and
we, such is our pride and want of grace, do despise the judgment both of the
godly fathers, and of the hole catholyke church, which is, (as saint
Chrysostom witnesses) the mother of the beleuyng people. Here now what
Tertulian ^ermone^. 76 de (...)
has said of the church in these few words. Non alia agnosce^da e^
apostoloru^ traditio, qua^ quae hodie apud ipsorum ecclesias aeditur. Exhibe
ergo aliquem ex tuis apostolici Lib. ^. aduersus Mattione^ habet eua^gelium
marcionis ecclesias, sed suas, ta^ posteras quam adulteras, quaru^ si c^sum
requitas factitus apostaticum inuenias, quam apostolica^ lib. 4. aduersus mart.
^.
ce^sus, et obduxeris. None other tradition is to be recognysed, or knwledged
the apostles, then yt which is published, or set forth at their churches.
Therefore show forth some man of thine of the apostles estimation, number or
judgment, and thou shall overcome or obtain the victory.) Again thus he
has. In summa si constat id verius, quod prius, id prius quod ab initio, id ab
initio quod ab apostolis, pariter vtique constabit id esse ab apostolis
traditum, quod apud ceclesias apostolorum fuerit sacrosanctum. That is to say
brieflye. If it be plain that to be trewer, that is first, that to be first,
or before that was from the beginning, which was of the apostles, it shall in
likewise be verily evident that to be taught of the apostles, which has been
much esteemed, as a thing hallowed, or that ought not to be touched but
reuerentlye, at or with the apostles churches.

Furthermore the council kept In registro lib. 1. ca. 23
at Nicea, which was one of the four general councils, that s. Gregorye said
he no less the^ y^ four gospels believed, declares how much the churches
authority and determinations should be regarded: saying. Si cathari venerint ad
Cap. ^. ^.
ecclesia^ catholicam, prae omnibus eos scriptis conuenit profiteri, quod ca
tholice et apostolice ecclesie dogmata suscipiant, et sequa^tur. That is. If
the heretykes (which called them selves cathoros for y^ cleanes of living,
which they proudlye challynge to them) shall come to the catholyke church, it
is mete that they first or before all things do by writing promise openly or
confess, that they do receive and follow the doctrines or determinations of the
catholyke and apostles church. Again Cap. 9.
the council says. Quod irreprehensibile est catholica tenet ecclesia. The
catholyke church holds that thing, which can not be reproved. If we would
mark well this saying, which as I said, saint Gregorye esteemed it as the
gospel, and follow it, we should not so shamefully ere, and go out of the way
as we now Lib. de ver^ sapien.
daily do. For (as Lactantius witnesses.) Sola catholica ecclesia est, quae
verum cultum retinet. Hic est fons veritatis, hoc est domicilium fidei, hoc
templum dei, quo si quis, no^ intrauerit, vel a quo si quis exiuerit, a spe
vitae et salutis aeternae alienus. That is to say. The catholyke church
only is, that holds still the true worshyppynge of God. This is the well
of truth, this the house or mansyo^ of faith, this ye temple of god, whither if
any man shall not enter, or out of which if any man goo, he is without hope of
life, and everlasting salvation.

These are both true words, and also dreadful, and therefore let men beware
that forsake the catholyke church, and follow any particular churches opynyons,
as they do, which lean to Luthers. And that we may know the catholyke
church from the heretycall, he adds saying.

But yet because every company of heretics do judge the^ selves chyefly
chryste^ people, and their church to be ye catholic church, we must know
that that is the true church of Christ, in the which is religion,
confession, and penance. By confession he understood aurycular confession of
sins / which is made to a preeste / for confession to god is refused of no
church / be it never so heretical / and therefore he meant that where aurycular
confession was not regarded / and used / there was not ye true church of
christ Lib. 4. Epistola. ^.
But Cypryan shall speak his mind in this matter with these words. Quisquis
ille est, et qualis cu^que est, christianus non est, si in christi ecclesia no^
est, quae vna est per totum mundum in multa membra diuisa. Who so ever he be /
and what so ever he be / he is not a christen man / if he be not in christ's
church, the which is one dyuyded through all the world in to many members.
Nestorius an arrogant heretic, as al such be / said that all the hole number
of doctors and writers, that were before him, were deceived and the whole
church erred from the truth, and he only found out the truth and followed it.

Did not even so say, and boost Marten Luther folowinge him therein, the
Donatians, Nouatians, Ruthenes, Armenos, and all other heretykes affyrmynge
that the church of Christ was with them only? Beware of them, good christen
reader, and stedfastlye follow the catholyke and universal church, which the
apostles builded, and set up with preaching the gospel to them. This is not
in one place, city, corner, nor country, but every where where true beleuyng
folk be. It can not err the holy ghost rulynge, guydynge, and gouernynge it
from time to time until Io. 14. 16.
the worlds end, accordingly as christ promised to it. This is the pyller of
the truth (as S. Paul affyrmethe) and therefore lean unto it fast, and thou
shall never fall from thy faith, but abide therein to thy great comfort, and
souls health. But now to the next chaptre, which recites the anncient
doctors sentences pronounced, and publysshed in their books upon this matter
of verytes unwritten, and ye churches tradicions. Saint Ireneus policarpes
saint Johan the euangelystes dyscyples scholar shows what doctors we should
follow in learning the truth of our faith saying. We must believe those
priests, which are in the church having successyo^ of Lib. 4ca. 43 et. 45.
the apostles, and all other, that come from that the pryncypall succession,
in what place soever they are gathered together or else to be suspected eythera
s hetykes, and of an evil judgment, Cap. 44.
or deuidyng the church again. Adhaerere oportet his, qui a postolorum
doctrinam custodiunt, et ab eis discere verit atem, apud quos est illa, quae
est ab aposto lis ecclesie successio.

The ancient doctors sentences written and set forth upon traditions of the
apostles, and christ's holy church.
Now for as much as Saint Basyll proves a truth concerning the holy ghost to
be godby saint Llemente, Ireueus, Dionisius, Alera^drinus, Eusebius
palestinus, origin Affricanus, historicus Gregori Nazia^zane
saint Paul, good christen reader / witnesses that Christ sent some
doctors for the edifyeng of the church, not only by preachyuge of the
scripture to the people, but also by the true and godly opening and expowning
the same, I will allege certain of the eldeste, and best learned of them,
that men may perceive the more clearly and perfectlye that all things which
we must believe, and do are not expressed, and publyshed in and by the bible,
and scripture, but that diverse things, which ought to be believed and kept of
us do come, and defend also of and upon the blessed apostles of christ, and
the churches tradicyon without any text of ye scripture speaking of them. I
have alre dye rehearsed some sentences of saint Basyll, Chrysostom, Damascene,
and Theophilactus, which therefore I neade not now again to recyte except it be
i^ other words, then they be already rehearsed, as now I will allege here
saint Basyll godly and notable saiges, which he has in a book of the holy
ghost thus writing. Basilius de spe. s. ca. 27.
Dogmata, quae in etclesia predican tut, quaedam habemus e doctrina scripto
predita, quedam rursus ex apostolorum traditione, in mysterio id est, in
occulta tradita recepim us Quoru^ vtraque, pare^ vim habentlad pietate^, nec
his quisqua^ contradicit quisquis sane vel tenuiter expartus est, quae sint
iura ecclesiastica. Nam si co^suetudines, quae scripto proditae no^ sunt,
tanqua^ haud multum ha bentes momenti, conemur reiicere imprudentes, et ea
daminabimus, que in euangelio necessaria ad salutem habe^tut, imo potius ipsam
fidei predicationem ad nudum nome^ co^ trahemus. These words may be turned in
to english after this manner. The laws, ordinances, decrees, statutes, or
commandments (for all these the greake word (dogmata) signifies) which are
preached, or publysshed in the church, we have certain of doctrine set forth
in writing eftsoon or again we have received certain by the apostles
tradicyon in a mystery, that is, in secret delivered. Of ye which two both
have like strength, power or virtue, to the knowledge the honor, deuote
worshyppi^g or love of god, another any man contrary to them, truly who soever
has proved, or learned by experience yea barely or poorly which are the
laws, power, auctorite, or right of ye church. For if we should endeavor, or
labor to cast away the customs, which are not put forth in writing like as
not having much pyth, or not being of much value, we shall also vnwards
condemn those things, which are in the gospel had necessary to saluaty on,
yea we shall also abridge, or Vnum est crimen quod nunc vehementer da^natur, ac
punitur, di ligens obseruatiotra di^yon^^ pa trum basilius Episto. 70.
draw together the same preaching or publishyng of y^ faith unto a bare, or a
naked name.

This saint Basyll rehearsyng straight many things set forth without
scripture by the apostles tradition, of the which I have spoken before. Thou
maest note here, good reader, diverse lessons against the lutherans, bearing
us in hand that all things are wryte^ in scripture, which we must neades
believe, and keep, but pryncypally that this blessed doctoure affyrmeth that
those things, which the apostles left without scripture, or unwritten, have
like efficacye, and virtue to the honorynge, and lo uynge of god: as have those
thiges which are written in scripture: and that because both of them comes by
the inspiracyon of the holy ghost: which styrred both the apostles: and the
evangelists also to write that: which is written: and the apostles in like
manner to leave certain things unwritten by tradition unto the church: ye which
was done (as. S. Basyll witnesses) that such things should remain hyd or
secret, lest they should be known of the rude, and ungodly folk, and thereby
might be despised utterly. But this shall be enough of saint Basyl, though he
wrote in this mattier much more. Saint Hierome thus writes Adilucinia^.
of traditions to lucinius demaundyng of him whether men ought to fast the
saturday, and daily receive the sacrament of the aulrer, Sed ergo breuiter te
admonendum puto, traditiones ecclesiasticas (praesertim quae fidei non
officiant,) ita obseruandas, vt a maioribus traditae sunt^. Nec aliorum
co^suetudine^ alioru^ more contrario subuerti. Vnaquaeque prouincia suo sensu
abunder, et praecepta maioru^ Roma. 19.
leges apostolicas arbitretur. That is to wit. But I think thou Roma. 14.
must be warned bryefly, that the traditions of the church (prynrypally those
which ca^ not hurt ye faith.) So are to be observed as they are taught or
delivered of the elders, or ancient fathers. Another other men's custom ought
to be subverted or turned up so down by the contrary custom of other. Let
every country have his own judgment, and judge the auncetours, or elders
commandments the apostles laws. I passover many Lege enim in eccleseaste^
ca. 10 et in Mat. cap. 21.
like sentences of saint Hieroms which he wrote in this matter, left my book
should be over long. Austen has very much of this matter in sundry of his
books, of the which some is alleged before out of his epistle written to
Ianuarye, where he says those things which are oblerued through the hole
world without writing, came either from the apostles, or else from the general
councils, whose authority is most wholesome in christ's church. Al^o to one
Casulane he thus has, entreating of ye saterdayes fast. In his rebus, de
quibus nihil certi statuit scriptura di^ina, mos populi dei, vel instituta
ma^oru^ prolege tene^ da su^t. That is to say. In these things, of the which
the holy scipture has ordained or stablished nothing certain / the custom of
gods people, or the elders ordinances are to be kept for a law. Luther and
his disciples teach n^e^ to break the fathers ordinances, precepts and
laws, and say that without manifest wytnes of the scrppture we should be bound
to believe and do nothing, Austen here affyrmeth the clean Lib 2. T^^.
contrary, whether ptye wylt y^ believe, good christian man? Epiphanius also,
which was about. M. cc. years se^ce, confirms my purpose saying. Oportet
au^t et traditione vti. No^ eni^ oi^a a diuina scriptura accipi possu^t, qua
ppter aliqua sacris seripturis, aliqu a traditione fa^cti apostoli nobis
co^me^dauerunt, que^admodu^ dicit sa^ctus apostolus. Sicut tradidi vobis. Et
alibi. Sic doceo et sic tradidi in ecclesiis etc. That is. But we must of
necessity use tradition. For all things ca^ not be taken of the holy
scripture / wherefore ye holy apostles committed to us some things by ye holy
scripture, some by tradition, like as paul says. As I have left unto you by
tradition. And in 1. Lor. 11.
another place. I teach so and so have delivered by tradition in y^ churches.
Lo this old doctor does not only affirm yt al things are not written in ye
scripture but ye apostles left sundry things unto the church by tradition,
and he also does allege paul in two places for his purpose. Origin Hom^. 5. in
Numeros.
agrees with this (which was above. M. ccc. years passed) saying. In
ecclesiasticis obseruationibus su^t no^nulla eiusmodi, quae oi^bus quide^
facere necessee^, nectame^ ratio coru^ oi^bus patet. That is. There be some
things in ye churches, ob seruatio^s of yt same sort, yt which al me^ must
needs surely do, and yet yt reason, or cause of the^ is not open to al me^. For
examples he puts yt we do knele when we do pray, which Basyll also
affirms to Despi. ^a. ca. 27.
have come of the apostles tradition, and says y^ as often as we do knele
down, and rise up again in our prayers, by that deed we do show yt we fell
down for syn upon the earth, and yt by his humanity which made us, we are
called again in to heaven. Also Orige^ recyteth ye custom to pray, our faces
being turned toward ye east part, affirming yt the cause thereof is not easily
known of every man, though I have already declared by Basyll and Damascene,
why it is done. Orige^ furthermore recites y^ manner, or fascion to consecrate,
and to receive the blessed sacrament of the altar, and the words / gestures,
orders, or demau^des, and a^sweares, yt are made in baptism, which he says
cannot lightly be expowned. Et tamen haec oi^a operta, et velata portamus super
humeros nostros, cum ita implemus ea, et exequimur, vt a mag no po^tifice,
atque eius filiis tradita, et co^me^data suscepimus. Which thus in english
sowneth. And yet we do bear all these things upon our shulders covered, and
hid, when we do so fulfill them, and do them, as we have received them
delivered by tradition, and committed of the great bishop, (christ) and his
children (the apostles.) Se we not here that after Origens mind christ the
great bishop, and his sons the holy apostles taught the church those things
above tecited of him, and yet there is no scripture making any mention of them
at al? does not this prove that some things necessary to be done are left to
us by the apostles tradition without scripture? But I will go forth toward an
end. Ciril writes very plainly in this behalf against the lutherans
saying. Fidei De tec^a ^i de ad theodosium
sa^ctissimu^ traditione^, quae ab ip sis sa^ctis apostolis ad nos peruenit, in
dignu^ e^ i^modica ratiocinatione inquirere, quae humana^ me^te^ excedu^t sed
neque in medium proferre, sicut quida^ periculose definiunt, et dicu^t, quod
haec quide^ recte se habeant, haec au^t aliter. That is to say. It is unmeet
to search out with to much reasoning, the most holy tradition of the faith,
that came from the holy apostles to us, ye which things do excede man's wit,
but it is another convenient to common of them openly, or to call the^ in to
question, like as certain me^ determyne perillouslye, and say, yt these things
are well, but these other wise. Our lord would that this se^te^ce touched not
ye quick of many me^ this time, and rubbed them not on the gal to make the^ to
kycke / and wynse. Well let this pass. Tertulian, which was very nygh the
apostles time writes De carona militi^.
thus plainly of traditions, saying after he had recyted diverse things kept
by tradition only. Haru^, et aliaru^ eiusmodi disciplinaru^ si lege^
expostules scripturaru^, nulla^ inuenies, traditio tibi prae tendetur autrix,
co^suetudo co^firma trix, et fides obseruatrix. Rationem traditioni,
co^suetudini, fidei, patro ci^natura^, aut ipse perspicies, aut ab aliquo, qui
perspexerit, disces. Interim nonnullam esse credes, cui debeatur obsequium.
That is to say. If thou do require a law of the scryptures of these, and
such other learnynges, thou shalt find none, the tradition shall be alleged
to the first inuentoure or maker, the custom a customer / and faith the keeper.

Either thou thy self shalt perceive, or else shall learn of him, that has
perceived, that reason shall defend ye tradition, custom and faith. In mean
season believe thou some reason to be, to ye which obedience is due. Again a
little after hewriteth after this manner. His igitur exe^plis renuncia tum erit,
posse etia^ non scripta^ traditionem in obseruatione defendi, co^firmatam
consuetudine idonea test, probatae tu^c traditionis ex per seuerantia
obseruationis. That is. Therefore by these examples it shall be openly showed,
or reported, that a tradicion not written may be defended in the obserui^g of
it confirmed by custom, a mete witness of the tradicyon then tried or
approved by the continuance of the observing. I spoke not of many other such
godly, and notable se^te^ces, which this auncyente doctoure has in his
books, lest I should be tedious to the reader. Saint Ireneus, Ireneus lib. 3.
the scholar of polycarpe saint Johan the eua^gelystes disciple, thus speaks
of traditions.

Quid si de modica aliqua quaestione disceptatio esset, no^ne opor^ebat in
antiquissimas incurrere ecclesias in quibus apostoli co^uersati sunt, et ab eis
de praesenti questione sumere quod certum, et reliquidissimu^ est? Quid autem
si neque apostoli quid^ scripturas reliquissent nobis, nonne oportebat ordinem
sequi traditionis, quam tradiderunt his, quibus co^mittebant ecclesias? Cui
ordinationi assentiunt multi gentis barba rorum, eoru^, qui in christum credu^t
sine charactere, vel atrame^to, scriptum habentes per spirit um in cordibus
eorum salutem, et veteru^ traditionem diligenter custodientes.

That is. What if there should be reasoni^g of a little, or a mean question,
ought not men to run in to the eldeste churches / in the which the apostles
were co^uersaunte, and to take of them, as touching the questyon present, yt
which is certain and most manifest. But what if the apostles had not left to
us any scryptures, must not we neades follow the order of tradition, which
the apostoles taught them, to whom they committed the churches? Unto the
which ordyna^ce many do consent of the barbarous people, of them, which do
believe in christ, having the saluatyon written in their hearts by the holy
gooste without letters, or ynke, and diligently keeping the elders tradition.
Again he says this. Cum aute^ ad eam iterum traditione, quae est ab apostol
is, atque per successiones presbiterorum in ecciesiis custoditur, prouocamus
eos, qui aduersantur traditioni. Dicent se no^ solu^ presbiteris, sed etiam
apostolis exi^te^tes sapientiores, synceram inuenisse veritatem. Euenit it aque
neque scripturis, neque traditioni consentire eos.

But when we do stere or exhort them / which are against ye truth again to
that tradition, which is of the apostles, and is kept in the churches by
succession of ye priests, they will say, that they being wyser not only then
the priests, but also the^ ye apostles y^ have found out the pure truth, It
has therefore happended that they do consent neither to the scryptures, nor
the tradityons.

See y^ not reader here a plain difference between tradicions, and y^
scryptures: he concludes thus Traditionem itaque apostoloru^ per totum mundum
manifestata^ in ecclesia adest oi^bus perspicere, qui vera audire velint. That
is to say. Wherefore all men, which will see the truth, may perceive the
apostles tradicion declared in ye church through all the whole world. But of
saint Ireneus this may be sufficient for my purpose. Now let us see what saint
Clement Paul's companion in preaching the gospel, has written in this point,
which is now intrauerse and questyon between me, and the lutherans. Eusebyus
the old writer of the churches Lib. 5. ^^. 6
storye thus witnesses of him.

Clemens scripsit epistolam ad corithios, exprime^s in ea apostolorum
traditionem, quam nuper ab eis ipse susceperat. Clement wrote (says he) to
the corinthians an epistle expressyng in it the apostles tradicion, which he
of late had received of them. Also another clemens bysshppe alerandrya, which
was, as he says him self (Eusebtus wytnessynge) shortly after the apostles,
thus wrote of the apostles. In libello quem scripsit Eusebius lib. 6. ca. 11.
de pascha (inquit eusebius) confitetur extorqueri sibi a frarribus, vt ea,
quae a presbyteris, et successoribus a postolorum voce sibi sola traditasunt,
describeret in libris, et posteris traderet. In his book (says Eusebius) of
eastur clement confesses that his brethren gat of him by force or with great
difficulty, yt he would write in books, and de liver to his successors, or
them that should come after him, those things which were taught hi by voice
only of the priests, and successors of the apostles. Loo this bishop being
very nygh to the apostles time confesses yt he learned by voice only
certe^thynges of the priests, and successors of y^ apostles, and left them
written to them that should come after him, and luther, bullynger, with a great
rablement of an ill hear, Do say the contrary, whether wylt thou believe
Epistal^.
Ignatius also saint Johan the euagelystes discyple holds with me in this
matter, saying. Stude ^e co^firmari in dogmatibus domini et apostoloru^. That
is. Apply your minds to be co^fyrmed in the ordynaunces of our lord, and the
apostles. That he meant here ordyuannces of the apostles un written it appears
first by that that saint Basyll says, dogmata silentur, decrees or ordynaces
called in greake dogmata a^ not spoken of in writing. Secondly B asnius de
spu^ Cancto cap. 27.
it appears that ignatius saint Johan euangelystes scholar, would men to
endeavor them selves to observe the apostles tradityons unwritten, by that yt
he wrote him self a book of the apostles tradicions, as eusebius witnesses
saying. Ignatius ^^. 3. ^^. 36
edocebat populos, vt diligentius, ettenacius apostolorum traditionibus
inherere^t, quas traditiones cautelae gratia, et nequid apud posteros remaneret
incerti, etiam scriptas a se asserit reliquisse. Thus much it is turned into
english. Ignatius Mark this well reader
saint Iohans disciple taught the people that they would more dilygently, and
fastlyc cleave to the apostles tradityons, the which traditions he affyrmeth
that he left yea written to make me^ ware, and lest any vncerteyntie should
remain to them, yt should come after. Here we se that this holy Martyr
exhorted men to stick unto the apostles tradytions very dilyge^tly, and
fastely / which he left behind him written, that they which should succeed,
or come after him should be cyrcumspecte, lest they were deceived of
heretics, which might teach some thing contrary to the verities unwritten,
that christ taught his apostles, and they other without writing. Therefore is
it not many fest by this witness that Luther and Bulliger do err, which not
so ernestly, as unlearnedly, and ungodly defend that the apostles write all
things necessary, that they had preached to the people? Saint Ignatius
saint Iohans scholar, which was much conuersaunte with the apostles, and was
made bishop of Antiochia next after saint Peter, witnesses that the
apostles left sundry things not written, necessary to be known, and
believed, and Bullynger says the contrary, whether of them two is more worthy
to be received, and belyued?

Now shall saint Deonise the apostle Paul's disciple make an end of this
chaptre, which as he was taught of Paul and Hierotheus, and learned many
things of the other apostles, which thing he him self affyrmeth in diverse
places of his book De ecclesiae hierarchia, eue^ so he wrote plainly of the
apostles traditions left by them to the church without writing. For thus hehath.

Substantia accrdotii nostri sacra scriptura est diuinitus nobis tradita.
Diou^^. d^ eccle. hiera^ cap. 1.
Porro huiusmodi plena venerationis eloquia dicimus, quae a beatissimis nostris
patribus (a quibus sacris mysteriis i^buti sumus,) in sanctis ac theologicis
co^me^data sunt libris.

Ac pretaerea quaeque ab iisde^ sanctissi mis viris sacratiore, purgatiore et
propi^qua quoda^ modo caelesti hierar chiae doctrina sancti duces, ac
praeceptores nostri didiceru^t, et ex animo in animu^ (medio intercurrente
verbo, corporali quide^, sed quod car nis excedat se^su^,) sine literis transsu
sa sunt. That is to say. The holy scripture given, or taught us of God, is the
substance of our preesthode. Moreover we call such sayenges full of worship,
honor, or reverence, which are written in the holy and divine books of our
most blessed fathers, of whom we were instructed or taught the holy
secrets, or pryuities. And furthermore al those things which our holy leaders
(the apostles) and our masters have learned of ye same most holy men by
doctrine, or teaching more holy, more purged, and nigh after a certain manner to
the heavenly holy governance, or principality, and which are powered from
mind to mind, or heart to heart, (the word runnynge a mean between, sothlye
corporal, but such as exceadeth the flesshes perceiving, or fealyng. Saint
Dionyse here puts manifest difference betwne the holy scripture, and other
things contained in books of dyuynytie, set forth by holy men, and affyrmeth
that many things came by heart from one to another without writing, which
are worthy to be had in honor and reverence, though the Lutherans despise al
such things both to their own confusion and other men's also, our lord
amend this in time. But every good christen man will believe this saint Paul's
scholar rather tha^ a thousand lutherans. This holy Dionise yet writes more
plainly of verities not written, and of traditions of the apostles saying.
Primi illi nostri sacerdotalis muneris duces (aposto los intelligit) su^ma
illa, et supersubstantialia, parti scriptis, partim non scriptis
i^stitutionibus nobis tradiderunt. That is to wit. They the first leaders or
capitaynes (ye apostles he means,) of our priests office, delivered to us,
or taught us by tradition those highest things (whose substance exceadeth
other things substance) by instructions of doctrine partly written, partly not
written. What could have been spoken of any man more plainly then this is
for the furtherau^ce of my purpose? Who, that has any sparcle of wisdom and
cares for his souls health, will not give crede^ce to this blessed doctoure
Paul's disciple, rather then to Histo. eccl. lib. 9. ca. 19.
Luther, or any of his scholars? Sequendi sunt doctores, qui ante diuisione^
fuerunt. Those doctors Dslige^ter obseru ^du^ est, vt lex dei, cu^ legitur,
no^ secu^ dum yprii ingenii intelligenciam legatur vel doceatur. Suni e^im
multa verba in scripturis diuinis, que possunt ^rahi ad eu^ sensum, quem sibi
vnusquisque sponte presumpsit. Sed id fieri non opor tet, non eni sensum, quem
attuleris extrin secus alienum, et extraneum de bes querere Et ideo oportet ex
eo intelligentiam discere scripturarum, qui eam a maioribus secu^dum veritatem
sibi traditam seruauit. Clemens ep istola. 4. ad ecclesia^ hieroso.
are to be followed (says Eusebius) which were before the diuysion, and such I
have alleged here for to make me^ believe the truth of this controuersye, and
therefore men ought to follow them rather the^ Luther or any other, be he never
so well learned, which has been sense the diuisyon begone. Saint Hierom
commended greatly Nepotian because he, willing to avoid the glory of
learning, was wont to say. This is the saying of Tertulian, this of Cypryan,
that of Lacta^tius, this of Hylaries, so spoke Munutius felix, thus victorinus,
and after this fascion Arnobius, whereby we may learn to follow the ancient
doctoures judgment in all controversies ryse^ upon matters of our faith, and
therefore sith I here have alleged the greatest part of all the eldest, and best
learned writers to prove traditions, and to declare that the holy apostles
left many things to us not written, men ought to give crede^ce to it, and
to cease askyng where it is written in the scripture. Solomon counsaylleth us
that we should not trust over much unto our own wits, and judgment / and
think our selves wise, saying thus. Ne sis sapiens apud teipsum, be thou not
wise in thine own eye, upon which text saint Hierome thus wryteeth. Est
autem sapiens in semetipso, qui in illis, que ex patrum magisterio recte potuit
cognoscere, sese prae caeteris quasi doctor extollit. That is to say in our
tongue, But he is wise in him self, or in his own conceyte, which extolleth
him self before other as more cunning in those things, which he moughte
have known well enough, of a right fashion, or trewly of the fathers or elders
masters office.

God give us grace to do otherwise then do al heretykes, which So do all the
lutherans to their own confusion, and many others. Vt qui cor nicum oculos
co^fig^^ et cona^tur reseindere, que a^tiquitas magno approbauit co^se^su.
Esaie. 5.
despise all the holy doctors judgments and follow their own fond fantasye,
which causes them to be so blind as they are, and to err in so many weyghtye
points of our faith as they do, being cursed by the holy prophet Esaie
saying. Vae vobis, qui sapientes estis in oculis vestris. Woe be to you, that
are wise in your own eyes, or sight. CC. fathers assembled in the general
counsel holde^ at Ephesus against Nestorius above eleven hundred years past
followed the doctors minds, and judgment: as vince^tius lirine^sis, which was
then alive, tells, and shall we set them at naught (as Bullynger does in
his book against tradicions) and cleave to our own dreams and lewd gloses,
made upon the scripture to support thereby our deuyllyshe opynions? But let this
pass, and co^pe^diously here an answer to the auctorities alleged against
tradicions, and reasons made in defense of this naughtye opinyo^ by the
lutherans, the which done, I will make an end of this book.

An answer to the auctoryties alleged, and the reasons made upon the
contrary part against traditions.
AFter I have, good christen reader, set fourth the truth of this matter
touchi^ge traditions not written in the scripture, I trust sufficiently / now
I will answer very co^pendiously and bryeflye to all the obiectyons made, and
put for the for the defense of the contrary part, ye by the^ no man be
deceived, except he be desirous to be blind, and wa^dre from ye truth, which
he may so plainly see before his eyes. First they allege this text of the
scripture. Non Deute. 4.
addetis ad verbum, quod loquor vo bis. That is to say, ye shall not add to the
word / yt I do speak to you. If (says Luther and his scholars) no man may
put any thing to gods word, as he commands here, it must neades thereof
follow that traditions not written in the scripture ought not to be observed of
us. Is not this a wonderful blyndnes of these men, which do take upon them to
reach all christen nations a new doctrine? who (that wise is) will follow
such blind leaders, that so do wrest the holy word of god from his right sense
to maynteyne an heresye? Our lord open men's eyes, which are shyt and closed
by affectyon, that they may se ones how little learning they have, who^ they
take for great clerks. But to the scripture recyted, which is. Thou shall put
nothing to the word (says god) which I do speak to the. Must not this
sentence or saying have a mete exposition, lest it appear very false, which
is very true? For these words were spoken of the commandments, and is it in
no wise lefull to add any thing unto the precepts of ye old law? Did the
prophets ill when they added their prophecies to ye word of gods
commandments? Who can deny but that christ himself, his euangelystes, and
the apostles added many things to that word of god, of the which he spoke
here, and yet no good christen man will say that the prophets, christ, and
his apostles did offe^de, and break gods commandment thereby, and therefore
that gods precept, byddyng nothing to be added unto his word, must be
understand of things contrary to it, or corruptyng the right sense thereof /
such as were the pharisees, and scrybes traditions, by the which they induced
me^ to break gods co^maundeme^ts / as I will more at large declare in the
soylynge of the next argument. Now there is not one tradition set forth in
this my book, though I have entreated of very many unwritten, no nor one other
kept, and observed through the hole world where christian people are, that is
against or contrary to any one commandment of god or any portion of his
holy word, but gathered out thereof rather much helping to the keeping of it.
This meaning and sentence may be well gathered of ye holy goostes words
publyshed by solomon in the proverbs saying. Ne adds quicqua^ verbis illi us,
et arguaris, i^ueniarisque mendax. Cap. 30.
That is. Add nothing to his words, that thou maiste thereby be reproved, and
found a liar. Therefore gods mind, and commandment is, that nothing should
be added to his word of us, whereby we might be accused and found liars. The
hebrewe text sowneth thus much. Add not upon his words, lest perchance he
may make correctyo^ against the, and thou be espied a liar. Secondly it may be
expowned: that by y^ which is said in this commandment is meant that nothing
should be added to gods word, or taken from it, as the scrybes, and wise men
of the jews did, which wrote a book called Ticcim zophrim, that is additions,
or corrections of ye wise men or scribes, in the which they took from the
scripture many things, as it apereth in a book of hebrewe called the Talmud,
and added also diverse things, lest the gentyles should se gods secrets and
mock them, or the rude jews not perceyuyng the^, Lib. 1. ca. 8.
might take harm thereby Thus the great clerk Galatinus expowneth both Moses
text, and salomons also. Thyrdly it may be well taken that god would no
thing should be added to his word as to a thing imperfecte, or lacking any
point to make it perfyte / as saint austen understood these words of Moses
Li. 17. ca. 2. et 6 aduer^us faustum
written deutero.xii. Quod praecipio tibi, hoc tantum facito domino nec addas
quicqua^, nec minuas.

Do thou only that unto ye lord which I command the, neither add thou any
thing, nor dymynyshe. Fourthly it may be expowned of addyng any thing to
gods word, which should be judged, esteemed, and kept, as a portion of it,
after the which meaning saint Johan in the Apocalypse says that if any
Cap. bi^.
man shall add to the words of his prophecy any thing, God will lay upon
him the plages written in it etc. To be short. It may appear by Moses words
Deuter. 1^.
last rehearsed, that god did forbydde the jews to add any ceremonies, or
observations of the gentiles or heathen people, leadynge them to Idolatry or
any sacrifyces of the gentyles, when they should come in to the land promised
the^, but yt they should only observe, fulfill, keep, and do that, which he
com^aunded them. This, I say after mine opinion, is the very true, and right
meaning of gods commaundyng yt nothing should be added to his word. But which
so ever of these senses is truest, and featest for the purpose, the text
makes nothing utterly against traditions of the church, because they are not
contrary to it, nor such additions, as were made by the learned of the jews,
in their book called Ticcim zophri^, nor they are added to gods word as
things to make it perfect, being imperfecte before, nor yet as though they
should be regarged as gods word or as part of it, nor finally they lead not
christen people to ydolatrye, as did the paynoms, and heathen ceremonies,
ordynau^ces, and sacrifices of which he bade the jews to beware and add none
of the^ to his commandments, when they should enter into y^ land of promise,
the heathen being thense expelled. But The second argument.
of this enough, now to the next reason builded, as all the rest is, upon the
wrong understanding of these chrystus words taken out of the prophet Esaye.
Frustra me Esaias. 29. Math. 15.
colu^t, doce^tes doctrinas, et praecepta hominum. They honor me vaynlye
teaching men's doctrines, and commandments. Of these words ill taken men
gather that we should believe and keep nothing of necessity, that is not
written in the scrpture, but taught, ordained, and set forth The answer.
Acto. 15. v^^ sum est etc. ^^ precepti chr no^ d^m nauit ne^ apostoloru^ et
seniorum decreta et precepta quorum Lucas meminit acto. ^5, ^^ 16.
by man without any express commandment of god. It is very easy to soil
this wise reason, by the right understanding of the said words, which is
this, that they do worship God in vain, which do teach men's doctrynes, and
commandments, that are against gods commandments, and doctrine, such
as the pharasyes taught the people. The which Luther, and his scholars might
have seen (if they had not been stark^ blind) by these words of christ. Why do
ye break gods commandment for your tradition? God bade you should honor
Exo. ^^
your father and mother, and ye dishonor them for to keep your own tradition.
Ye hypocrytes the prophet Esaye did prophecy well of you, saying. This people
Math. 15.
honors me with the lyppes, but their heart is far from. They worship me
in vain, teaching man's doctrynes, and commandments. Do not these words,
I beseech the, good reader, so plainly open christ's meaning, when he spoke
against men's traditions, yt it is a great blyndenes, or else a great
malice, that the Lutherans do wraste it against all the holy churches
constitutions, ordynaunces, and traditions, the which are not against gods
commandments, nor the keeping of them is the breach of gods law, but a
great furtherau^ce to the keeping of them, as it may appear to every good
christen man, lokyng upon them indifferentlye all affection, and corrupt
judgment laid aside. These the pharysees, and scrybes traditions set up
against gods law are not hear only reproved of Christ, but also of saint
paul, saying to Tite ye bishop. ^^. ^.
For which cause blame them sharply, that they may be sou^de or hole in the
faith, not taking heed of the Jews fables, and commandments of men
turnynge them selves from the truth, co^tempnyng the truth with disdain, or
abhorrynge the truth. Thus saint Cypryan, and saint Ciprianus lib. 1. epist. 3
Hiero in esa^a^.
Hierom do expowne Esayes, and christ's words, and therefore they make nothing
against ye churches traditions. Yet they allege The. 3. argament.
mo auctorities of the scripture against traditions, of the which this is one /
Omnis plantatio, qua^ non plantauit pater meus caelestis, Math. 15.
eradicabitur. Every plantynge which my father of heaven has not planted,
shall be plucked up by the root, but ye churches traditions are not (says
Luther) of gods plantynge / wherefore they shall be plucked up by ye roots) The
auswere.
To this objection an answer is sone made for as much as christ spoke of
pla^ting doctrine, and precepts against gods law, as he did of teaching the^,
and of pla^ting any superstitious, superfluous, tri feling, and vain
traditions, which should be more esteemed the^ gods commandments, and kept
also before them, yea gods commandments broken for the kepinge of them, such
as was the jews ordinance to wasshe their hands before meat, lest by the
fylth of the hands the meat might be defiled, and it so defiled might defyle
the eaters soul, and of offering also ye chyldrens goods in the temple before
the helping of their poor fathers, and mothers. All such plantynges shall be
pluck clean up by the rotes says christ, but what is this against the
godly, wholesome, and necessary traditions of christ's church, of the which I
have recyted in this book the greater part? Moreover they allege S. paul
saying to the Galathians Cap. 1.
But though we, or an angel from heaven, preach save it, yt we have preached,
yt same be cursed or diseuered from your company. As we have said before, so
say I again If any man preach beside it, yt ye have received, let him be
cursed, or separate from you. If he ought to be cursed, or put from christian
peoples company, yt preach ought beside yt which paul preached, and the people
received, why should we believe, or keep men's traditions which paul preached
not, nor ye people then had received them. This reason depends upon the
wrong taking of saint paul's The aunsweare.
words. For he meant not that every preacher of any thing which he had not
preached and the galathyans received, should be acursed or separate from their
company, for the^ he had been cursed him self, which preached many things:
that he taught not the galathians. Therefore Paul is to be understand of them
that preach any thing against the gospel, which he had taught the
galathyans, and they received it, but afterward forsook it, receyuyng the old
law of Moses and ioynyng it with the gospel of christ, as though they could not
be saved by faith in christ without the keeping of those ceremonies then
prohibit utterly This is ye true meaning of saint Paul saint Austen expo
wneth it generally of all doctrine that Lib. 17 cap. 3. contra faustu^.
is against the apostles and the gospel established by their prechyng. And so
the greake, Para o must be translated contraqua^ or co^tra quod yt is
otherwise the^, or contrary to that: paul's purpose declares none other thing
to be mente of him, which was to persuade the galathians to return again
from the keeping of ye ceremonies of Moses law and to believe no false teacher
la bourynge to make them think that Christ's gospel were not sufficient for
their saluatyon with out those ceremonies. Says not saint Paul that he meruey
led that they were so sone turned from the gospel, and from him which called
them to the grace of christ, in to another gospel, which is not another,
saving that there besome which do trouble you, and would turn up so down
christ's gospel? What need we any further declaratyon? yet lest some man will
suppose that this is mine own phansye or dream, let men mark these s.
Chrysostoms words upon the same letter of paul. If any angel come from heaven
corruptyng ye preaching of ye gospel, let him be coursed. Again. Etiam si
quid vis labefactarint, a nathema si^t. yea if they do corrupt or subvert a
little, or what thou will / let them be cursed. Nec mihi ipsi parco, si diuersa
predicem. Another I spare my self, if I preach or publishe things contrary to
the gospel. This is sufficyente for the full confutacion of that argument /
especially seeing yt I have declared by paul's own words and diverse doctors
expositions set forth upon the^, yt he taught many things which he wrote
not at al, and saint Paul says not, If any man do preach ought be side that
which I have written to you or you received of me by my writing, but beside yt
which I have preached to you, which makes nothing against tradicions or
verities unwritten, which Paul preached, more the^ against yt which he wrote.
Mark also, reader, that Paul spoke there to ye Galathi^s of the gospel, that
he had preached, which in deed properly is the good, merry and joyful tidings
of our salvation by christ our savior, unto the which man's traditions do
not perteyne, nor to any part thereof, but as things helpinge to the easyer
understanding, and better fulfyllyng of it, and therefore these Paul's words
speaking of setting forth another gospel, do nothing at all make against
the churches tradicyons. They yet proceed on reasonynge The.iiii. reason.
thus upon saint paul's words. Videte nequis vos decipiat per philosophiam,
et inane^ fallaciam, secundu^ traditione^ hominu^. that is. Take ye head, or
beware lest any man deceive you by philosophy, and vain deceit, after the
tradicion of men. Here saint Paul byddethe men to be ware lest they be
deceived by men's traditions, therefore they are not to be kept. This reason
is so weak, yea so fond and folysshe, y^ it is not worth rehearsing, much
less any co^futacion. For Paul warnethe men to be wise lest some man deceive
them by philosophye, and void crafty ha^dlynge the^ after men's teachi^g, and
not to be ware absolutely, and generallye of all traditions, for the^ he had
said against his own instructions given to the corinthians in the.xi.
chaptre of the first epistle, when he spoke of his tradicions, as I have
already declared, and also when afterward he badde the thessalomans stand
fast, and keep his tradicions.ii. These.ii. Again he expowneth his mind by
the words next following, which be part of the same sentence, and are left
out of these me^ because they did make against their purpose, after which
fasshyon the devil alleged the scripture as all his knights the heretics
do. It follows. Secundum elementa mundi, et non secundu^ christum. That is.
After the elements of the world, and not after christ, which is as much as
if he said. Be ware, and circumspecte lest any man deceive you by philosophye
and vain deceyte, after the tradicyon of me^ in worshyppynge and observing
the planettes: to whose influences, and conjunctions ye lyenge apostles, and
false prophettes did refer and ascrybe al things / as ye philosophers, and
astronomers did / and not to god as ye autour of the^. This kind of doctrine
as it is not after Christ's teaching and religyon / so no good chryste^ man
has or does defend it / or maynteneth any such tradicyons, which are
properly called men's tradicions, for as much as they be invented by man only
without the steringe, and inspyration of the holy ghost, and so are not the
apostles and the churches tradytyons, but they come chyefely of the holy ghost,
as witnesses the blessed martyr Fabian, which was above. M. In epistola ad
episcopo^ orientales
ccc. years past, saying. Cura vestrae solicitudinis est adhibenda, vt ea,
quae sunt ab apostolis, eoru^que successoribus ordinata, et instiga^te spiritu
sa^cto instituta, nec dissimulatio negligentiae, nec aliqua praesu^ptio valeat
perturbare. Sed sicut hoc, quod exigebat rationis vtilitas oportuit definire,
ita quod definitum est, no^ debet violari. That is to say.

The dilygence or study of your care must be put to, or you must be diligent,
and careful, that dyssymulation of negligence may not much trouble, nor any
arrogance, those things, which are ordained, of the apostles, and their
successors, and instructed by the holy ghost styrrynge, or prickynge forward.
Also he spoke of the jews ceremonies, which the^ it was unlawful for y^
Galathia^s to observe, and keep, and therefore the observing of the^ was man's
tradition. That this is the true / and right meaning of the apostles words
it apeareth both by that yt anon afterward, when he had spoken of y^ jews
choice of meats and their feasts, he calls the^ eleme^ta mu^di, eleme^tes
of y^ world, saying. If ye be dead with christ from the eleme^tes of this
world, why do ye yet put difference between meat and meat, day and day etc?
Also ye iiii chapter of his epistle to the Galathians paul calls ye old
laws ceremonies egena eleme^ta, eleme^tes lackyng somewhat. Therefore this
paul's letter stands nothing against ye traditions of ye apostles, and their
successors / left in the church from one to another. But let this Pet manus
tradua
be said for the repeallynge of yt argument. They dispute yet further The.v.
argument.
of this sort against traditions. Paul says.ii. To.iii. Al scripture given
by the inspiratio^ of god is profitable to teach improve, inform, and to
instruct in righteousness, yt the man of god may be perfect, and prepared unto
all good works. Then why do we thruste (says Vrbanus regius wisely) in ye
churches hands ye laws of men, as necessary to christ's religion? This
argument is sone answered unto. For what argument, I beseech the, good christian
reader, is this, al scripture inspired by the holy ghost is profitable to teach
man, y^ he may be perfect, and made ready to al good works, ergo the
scripture co^teyneth in it expressly al truth, and every thing necessary to be
believed of us, and kept? May not every part, and book of ye scripture be, as in
deed it is profitable to instruct man, y^ thereby he may be perfect, and
prepared to all good works, and yet not co^teyne al truth and the hole, y^ is
necessary for our salvation? The.v. books of Moses co^teine a doctrine
profitable to y^ purpose, and so of the rest severally, and yet that
notwtstandyng, there are sundry things both true, and necessary not contained
therein. Yea but perchance some man will say to me. The gospel is perfect, and
sufficient for to procure our salvation, for Christ gave unto his church not
botched, clowted nor imperfect lernyng, and seeing there needs no addition to
be made unto ye which is perfect, wherefore should men believe ye the scripture
co^teyneth not in it all truth and things necessary for our salvation, but ye
diverse things come by tradition, which are both necessary to be believed of
us, and also kept?

It is very true that ye scripture, and the gospel is perfect, not that it
contains in it expresselye all truth necessary to be known, and observed,
as I have proved before in this my book, but ye it is perfect touching the
things comprised therei^, and co^teyneth general rules and p^ceptes, out of ye
which al things necessary for a christen man's religion, and salvation, may
be collected, and gathered though they be not particularly, and expressly
publyshed, and set forth therein. As for an example. The scripture byddeth us
honor god, but upon what day Exo. 20. Deute. 6. Math. 4.
we should do it chiefly, scripture plainly tells not, leaving that to be
taught the apostles of the holy ghost, which did institute the sunday styred
of that spirit of al truth, as I have showed before. Also the scripture says
ye without baptyme none ca^ enter in to ye kingdom of heaven Ioha^ iii. ye holy
apostles inspired with the holy ghost of that, and other sayenges touching the
necessitye of baptysme, ordained, and taught without writing that children
ought to be chrystened, and may be saved thereby. Finallye the scripture
commands every man to take up, and bear his cross and mortify the
sensualities, and affections of the flesh, ye apostles taught bow that should
be done by fasting the lent, wensdaye, friday, and such other. This we se
therefore that with the perfectenes of the scripture agrees, and stands right
well, that it co^teyneth not expressly all truth, but that diverse truths were
opened to the holy apostles by ye holy ghost / which they left unto ye The.vi.
argument.
church unwritten. Hitherto of this. Another reason makes Vrbanus regius upon
Paul's words ^ Cor. 3.
saying. All things be yours / whether it be Paul / either Apollo / either
Cephas. Whereby (says he) we do understand ye, neither Paul / nor Cephas or
Peter has authority to bind men's conscience / where god byndeth not / and
therefore we are not bound to believe, or keep of necessity any tradition of
paul / peter or any other, which God byndeth not us to believe / and observe by
his holy word. Did ever any man The aunsweare.
read / or hear so fond, and folysh a reason as this is? who will not
bewail, and lament this great bli^d nes of ye lutherans, which do reason so
vnlernedlye to defend an heresy? It is true, ye peter and paul were ye
corinthia^s, for as much as they were ministers sent of God for their salvation.
What tha^? could not they yet teach many things by mouth only, and leave
the^ weout writing unto ye church ye it should believe the^ to be true, and keep
the^ also? But thou say that they could not bind men's conscience, where god
bi^deth not. I grant ye / but of ye must it needs follow that they left nothing
un written byndynge men's conscience to believe and observe it? Does god bind us
to nothing unwritten in the holy scripture?

Have not I proved the contrary in this book? Byndeth not the^ and there god
man's conscience / when and where the holy gooste styrreth the apostles to
institue and ordeyn any thing not co^prehe^ded in the scripture, and leave it
to y^ church vnwrytte^? Therefore this slender argument is clean wypte away,
as this other shall be, grounded like wise upon the wrong understanding of
these S. Paul's Colo. 2. The. 7. argument.
words to the Collossians. Ye being dead with christ why are ye holden still
with decrees?

What is this, if it be not plain wrestynge of scripture from his true sense?
Saint Hierom said well, that heresye stands in the Ca. 1. ad Gala.
wrong taking of the scripture does (...)

Did not saint Paul in that second chaptre to the Colossians plainly speak of
y^ old laws decres, or ordinances, which did co^syste in choice of meats and
such other ceremonies / that were the^ anulled, and made void by christ? For
he thus has, If ye be dead with christ from the elements of this world, why
do ye yet decree or teach, or else, as the greek now has Dodmatizesthe are ye
taught (such decrees and ceremonies) as yet living in the world, Touch not,
another taste, nor handle. Who sees not that these words do plainly show,
that saint Paul mente of the jews decrees, and ordinances perteynynge to
their old ceremonies the^ abrogate clean by christ, and nothing of the
churches decrees, or the apostles tradicions? It is therefore a great blyndnes
to apply such textes against the traditions of the church, and they do
very little regard their souls health, that do follow such teachers, which do
so manifestly abuse, and mistake the scripture to kill their own souls, and
other men's by an heresye. Some man perchance will say to me, christen people
are endued with liberty Vrbanns regius.
of conscience.ii. Cor.iii. which another ought, nor can be bound to the
observing of any tradicion set up by man, which scripture speaks not of,
for the^ we should be the servants of me^ against saint Paul's
co^mau^demente. To that I say that christen men are free, and idued 1. Cor. 7.
with a certain liberty from the yocke of the old law / and the bondage of
sin, in which two stands the lybertye of christ's gospel, and not in the
liberty from the observing of good, and hol some tradytions institute, and
set forth by the holy apostles without writing by mouth only.

The obedience due unto the hyer powers, and to the keeping of their laws
stands not only with the liberty of the gospel, but y^ gospe^ll does also
co^mau^d that to be done of us. They that suppose them selves free from
observing of the apostles traditions by reason of the lyberte of the gospel,
do against paul's commandment use their liberty to satisfye the flesshes
lusts: and have (as saint Peter says) Gala. 5. 1. P^. 2.
it as a cloak or a cover of their malice. Christen people should not be the
servants of men, it is true, but what tha^? Wylt not thou therefore be bound
in conscience to obedientlye keep thy prince, and kings ordynau^ces and laws,
when Paul bids us to be obediente unto his commandments for conscience
sake? It is not therefore holly unlawful To. 13.
nor forbidden of saint Paul to be men's servants, but to obey them, and
to serve them co^mau^dyng any thing against the lybertye of christ's gospel, or
else any unlawful thing, the keeping of the which should cause the^ to fall from
the benifite of christ's death, and therefore he did put them in remembrance,
that they were bought with a great price Thus saint Chrysostom does
understand this paul's text, bidding that we should not be men's servants.
Saint paul also he meant that the corynthya^s should not be men's servants to
reyse schisms, or diuisio^s, so y^ one of the^ should be counted cephas
scholar because he was christened and instructed by him, and another Apollos?
Take now this text whether way thou wylt it makes nothing at al against the
traditions of the holy apostles and the church. Moreover when we do believe
certain truths and observe them also, which the apostles left unwritten by
the inspiratio^ of the holy ghost / as they did many things, which are above
rehearsed in this book, what mad manne will say y^ thereby we be men's
servants / and not rather the holy goostes the autour of those tradicyons?
Some men do suppose that these god the fathers words. Ipsu^ audite, hear him,
do bind us only to learn of Mat. 17. dr^auus ^e^^us.
christ the doctoure and teacher of the church, and to believe and observe
nothing but his doctrine, and therefore we ought not, nor can be bound to any
thing not written in the scripture, as though we are not bound to be leave the
apostles teachi^ge in things not taught before by christ, or y^ we ought not
to believe, as I have touched before, that children ought to be chrystened,
albeit we find not in y^ scripture that ever christ taught that doctrine, or
else his apostles, but it comes only without witness of the scripture by
their tradition. If thou yet wylt reason further, and say that Christ
sendynge his apostles to preach abroad y^ gospel in the hole world, commanded
them to teach the people what soever he had commanded, and therefore men are
not bound unto any thing not commanded of Christ, of the which it must
neades follow that there are no traditions unwritten necessary for us either
to believe, or to fulfill. This reason of one vrbanus regius a lutherans making
declares the autours ignorance, or blind malice conceived against y^
church of christ. For christ byddi^ge the apostles teach the people all that
he had commanded them, did not bydde the^ teach nothing more then he
commanded them. For who doubts but the apostles taught afterward many
things by inspiratio^ of the holy ghost, which christ never commanded, as
that the gentyles should abstain from bloudde, and meats suffocate, or
strangled, with many other things as it appears in their epystles and the
acts written by Luke the euangelyste. But se what kind of argument is this of
regius, Christ commanded his apostles to preach al what soever he had did
the^ do, ergo the apostles left nothing unwritten to the church y^ ought to
be believed, or observed, or men are not buunde to keep the churches traditions.
This is a wonderful blyndnes. What madness were it to believe such teachers?
May it not be said truly of them, y^ blind leaders and they that are Mat.
15.
led by them, do fall both together into the den, as our sauy our christ
said? There are other obiectyo^s as fond, and folyshe as these be, which
because they are made against man's laws and constitutions, and not against
the apostles, and hole churches traditions vnwrytte^ in the holy scripture, I
will recyte them very compendiouslye and as co^pendiouslye confute the same.
This is one of them. Paul says. Si spiritu ducimini no^ estis sub lege. It
ye be led with the The. 8. argument.
spirit, ye are not under the law. These words do prove (says the
lutherans,) that no man's traditions can bind us to the obseruinge of the^,
if we do lead our lives after right reasons and the holy goostes guydynge and
styrrynge, for else we should be under the law, which saint The answer.
Paul denies here. This auctorytie of saint Paul proves nothing more
against the churches constitutions, ordinances, and traditions of the
apostles, that they ought not to bind men's consciences, then it does
against the law of god, that just and good men led by reason and the holy
gooste should not be bound to keep it, because y^ paul understood not, here
the law of man, but the law of god, which rested in ceremonies, and was
abrogated by christ's death. That Paul spoke there of that old law of Moses,
it appears by that the process of that epistle and chaptre, where he speaks
of circumcision. Now what argument is this, (good reader.) If ye be led with
the spirit ye are not under Moses law, ergo the traditions of the apostles
unwritten ought not nor can not bind me^nes conscience? Saint Chrysostom
expowneth it thus. He that has the holy ghost, and in his living and deeds is
ruled, and led by the same, does quench al ill desires, and lusts, and
therefore he has no need of the laws help, that by fear of it he should live
well. Etiam qui ex sese suo fungitur officio, quid opus habet paedagogo? For
what need has he, y^ of himself does his duty, of one appointed to se him
well ordered, as a child? As a horse that runs fast of him self needs not
to be spurred, eue^ so the ryghteous, and perfect good man led with the holy
gooste, is not under the law of god, for as much as he does live godly, and
would so contynew if there were no law to enforce and constrayne him so to do.
But what is this to the holy apostles traditions? Yea what makes i^ against
any ordinance of the church?

The best men, that live in the world have need of gods law to lead them
streyghte in the way and payth of virtuous living, though they ncade no law
to compel them for fear of punyshmente to do well, and to absteyne from sin.
After this meaning and sense Paul said. Justo non est lex posita, the law is
^. Tim^. 1.
not made for the ryghteous, because (says Chrysostom) the law is made that
by fear and threteninge of it, sinners should leave committyng of sin, and
be punished when they do amiss, and therefore Paul said to the Galathians.
Lex propter transgressiones posita est, the law is Gala. 3.
made for transgressyons to be restrained and punyshed thereby. But of this
sufficient.

Some men allege saint Austen against traditions, which in a certain epistle
to saint Hierom, would that we should believe that the writers of the holy
scripture only never erred and give no credence unto any other man be he
never so holy and well learned, except he did prove by the scripture, either
by autours or by probable reasons that he said the truth, and therefore men
ought not to believe them that teach traditions. To this wise reason J first
say that seeing saint Austeyne him self says in sundry places of his
books that we must needs observe traditious, as J have declared before, it is
a great blyndnes or rather malice against the truth, to allege him against
traditions, as though he were contrary to him self. Secondarilye J say that
they which do set forth the apostles traditions do prove the^ by the
scripture, other autours, and probable reasons also, as J have done in this
book, and therefore saint Austeynes authority alleged before holds with us
against the reprouers of traditions. Thyrdlye J say that saint Ansteyne in
the said epistle resembled, and compared the books of holy scripture unto
other books compiled, made and set forth by man's wit without the revelation of
the holy ghost, as it appears by the tenor of that epistle evidently, and
therefore he mente nothing there against any thing taught, or left to the
church of christ by the holy goostes stirring and in spiration, but he called
there all such doctrine holy scripture, that is good and godly though it be
not written expresselye in the bible, but delivered by tradition without
writing. Therefore this argument is soyled clearly. Furthermore this reason is
made against traditions of the church. The old testamente The. 9. argument.
and the new are as sufficient for christen people beleuynge now in christ as
the old testamente only was for the jews, but the whole faith, unto the
which the Jews were bound was expressed in the old testament, and the books
of it / ergo the hole faith, to the which christen men are now bound is
expressly written in the new testamente, and the old, and therefore the
faithful are not bound to believe any thing not expressed in the Bible / and
so there are no traditions unwritten necessary to be believed of us christen
people. Though this reason do The answer.
appear good, and pythye unto them that are not learned in the scripture, or
being meanelye learned therein, are affectionate, and so married to the
contrary opniyon / that all thing which does any thing soune to their
purpose pleases them hyghelye, yet in very deed it nothing serves for their
malycious intent, partly because the Hebrews were of long time faithful
people before their faith was written by Moses in his five books, and yet they
were y^ time bound to believe the things then not written, but afterward,
partelye for as much as after Moses had written, and the other books of the
law were all written, the people believed many things perteynyng both to the
faith, and also to manners, which were taught by mouth only without writing,
to the belief of the which and fulfyllynge also they were nevertheless bound
of necessytie. And these traditions not written some men of the hebrews called
i^ that Cabala.
tongue cabala^, because they were received by the younger or later living
people of the elders without writing of the old testament, like as diverse
dilygente searchers of such things have wytnessed by writing. Therefore this
argument is answered unto sufficyently, as the next anon shall be, god
willing, which is thus framed of the lutherans upon these saint Hieroms
words. Quod ex scriptutis sacris In Math. 23.
auctoritatem non habet, eadem facilitate co^temnitur, qua approbatur. That is
to say. That which has not auctorytie of the holy scriptures, is despised by
ye same easeynes, by which it is approved, or allowed, but all traditions have
not their autorite of y^ scripture therefore they are as easily despised
asalowed, which they should not be if men were bound of necessyte to believe
the^, or to keep them, whereof it follows yt we are not bound to believe and
observe any of them not written in the holy scripture. This reason hangs
altogether upon the ill understanding of saint Hieroms sentence, which mente
not by holy scripture that only which is set forth in the bible
expresselye, but all doctrine coming of the holy goostes reuelatyon written
in the Bible, or not written, but taught the apostles, and the church of them
by mouth only, for else he had written against him self, which in diverse
places of his books exhorts men to believe, and keep many things not written
in ye scripture, as it appears before in this book. This is thought by a
learned man to be saint Hiero^s mind, where I examini^g and wayenge
diligently saint Hieroms commentaryes there, have found that he mente
another thing. For he recyteth some men's opinion to have been that zachary,
whom christ said that Mat. 23.
the jews murdered between the temple and the aultare, was S. Johan baptistes
father, proui^g by certain books dreams (which were apocriphi, because their
makers were hyd, and not known) that he was therefore sleane because he publy
sshed our saviors coming. Hoc quia de scripturis (inquit hieronimus) non
habet autoritate^, eadem facilitate co^temnitur, qua probatur. That for as
much as it has not authority of the scryptures, is with ye same easynes
despised, by which it is praised or aproued. Loo we se that the holy father
saint hiecome mente of that one thing, which was proved only by books of none
auctorytie, what is this against the apostles tradicions, or to prove yt we
are bound to believe and keep nothing but only that which is expresselye
written in the scripture? Do the churches traditions hang, and depend of
books the autours whereof be unknown? Have not I declared that scripture
approves the apostles unwritten traditions, and that they taught or ordained
diverse things by the motion and inspiratio^ of the holy ghost, which they
left to the church unwritten, and so they remain hitherto and shall still
whiles the world dureth? Now to make an end of this book, I exhort every man
and woman to be ware of erroneus doctors, and ill books, which do teach and
auau^ce any learning contrary to the faith of the church of christ / that is
y^ dear spouse of our savior, bought with the shedynge of his most precious
blood, and therefore has ever been so tenderly beloved of him yt he has not
suffered her wholly to err in any weightye point of our religion, nor hereafter
will permit to err according to his promise, saying hell gates, y^ is, syn and
heresye shall not prevail against her. Who that leans to this sure pyller ye
church shall be ever in the right way, overcome all heresye, to the great
comfort of his soul / and at the length through the help of god lyui^g
devoutly he shall come to endless Joys of heaven, which our saniour Jesus Christ
purchased for all his servants, to whom with ye father and the holy ghost be
honor and glory for ever. Ame^.

Another tradition of the apostles.
The catholyke and universal church of christ our sauyoure has believed
almost this xv. hundred years, even sense our ladies deceace, that her body is
in heaven, and yet there is no scripture to prove that point, whereupon it must
neades follow that this belief came up fryste by the holy apostles tradition,
especially sense no man can tell wha^ and by who^ it was fryste of al begone,
and brought i^ to ye church.

Saint Hierome says unto Theophilus.
Scito nobis nihil esse antiquius, qua^ nec christi iura, nec patrum transire
terminos. That is in englyssh. Know thou that, we do set by nothing more,
then another to pass over Christ's laws, nor the fathers lymytes, or
determinations. Hieronimus vigila^tio. Oi^a co^tra ecclesia^ dogmata
reprehendo, et publica voce damno.

I do reprove al doctrine, that is against the church, and condemn it with
an open voice.

Theophilus hieronimo.
Optamus, sifieri potest, in diebus nostris catholicam fide^, et ecclesiae
regulas cum subject is nobis populis custodire, et omnes nouas sopire
doctrinas. We wysshe or desire, if it may be, to keep with the people under
us, the catholyke faith, and the churches rules, and to brige a sleep al new
doctrine.

Imprinted at London in paul's church yearde, at the sign of the mayde^s head,
by Thomas petit. M. D. XL vii.




