Controversies handled in this book.
1. Of the Popes supremacy. Article 1. through out. 2. Of the real presence of
Christ in the Sacrament of the Alter. Article 2. chap. 1. 2. 3. Of the
Sacrifice of Mass. Art. 2. chap. 3. 4. 5. 6. 4. Of the Popes dispensations.
Article 3. through out. 5. Of Original sin and concupiscence. Article 4.
through out. 6. Of merit of good works. Art. 8. through out. 7. Of the
distinction of mortal and venial sins. Art. 6. through out. 8. Of the
sufficiency of the holy Scripture. Art. 7. cap. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 9. Of the
difficulty of Scripture. Ibid. chap. 6. 10. Of the vulgar peoples reading of
scripture in vulgar tongues. Ibid. c. 7. 11. Of the translating of holy
Scripture into vulgar tongues. Ibid. c. 8. 12. Of Traditions. Art. 7. chap. 9.
10. 11. 12. 13. Of the authority of late general counsayles. ibid. chap. 13.
14. Of the oaths of Bishops. Ibid. chap. 14. 15. Of the possibility of keeping
Gods commandments. Art. 8. through out.
TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, JAMES By the grace of God King of great
Britanie, France, and Ireland, Defendor of the Faith.
IF S. Paul (Most Gracious Sovereign) being accused of the whole Synagog of
the Jews, by their Orator Tertullus of diverse heinous crimes, both against
Gods and the Princes laws, found notwithstanding such equity in the heathen
President Festus, as that he answered his adversaries, that it was not the
Romans custom to condemn Act. 2^
any man before he have his accusers present, and place to make his answer: and
also such favor at the The like reports Plutarch of K. Alexan. the great.
Act. 26.
Jewish King Agrippa his hands, as he both licenced him to speak for him
self, and afforded him favorable audience. Much more cause have your Majesty's
Catholic Subjects, being accused of the ministers by a hired spokesman Bell,
to expect the like, yea greater favor and equity at your Graces hands. For if
the Romans though Heathens, thought it injustice to condemn any particular man
at the clamors of a whole nation, before his accusers were present and his
defense were heard? And if King Agrippa, albeit He killed S. James and
emprisoned S. Peter. Act. 12.
a Jew and persecutor of Christians, deemed it notwithstanding a Princes part
to given audience to one accused of that Religion which he both hated and
persecuted: How much more will a Christian Prince forbear to condemn the
universal cause of his Catholic subjects at the slanders and outcries of
ministers and one hired Proctor, before their accusers be brought face to face,
and they have time and place granted to answer for them selves? wherein we
shall account our selves more happy then S. Paul, because we shall plead our
cause, not before a Jewish, but a Christian King, and such a one as better
knowerh the questions and customs of the Christians, then King Agrippa did of
the Jews.

Wherefore seeing that of late Thomas Bell (a fugitive once from Protestants
religion, as he is now from Catholics) has not only accused, but also
maliciously sla^dered the universal Catholic cause, in a book which he has
dedicated to your Majesty, and termed it the Dovvnefall of Popery, and withal
challenges, dares, yea adiureth (in which case our B. Savior Matthew. 26.
though with danger of his life made answer) al English Jesuits, Seminary
Priests, and (as he speaks) Iesuited Papists to answer him. I have presumed
upon your Gracious favor to accept his chaleng, and am ready to perform it
hand to hand, if your Majesty grant license, and in the mean time, to
dedicate to your Name this my confutation of his arguments and slanders.
VVherin I speak not for my self as S. Paul did before King Agrippa, but for
the religion of your own Progenitors and Predecessors, for the faith of our
Forefathers, for the cause of al Catholics, and for the good (I dare say) of
your Majesty's own person and kingdoms. For though Bell calumniate Christian
Kings and page 17.
Emperors with opening the window to al Antichristian tyranny, and Catholics
generally, with thinking p. 1. 22.
Christ to be killed a thousand times a day and the like: yet especially he
slandereth the Popes with usurping power proper to God, and to depose Princes,
and dispose of their kingdoms at his pleasure, thereby to alienate your mind
from the Sea Apostolic. wherein he not only abuses your patience with telling
you untruths, but greatly harmeth and endamageth your self and Realm, by
endeavoring through Vir Apostata prauo cord machinatur malu^, omni tempore
iurgia Seminat. ^ouer. c. 6.
his false slanders to auert your mind from the Popes, who have been the most
ancient, most assured, and most beneficial friends, which the Kings and Realm
of England ever had. Which thing that I may make manifest unto your Grace, I
humbly beseech you give me leave to set down some praticular examples of the
mutual amity, kind offices, and benifites, which have ever been betwixt the
Popes and the Princes of this land. Wherein if I be somewhat longer then men
in Epistles The love and benefits of Popes to England and Kings thereof. S.
Peter P.
use to be, I hope that the variety and profit of the matter will make requital.

Not long after the Apostolic Seat was settled in Rome, S. Peter the first
Pope, about the 63. year of Christ came hither (as not only Gretians, but
Metaphrast. tract. de Pet. and Paul. apud Lippoman. Cambden in descrip.
Britan^^ p. 52. And Nicephor. as he says.
Protestants also confess) stayed here a long time, converted many Nations to
Christ's faith, erected Churches, ordered Bishops, and Priests, and being
admonished of an Angel, returned from hence to Rome to suffer Martyrdom.
Neither was this love to our Country extinguished by death, but as he promised
to some, so he had it 2. Pet. 1.
also in mind after his death, and miraculously assisted it in the greatest
distresses. So that truly wrote S. Sergius Malmesbur. lib. 1. Pont. Angl. p.
209.
1. Pope unto our Kings of England almost a thousand years ago, that S. Peter
was mindful of them: and Pope Alexander 3. to King. Henry 2. ^ugubin. de donat.
Co^st.
that England was under S. Peter's protection ever since Christ's name was
glorified there. For when our country about the year 611. began to Apostatate
from the faith of Christ, and the Bishops were determined to forsake the land.
S. Perer appearing to Saint Laurence Archbishop of Canturbury did seuerly
rebuke and scourge him because he would abandon the flock which I (said S.
Peter) committed unto thee. This miracle is so certain as some Protestants
confess it, and though Gadvvin in the life of S. Laurence.
some others will not believe it, because they have neither seen nor put their
singers into S. Laurence his wounds; yet it may suffice any indifferent man,
that it was avouched by S. Laurence, believed by King Edbald and his people,
lib. 2. hist. c. 6. Malmesb. lib. 1. Reg. and lib. 2. Pont. Huntingt. l. 3.
Marian. A. 693. al. 617. VVestman. 616.
who thereupon returned to the Chaistian faith, recorded by S. Beda above eight
hundred years ago (who wrote nothing but what he knew him self or received
from credible men, whose history was approved by the King of his days and by
the Protestants Godvvin in life of Tatvvin. Cambd. in Britania. p. 12.
now) and finally it is contested and delivered by our best Chroniclers.

Not long before, when the King had built a Monastery and Church in honor of
S. Peter, where now westminster stands, S. Peter came from heaven and
consecrated (as by miracle he confirmed) the same church, promising that there
he would hear the prayers of the faithful. VVherupo^ King Edward Conss:
reedified that church of new and chose it for the place of his sepulture, whom
the most of his successors have imitated, and been there also crowned. Authors
of this are Abbat Ealred, Malmesburiensis In vit. S. Eduardi. Malmesbur. l. 1.
de Pont. See Sauil ep. ad Reg. Elizab. ante Malmesbur. Epist. ad Eduard. R.
apud Sur. Baron. An. 610.
(a man highly esteemed of Protestants) P. Nicolas 2. and others. In like
manner when England was sore oppressed by the Danes, S. Peter was seen of
Brithwald a holy B: of winchester, in a vision to anoint S. Edward Conss: King
of England, and to foretell the years of his reign, and the end of the Danish
fury, adding withal these most comfortable words. The kingdom of England is
the kingdom of Loc. cit. Malmesb. lib. 2. reg. cap. 13. p. 91. lib. 8. histor.
Angl.
God. This testify the foresaid Ealred, Malmesbury, Polidor, and others. If
Protestants object against my Authors, that they were Papists, I must confess
(but to their shame) that I find no protestant writer before K. Henry 8. his
time: yet such papists they are as protestants account some of them the
singular Cambden in Britan. p. 12. and in Durham. Stow A-726. Bell in dovvnefal
p. 54. of S Beda. Sauil of Masmesbur. Hunting. and Hoveden. epist. ante
Malmesbur.
ornaments of England, especial friends of truth, and renowned through
Christendom for virtue and learning, and others they call faithful recorders of
things done, good and diligent Authors, and most true guides of the times past.
Such also they are, as wrote long before protestants were, and therefore not
upon any spleen against them: and finally such they are, as upon their
authority principally depends all the credit of our English Chronicles.
Others perhaps will say, that the foresaid histories are not in scripture. True:
nor almost any thing else in all our Chronicles. Shall we therefote believe nothing
but what God reports? I request no more, but that the foresaid matters be as
well credited, as other things are, which the same Authors report.

This affection and love toward England was not proper to S. Peter alone, but
descended unto his successors. For when the sweet sound of the Ghospel first
preached here by him, had so increased, as it came to the ears of Lucius then
King of this land, he sending to Rome for preachers, P. Eleutherius about the
year 156. sent P. Eleutherius A. 156. S. Beda lib. 1. c. 4. Martyr. Romans 26.
Ado and Marian. in chronic. VVestmon. A. 188. Stow 179.
hither S. Fugatius and S. Damian, who baptized the King, Queen, and almost al
his people. Whereby our Country became the first, that publicly professed the
faith of Christ, and there upon is called Primogenita Ecclesiae. The like
charitable office performed also P. Victor unto Scotland P. Victor. 203. Boet.
lib. 6. histor. Scot. Genebr. chron. in Victore.
about the year 203. sending thither his legates at the request of King
Donaldus, who converted the King together with the Q. and nobility And about
the year 324. Pope Siluester P. Siluester. 324. Constant. in edicto Menolag.
Graecor. call. Ion. Huntingt. l. 1. hist. p. 306. Acta liberij. vita Siluestri.
having perfectly instructed our great Emperor Constantin, baptized him, and
miraculouslie cured him of his leprosy, as the said Emp. and many others
testify. Afterward when the Christian faith in Britany began to be infected
with heresy, P. Celestin about P. Celestin. A. 432. Prosper in chron. An. 432.
Baron. 429. Prosper An. 434. Beda l. 1. c. 13. Plat. in Celestino. Baron. Ann.
429. Cambden in Hibernia. Marian. in chron. Cambd. in Hibern.
the year 432. sent hither S. S. German and Lupus for to expel and confute the
heresies, which they accomplished. And the same P. in the year 434.
consecrated Palladius a Bishop, and sent him to Scotland, where as yet was no
B: and not forgetful of Ireland, sent thither S. Patrick, who with miracles
converted the Island, and deserved (says Cambdin) the title of Apostle thereof.
Thus continued the love of the Sea Apostolic toward our Country all the time
that the Brito^s possessed it.

But toward our English nation, after they had conquered this Island, Beda lib.
1. ^. 22.
it was far greater. For whereas not only the Britons refused, but the French
also and other Christian nations Gregor. lib. 5. epist. 58. 59. Gadvvin us life
of S. Austin.
neglected, to preach unto our English aunciters, who ever until that time had
been Pagans, and bondslaues (says S. Beda) of Idols: only Rome lib. 2. c. 1.
put forth her helping hand to draw the^ out of that darcknes and misery of
Infidelity. For no sooner that blessed and holy father S. Gregory (as Gadwin
P. Gregory. An. 596. loc. cit.
calls him) understood that the Angles or English (whom for their beauty and
his tender affection he called Angels) were Pagans, but forthwith he Beda lib.
2. c. 1. Malmesb. l. 1. Reg.
went to the P: (being him self yet a monk) and desired him to send Preachers
into England, and offering him self to be one: And obtaining Joan. Di^^. in
vit. Gregor.
license came on his voyadge toward England three days Journey, but was
recalled at the importunity of the Romans, who were unwilling to forgo so
worthy a man, nevertheless he forgot not his holy enterprise. For as soon
(says S. Beda l. 1. cap. 1.) as he was high Bishop over the whole world, he
made our nation the Church of Christ, which had been ever until that time the
bondslaue of Idols. And in the year 596. Beda sup. Stow. An. 596. Godvvin.
sup.
sent hither S. Augustine with almost forty Moncks more to preach, who being
received of K: Ethelbert in short time converted both him and his Country. And
that they preached the true faith and religion of Christ, appeared by the
miracles they wrought in testimony thereof, which were so great, and many, as
it seemed (says S. Gregory) lib. 7. epist. 30.
that they imitated the virtues of the Apostles by the miracles they wrought,
and are withal so certain, as they are not only testified by the said S.
Gregory lib. 9. ep. 56. ^8. Beda lib. 1. c. 31. l. 2. c. 2. Apud Godvvin. in
vit. August. Godvvin. sup. Stow An. 603. Cambd. in Britan. p. 104.
in diverse places, S. Beda and other ancient writers, and by the Epitaph of S.
Augustins tomb, but confessed also by diverse Protestants. Again in the year
601. he sent more Preachers and with them al things necessary for the furniture
and service of the Church, as holy vessels (says S. Beda) Altar Beda lib. 1.
c. 29.
clothes, apparel for priests and Clarcks, relics of holy Apostles and
Martirs, and many books, and a Palle to S. Augustine to use only (writes S.
Gregory) at Mass, Apud Bed. sup.
appointed also him to be over all the Bishops and Priests of Britany, and gave
him license to institute 24. Bishoprics, whereof 12. should be under his
province, and 12. under york. Besides he sent rich presents of Bed. lib. 1. c.
32. Gregor. lib. 9. epist. 59. 60.
diverse sorts, and letters unto the King and Queen, for to confirm them in
their faith: and sent order also into Gregor. lib. 5. epist. 10.
France to buy such English youths as were there slaves, and to send them up to
Rome there to be brought up in virtue and learning. Wherein he gave the
example of the English Seminary which not long after, our English Kings founded
in Rome. This was the exceeding love of this B. Pope toward our Nation, whom
we may well, and must (says S. Beda lib. 2. c. 1.) call our Apostle, and may
lavvfullie pronounce of him that saying of the Apostle. 1. Cor. ^.
Although he were not an Apostle to others, yet he was unto us: For the sign
of his Apostleship we are in our Lord.

Neither was this great good so happily begun and planted in our nation by S.
Gregory and his Legates, neglected by the Popes his successors, but rather
diligently watered and furdered by them, as appears by the letters Bed. lib.
2. c. 10. 11. Huntingt. l. 3. Bed. lib. 2. c. 17. Hunting. sup. Bed. lib. 4. c.
18. Hunt. l. 4. p. 335. Malmesbur. l. 1. Pontif. p. 197. Westminster onast. A. 789.
Malmesb. l. 2. Reg. p. 47. A. 804. P. Honorlus An. 635. Bed. l. 3. c. 7. Gadvv.
in vit. Birini. P. Vitalian. 668. Bed. lib. 4. c. 1. 2. Gadvv. in vit.
Theodori. Antonin. tit. 14. c. 4. paragr. 14. Lazius l. 3. de Cimmeri^s Ramus
and Poeta German. apud Ca^bd. in Britan. p. 105. Polid. lib. 5.
and Messages of diverse of them sent unto our Princes and Bishops to that
purpose. as of P. Boniface 5. in the year 618. of P. Honorius in 633. of P.
Agatho 679. P. Zachary about 746. P. Adrian 789. P. Formosus 894. and others.
But most of al it was increased by P. Honorius his sending hither in the year
635. that Apostolical man S. Birin, who converted the west Saxons: and by P.
Vitalian, who in 668. sent hither those holy and great learned men S. Theodor
and Adrian, by whose teaching Englishmen in short time became the rarest men,
and best learned of their age, and the first founders of the universities in
Paris, and Pauia, and consequently the chiefest fountains of the learning
which has been since in the west. After this time Eardulf King of
Northumberland, being driven out of his kingdom and country, P. Leo 3. in the
year 808. P. Leo 3. An. 808. Amoinus l. 4. c. 94. Regino in chron. Baron. 808.
sent Card: Adalph his legate into England, who with the help of Charles the
greats Ambassadors, restored the King peaceably unto his kingdom. Not long
after P. Leo 4. dispensed P. Leo 4. 855. Gathezelin in vit. S. Suithuni apud
Sut. Baron. 855.
with King Ethelwal for to marry, which he being a Subdeacon could not do
lawfully: and at the same kings request crowned his son Alfred VVestmonast.
855. Baron. sup.
King, and adopted him for his son. who afterward, for his worthy deeds both
in war and peace was surnamed the great, and for all things became the rarest
Prince that England (and perhaps Christendom) ever had. Soon after in the
year 883. at the suite of the King Alfred, the great P. Martin P. Martin. 1.
883. VVestmonast. and Baron. A. 883. Gadvvin in vit. Pleg.
1. released the tribute which the English school or Seminary then in Rome
paid, and sent to the King many gifts, among which was a good piece of the
holy Cross.

In the year 990, when Richard: Marquis of Normandy had purposed to invade
England, and make war upon king Ethelred, P. John 15. sent P. Ihon. 15. An.
990. Epist. apud Malmesb. l. 2. Reg. c. 10. Baron. An. 990.
his Nuntio and letters to take up the matter, who happily brought them to
agreement: and about the year 1059. P. Nicolas the second granted to king P.
Nicolas 2. 1059. Epist. ad Eduard. R. apud Sur. in cit. Eduardi.
Edward Conss. and his successors, aduocationem and tuitionem omniu^ totius
Angliae Ecclesiarum, the aduouzon and protection of all the Churches in England.
And in the year 1094. P. Urban 2. in P. Urban. 2. 1094. Malmesbur. l. 1.
Pontif. p. 223. Gadvvin in vit. Anselmi.
a council at Bari, appointed that S. Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury and his
successors should sit in Councels besides the Archdeacon of Rome, who sits
before the P. adding these honorable words Includamus hunc in orb nostro
tanquam alterius orbis Papam, whereas before it was unknown (says Malmesbury)
what place belonged to our Archibishop; and the same place did P. Paschal 2.
confirm in a council at Rome about the year 1102. But besides this, diverse
other dignities have been granted to the Sea of Canturb: Malmesbur. sup. p.
208. 209.
by the Popes, as that it should be Primate over al Britany, and the B:
legatinati, Polid. lib. 13. Gadvvin in vit. Theobaldi.
and other like dignities.

Moreover in the year. 1098. the Scottish men (says Genebrard out of
Genebrard. chron. in Urban. 2. Pascali 2. Leone 9.
Mayor and Boethius two Scottish Chroniclers) obtained of P. Urban 2. for their
Prince, that he might have the name, title, and anointment of a king (which the
Hungarians and Polonians Baron. An. 1000.
had obtained for their Princes, about the year 1000.) whereupon Edgar was
then first anointed King of Scotland. And about 1107. P. Pascal P. Pascal. 2.
1107. Malmesbur. lib. 5. Reg. p. 163.
2. writing to king Henry 1. among other things promises so to favor him and
his son, as who (says he) hurts you or him may seem to have hurt the
Church of Rome. And in the year 1152. when K. Steephen (having usurped the
Crown of England) would have caused the Bishops to Crown his son Eustace,
thereby to exclude for ever the right heir Henry 2. Pope Eugenius P. Eugenius
3. An. 1152. Stow A^. 1152. Gadvvin in vit. Theobaldi.
3. sent commandment to the Clergy not to meddle in that matter, whereby it
was hindered. In the year 1160. P. Adrian 4. gave unto King P. Adrian. 4.
1160. Stow. An. 1160.
Henry 2. the dominion and regiment of Ireland, and sent unto him the Bull of
his grant with a ring of gold in VVestmon.
token of the inuestiture: which grant at the request of the said K. P.
Alexander 3. P. Alexander 3. An. 1171. Houeden. p. 1. Annal. p. 528. Polid.
lib. 13. P. Lucius 3. 1185. Houed. p. 2. p. 628.
confirmed to him and his heirs. And as for P. Lucius 3. successor to the said
Alexander, his good will appears by the great praise which he gives to our
English kings, whom he writes to have far exceeded the rest of Christian
Princes in warlike prowes and noblenes of mind. Which affection continued
also in his successor P. Urban 3. of whom (as Houeden P. Urban. 3. An. 1185.
part. 2. p. 631.
writes) K: Henry 2. obtained many things, whereof one was that he might
crown which of his sons he would of the kingdom of Ireland, which he Stow.
Ann. 1185.
confirmed by a bull, and in token of his good will and confirmation, sent to him
a crown. And lastly P. Clement the P. Clement. 3. An. 1189. Hovved. p. 2.
page 652. VVestmonast. A. 1189.
third in the year 1189. when, not only the French king, but also his sons
and Nobles had conspired against the said K: and invaded his dominions with a
far greater power then he was able to resist, sent a Cardinal to exhort them to
peace, who excommunicated the hinderers of the peace, and threatened to
interdict the French kings country unless he made peace with England.

Likewise in the year 1193. when K: Richard Ceur de lion was taken prisoner,
as he came from the holy land by the Duke of Austria, P. Celestin 3. P.
Celestin. 3. A. 1193. VVestmon. Ann. 1193. Stow 1195. Polid. l. 14.
at the K: request excommunicated the D: and enjoined him to release the
covenants which he had constrained the K: to make, and to send home the
pledges: who not obeying the Pope he soon after died miserably, and was left
unburied until his son had sent home the pledges, and sworn to stand to the
judgment of the Church. And in the year 1207. P. Innocent 3. P. Innocent. 3.
An. 1207. Stow Ann. 1207.
sent to K: John an eloquent Epistle and diverse precious Jewels. And in the
year. 1215. when the Barons had extorted from the said king certain charters
and liberties, the P. at the Kings request disanulled them, and Stow 1195.
1296. 1297. Gadvvin in vit. Steph. Langton. Polid. lib. 15. 16.
excommunicated the Barons which had rebelled against him, and when the said
Barons had called in Lewis the Prince of France, chosen him their King, and
yielded the chiefest Cities and holds into his hands, so that England was in
evident danger to be lost, the P. sent his Legate to assist king John, and to
forbid the French upon pain of excommunication to enter into England, which he
stoutly performed. Also in the year 1253. P. Innocent 4. P. Innocent. 4. An.
1253. Comin ventura nella relat. de Napoli. Polid. lib. 16. Stow A. 1254.
bestowed the Royal title and right of the kingdoms of Naples and Sicily upon
Edmond son to K: Henry 3; and sent by a Cardinal the inuestiture thereof. And
1257. P. Alexander 4. P. Alexander 4. Ann. 1257. VVestmon. An. 1259.
sent Messengers unto Richard brother to the said king, for to assure him of
the Imperial dignity and to exhort him to go into Germany to receive it,
which he did, and was crowned king of Romans at Aquisgran. And in the year
1292. when the Barons had wrested out of the said K. hands certain liberties,
P. Urban 4. at the P. Urban. A. 1262. Stow Ann. 1262. 1264.
kings suite, sent a Legate to accurse the Barons that had rebelled in defense
of the said liberties.

Again in the year 1272. at the request of king Edward 1. P. Gregory P.
Gregory 10. An. 1272. VVestmon. An. 1272. Polid. lib. 17.
10. excommunicated Guy of Monfort for killing the kings Coosin German in a
church at Viterbo, and condemned him of wilful and privy murder, of Sacrilege
and treason, declared him to be infamous, and incapable of any office in the
commonwealth, and disherited his posterity unto the fourth generation, and
excommunicated al those that entertained him and interdicted their dominions.
And in the same kings time was Cambridge of a Cambden in descript. Cantabrig.
p. 435. ex Remington. p. Clement. 5. 1311. Clement. ^it. de Mag^st. c. 1.
school made an university by the P. and soon after in the year 1311. under
king Edward the second P. Clement 5. appointed that in Oxford should be read
two lectures of the Hebrew, Arabic, and Caldaick tongue, and authorized it for
one of the famousest universities in Christendom. Also in P. Ihon. 22. An.
1316. Polid. lib. 17. Stow. An. 2316.
the year 1316. P. John 22. at K: Edward 2. his request, sent two Legates to
make peace betwixt England and Scotland, and to reconcile Thomas Earl of
Lancaster to the King, who excommunicated the Scots, because they would not
agree to peace. And in the same year at the kings petition, the P. confirmed
all the ancient privileges of the university of Cambridge, which of long time
they had enjoyed by the benefit (writes Stow) of the Stow. 1317.
Popes predecessors.

Moreover in the year 1489. Pope P. Innocent. 8. A. 1489. Stow. Ann. 1486.
Innocent the eight sent a Nuntio to take up the variance betwixt the King of
Scotland and his people, but before his arriual the King was slain. And about
the year 1504. When there arose a contention between K: Henry 7. and Ferdinand
King of Spain about the precedence, P. Julius 2. having P. Iulio 2. A. 1504.
Valaterran. Comin ventura. Stow ib.
heard both their Ambassadors gave sentence for the King of England. And in the
year 1505. sent to the said King a sword and Cap of maintenance, as to a
defendor of the Church. But as no King of England deserved better of the Sea
Apostolic then K: Henry 8. did for a long time, so none received more honor
from thence then he did. For he received not only from P. Julius 2. in the
year 1514. a sword and Stow 1514.
Cap of maintenance, for defending him against the French king; But also of
Pope Leo 10. in the year 1521. P. Leo 10. A. 1521. Stow A. 1521 Onuphr.
chron. 1520.
the most honorable title of Defendor of the faith, for defendig by writing
the Catholic faith against Luther. Which title as it is more honorable then
the titles of most Christian, or Catholic, given likewise by Popes to the
French K: and K. of Spain: so was it ever highly estiemed of K. Henry, and by
him caused to be engraven Stow did see it. An. 1547.
on his tomb, where he left the title out of his Supremacy.

And though Q. Elizabeth had utterly cast of the Popes friendship, yet he
forsook not her. For Pius 4. supposing P. Pius 4. A. 1560.
that she had revolted from that Sea, rather for fear lest her title to the
crown might be called in question, because one P. had before declared her
birth, to be unlawful, then for dislike of the religion which in her father P.
Clement. 8. 1603.
out of your own grateful mind, you have publicly professed, your Proclamat.
^^ 1. ^egni.
self behoulding unto P. Clement 8. for his temporal carriadge, and diverse
kind offices toward your Majesty. Besides he has (as it is reported)
censured al such as shall molest your grace, and has often times professed that
he would willingly give his life for the eternal good of our country. Which
is the greatest love that one can bear (as our Savior testifies) unto his
friend. Oh how great enemies are they unto England, who seek by false
slanders to make such friends odious unto us.

By this which has been said (omitting much more for breuity) your Majesty
clearlie sees, how greatly and how continally the Sea Apostolic has ever
favored the Christian Princes of this land: how many and how great benefits
both spiritual and temporal, Popes have bestowed upon them, and in their
dangers and distresses according to their power assisted them. Weigh (I
beseech your grace) in the balance of your Princely wisdom, the forsaid
benefits, with such as your self or Auncitors have received from the rest of
Christendom, and Popes have benefited Engl. more then al Christendom besyds.
you shall find that the Sea Apostolic alone, has more benifyted England,
then al Christendom besides, and consequently that the forsaking of the Popes
friendship has more endammaged your Realm, then if it had forsaken the rest
of Christendom. But especially (I humbly beseech your Majesty) weigh them
with such as Bell, or any minister can show you to have received, from their two
seats of pestilence in witenberge and Geneua. What kingdoms have they
bestowed upon you? unto what imperial or Royal dignity have they exalted you?
from what Paganism have they converted your land? what enemies have they
appeased? what assistance have they afforded you in any need? what good, little
or great have they brought to this land? Now what mischief have they not
brought? That Bell in his own judgment was both an Apostata and Traiter
vvhiles he was Priest.
one Apostata, and fierbrand of sedition Knox, sent from Geneua, brought more
mischief to your Grandmother, your B. mother, to your father, and Kingdom of
Scotland, then I can rehearse, or your Majesty without great grief can
remember. Ministers pretend the love of the Ghospel, as the cause of persuading
you from friendship with the Pope: But yet dissuade not from friendship with
the Turk. They pretend also your graces See Conser. at Hampton Court. p. 80.
81.
security: But the true cause indeed your Majesty descried and discovered in
Knox, to wit their own security and aduau^cement, which they fear would be
endangered, if you kept your ancient, and surest friend, and therefore with
your loss (as your majesty perceived in your Grandmothers case) they work
their own wealth and security. And thus much of the Popes. The laue and
benefits of the British Kings to the Sea Apostolik. Note this.


As for the Christian Princes of this land, though they have been of four
different, and most opposite nations, to wit Britons, English, Danes, and
Normans, yet have they al agreed in keeping the league of friendship with the
Pope, being officious unto him, and accou^ting him their especial friend. Of
the British kings of this land first K. Lucius A. 156. Beda lib. 1. c. 4.
is King Lucius, whose particular affection toward the Sea Apostolic, is
evident, by that he neglecting other Christian Churches near unto him, he sent
so far as to Rome for Preachers. As for Constantin the great Constantin Mag.
324.
(the immortal glory of the British kings) his extraordinary love and affection
unto the Sea of Rome is more notorious then I need rechearse. For he not only
gave unto the Pope the government of Rome, and of a good part of the west (as
besides him self, and Latin historiographers, Constant. in edicto. Isidor.
Eugubin de donat. Constant. Great. d. 69. Iuo. Genebr. in chron. Photius seu
Balsam. in nomoran. R. Abraham in Zikron Dibre Romi. Abben Estra 11. Daniel.
Cadualader. Polid. lib. 3.
both Greecks and Jews professed enemies to the Pope do testify) but also
served him as a lackey houlding his stirrup and leading his horse by the
bridle. Cadwallader also the last British king in England, having left his
country went no whither but to Rome, and there ended his days. And if the
histories of those ancient times were more perfect, or the Britons had reigned
longer in this Island, no doubt but we should have more examples of their
devotion to the Sea of Rome, as appears by Solomon A. 869. Argenteus. histor.
Brit. lib. 2. c. 27. Baron. An. ^^9.
Solomon their King in little Britany, after they had been driven hence by the
Saxons; who writing to Pope Adrian the second begins his letter thus. Domino
ac beatissimo Apost: sedis Rom: Hadriano, Solomon Britanorum Rex flexis genibus
inclinatoque capite. And sends him his statua in gold, with diverse rich
gifts and money, promises a yearlie pension, and acknowledges his Royal
title to have been given to him by Popes. This was the love of the British
kings unto the Sea Apostolic.

To the British kings succeeded the The love and benefits of the English Kings.
K. Ethelbert An. 596. Beda lib. ^. c. 25.
Saxons or English, as well in their love and reverence to the Sea of Rome, as
in their kingdom. For king Ethelbert at the very first received S. Gregory his
Legates very courteously, provided them of al things necessary, and freely
licensed them to preach, using these gracious words worthy to be imitated of
your Majesty in the like case. For so much as you are come so far to impart
unto us such knowledge as you take to be true, we vvil not trouble you, but
rather vvithal courtesy receive you. After him king Ofwin having K. Osvvin. A.
665.
perfectly learned that the Church of Rome (says S. Beda) was the Catholic
Lib. 3. c. 29.
and Apostolic Church, sent thither in the year 665. a Priest to be
consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury. And in a conference about the observation
of Easter, hearing that the keys of heaven were given to S. Peter, concluded
thus. I vvil not gain Bed. lib. 3. c. 25. Bar. An. 664.
say such a Porter as this is, but as far as I know and am able, I vvil covet
in all points to obey his ordinance. And in the year 670 he bare (says S.
Bid) such love and affection lib. 4. cap. 5.
to the Apostolic Sea of Rome, as if he might have eskaped his sickness, he
purposed to go to Rome, and to end his life in those holy places there.

But what he could not through death perform, the valiant Prince King Cedwalla
did in the very flour K. Cedualla. An. 689.
of his age and prosperity. For in the year 689. forsaking his kingdom (says
S. Beda) he went to Rome, thinking it to Beda lib. 5. c. 7.
be a singular glory, and renovvme for him to be regenerated with the
Sacrament of Baptism at the Sea Apostolic. And vvithal conceived hope, that
as soon as by baptism he was cleansed from sin, he should depart from this
world to immortal joy. Which by Gods providence was performed, and he
honorably buried by the Pope in S. Peter's Church. Not long after him, to wit
in the year 709. two English Kings Coenred and K. Coenred and Offa. 709.
Offa forsook their kingdoms, went to Rome, and there became Moncks, Lib. 5.
cap. 10. Baron. 709. Huntingt. l. 4. p. 337. Malmesb. 1. reg. c. 6. Marian.
chro. VVestmonast. 710. Sigeb. 707. Polid. lib. 4. Fox. l. 2. K. Ina. An. 726.
Lib. 5. cap. 7. Baron. 726. Ethelvvead l. 2. c. 13. Huntingt. l. 4. p. 338.
Malmefbur. l. 1. Marian. chron. Stow 685. Fox. l. 2. VVestmon. An. 727. Geneb.
741. Polid. lib. 4. Stovvv in Ina.
continuing (says S. Beda) at the Apostles tombs in praying, fasting, and
dealing alms until their dying day. Ina al. Hun successor to K. Cedwal in his
kingdom, succeeded him also in his devotion to the Sea Apostolic, for after
he had reigned (says S. Beda) 37. years he gave over his kingdom, and went
him self to the tombs and monuments of the Apostles in Rome, as in those days
many English both of the Nobility and Commons, spiritual and temporal men and
women were wont to do with great emulation. Neither went he only to Rome,
but became there a Monk, and was the first that paid the Peter pence,
appointing that every householder of his kingdom, who English Seminary in Rome
almost 900. years ago.
had thirty penny worth of Cattle of one sort, should pay yearlie one penny to
Rome: which money was partly for the P. partly for the maintenance of an
English school or Seminary which VVestmon. A. 727. 794.
he then built in Rome for bringing up of English youths there in virtue and
learning.

Not long after about the 750. year S. Richard K. forsook his kingdom, S.
Richard K. A. 750. Sur. 7. Februar. Baron. 750.
and leaving his two sons in Germany with S. Boniface an Englishman the Popes
Legate there, went him self in Pilgrimage to R. but dying in the way at Luca
is there honorably buried. And the year 775. King Offa though K. Offa. An.
775. Fox l. z. Martyr.
a warlike Prince, gave over his kingdom, went to Rome, and there became a
Monk: and imitating the example of King Ina, increased the English See
Malmesbur. l. 2. reg. c. 2. p. 38. VVestmon. An. 794. Bar. 775. Polid. l. 4
Hunting. l. 4. p. 342. Greg. 7. l. 8. ep^st vlt. Baron. A. 782.
Seminary begun by him, and imposed the like pension of Peter pence upon his
kingdom of Mercia: as Charles the great about the same time imposed upon
France the like tribute to be paid to Rome. The love and affection of King
Kenulph, a worthy K. Kenulph. An. 808. Annal. Fran. Baron. 808. Malmesbur. 1.
Reg. c. 4. p. 30. 33.
Prince, and successor to King Offa, appears by his redeeming the Popes
Legate taken of Pirates in the year 808. and by his submissiue letter to the
Pope, wherein he humbly craves his blessing, as al his predecessors had,
desires to be adopted for his son, as I (says the King) love you like a
father, and embrace you with al obedience. And protested to be willing to
spend his life for the Pope.

After him King Ethelwolph in the K. Ethelvvolph. An. 855. VVestmon. Baron.
855. Ethelvverd lib. 3. cap. 3. Srovv Ingulphus.
year 855. went to Rome, took with him his best beloved son Alfred, for to
be instructed (says westmonaster) of the Pope in manners and religion, where
he abode a whole year, and procured his son to be crowned of the Pope and
adopted of him for his son, he also notably repaired the English Seminary
Malmesb. l. 2. cap. 2. p. 38. Stow Ann. 839.
at Rome, which had been burnt a little before, and confirming gifts of K. Ina,
and Offa, imposed Malmesbur. sup. Marian. 877. Platina in Leone 4.
the pension of Peter pence upon al England, which was afterward paid until the
later end of K: Henry 8. About the same time King Burdred leaving K. Burdred.
Ethelvvead l. 4. c. 3. Malmesb. l. 1. c. 4. p. 33. Ingulph. Stow 875. K.
Ganute a Dane 1032. Malmesb. l. 2. cap. 1. Ingulph. Polid. l 7. Huntingt. lib
6. Stow in Canute. Marian. A. 1033.
his kingdom went to Rome, and was there buried in the English school.
Neither would King Canute, though a Dane be found ungrateful to the Sea Apost:
but went to Rome in the year 1032. confirmed the payment of the Peter pence,
gave great gifts of gold silver, and precious things to S. Peter, and
obtained of Pope John immunity for the English Seminary. And finally K. Edward
Conf: the last but K. Eduard. Conf. An. 1056. Ealted in vit. eius.
one of the Saxon blood, would have gone to Rome in Pilgrimage, had not his
people upon fear of the Danes invasion hindered him, yet sent he Ambassadors to
the Pope with great presents, and confirmed all the duties and customs
belonging to him in England. And thus continewed the English Kings all the time
of their reign in singular affection, and devotion to The love and benefits of
the Norma^ Kings.
the Sea Apostolic.

To whom as the Norman Princes succeeded, so they followed them in their piety
and religion. For beside that they paid the Peeter pence, in particular K.
william Conqueror having K. VV. Conqueror. An. 1066. Stow in Herald.
subdued England, and slain K. Herald in the year 1066. sent straight his
standard to the Pope, as to his peculiar K. Henry 1. Malmesb. l. 1. Pont. p.
226.
friend. And K. Henry 1. professed by his Ambassador to P. Paschal 2. that
England was a peculiar province of the Church of Rome, and paid unto her
yearlie tribute. King Henry 2. about the year K. Henry 2. An. 1180. Genebr. in
chron. 1180.
1180. together with Lewis King of France led P. Alexanders horse, and with
great pomp conducted him K. Richard 1. Polid. lib. 14. Genebr. 118. Stow.
through the City Tociacum. K. Richard Ceur de Lion at the exhortation of the
P. went in person to the holy land, with an army of 30. thousand foot, and
five thousand horse: in which voyage he conquered the kingdom of Ciprus, and
city of Ptolemais, and overthrew the Souldan in a great battle; and the like
enterprise afterward undertook K. Edward the K. Henry 2. An. 1241. Stow An.
1241.
first in the year 1241. King Henry 3. placed the Popes Legate in the most
honorable room of the table at a public banquet in Christ-masse betwixt him
self and the Archbishop of york: And afterward with great pomp (says
Stowe) and innumerable company of Nobles, and trumpets sounding before, brought
him to the Sea. How devout K. Richard 2. and Englishmen K. Richard 2. Stow An.
1407.
in his time were to the Sea of Rome, appears by their building an hospital
there, for receipt of English Pilgrims (instead of the foresaid Seminary which
as it seems was destroyed in that great burning of Rome in the year 1084) in
the place where S. Thomas of Canturbury had before built a chapel in honor of
the B. Trinity. This hospital was afterward in the reign of K. Henry 6. and
Henry 7. reedified, and much increased, and lastly in the year 1570, was much
bewtifyed and augmented both in buildings and reuenews by P. Gregory 13. and by
him converted to the ancient use of a Seminary, retayning still the obligation
of an hospital.

The affection of K. Henry 4. appears K. Henry 4. A. 1409. Stow Ann. 1409.
by his letter to the Pope A. 1409. which he begins thus. Most holy father
our humble recommendations in filial wise premised. And afterward, having
taken with our said son, and also with our Prelates and Nobles mature
deliberation, we beseech with al humility and require your clemency (whose
state and honor upon diverse causes as a devout son of the Church so far as
we might with God, we have ever embraced and do embrace) by the express and
whole assent of the estates aforesaid etc. And as for King Henry 5. he in the
year 1416. sent his K. Henry 5. An. 1416. Stow Ann. 1416.
Ambassadors to the general Council at Constance, at whose procurement it was
there ordained that England (says Note this.
Stowe) should obtain the name of a nation and be said one of the five Nations
that owe their devotion to the Church of Rome, which thing until that time
men of other Nations for envy had let. Behold what an honor K. Henry 5.
the Alexander of England, and Conqueror of France, and England in his most
flourishing and triumphant time, accounted it to owe devotion to the Church of
Rome. Which now Ministers would account so dishonorable. And as for K. Henry
K. Henry 7. An. 1505.
7. your Majesty's great grandfather, his affection is evident by the sword and
cup of maintenance sent to him from the Pope, and spoken of before.

But none of the kings of the Norman blood ever showed so great signs of love
and affection to the Sea Apostolic as K. Henry 8. did for a long time K. Heury
8. A. 1511. 1521. Stow 1511. 1512. 1513. Onuphr. in Iul. 2.
for first in the year 1511. he wrate to the French K. to desist from
molesting Pope Julius 2. and in the next year sent an army of ten thousand men
into France for the Popes defense. And in the year 1513. went him self in
person with a royal army and conquered Turwin and Turnay. And not content to
defend the Pope with his sword, in the year 1521. wrate an excellent book
Stow An. 1521.
in his defense against Luther. And again in the year. 1527. when Pope
Clement 7. was taken prisoner by the Emperors soldiers, he gave monethlie
Stow An. 1532.
60. thousand Angels to the maintenance of an army, for the Popes delivery.
And in this singular affection toward the Sea Apostolik continewed he until
the 22. year of his reign Stow 1530. and deinceps.
An. 1530. when not upon any injury offered by the P. or dislike of his
religion, which (except the matter of supremacy) he defended to his death, and
persecuted the Protestants, but only upon occasion of delaie (says Stowe) made
by the Pope in his controversy of deuorcement, and through displeasure of such
reports, as he he ard had been made of him to the court of Rome, and thirdly
pricked forwards by such counselors to follovv the example of the Germans,
he first forbad the procurement of any thing from Rome, and soon after
prohibited al payments and appeals to Rome, and lastly took upon him that
supremacy which al his Christian predecessors had acknowledged to be in the
Pope.

Thus your Majesty sees how long, how honorably, and how profitablie also
unto both parties, has the mutual amity and league of friendship, betwixt the
Sea Apost. and the Princes of all the four Nations, that have swaied the
Scepter of England continewed and flourished: and how of late it was broken by
one Prince upon mere passion, contrary to the example of al his Predecessors
and Successors also, except one child and a woeman. What dangers and troubles
he and his kingdom incurred thereby, and how his progeny (according as Friar
Poeto did then foretell him) is now consumed, and his Crown translated to an
other Royal line, against which in his time he made sharp war, I need not here
declare. Only I will say, that him self being after more free from passion,
labored to be reconciled to the Sea Apostolic and employed therein B.
Gardener (as he professed in a sermon at Paul's Cross) and had easelie
obtained it, if he would have acknowledged his fault and done penance. What
remains for me to conclude this long epistle, but prostrate at your Majesty's
feet humbly to beseech you for your own good, and in the name of the foresaid
Christian Princes, that as you are the head of the fieft Nation, which
(according to Gods providence foretold by a holy man Hunting. l. 6. p. 359.
many hundred years ago) has attained to the rule of this land, so you would
continue that most ancient, honorable, and proffitable league of friendship,
which was betwixt them al and the Sea Apostolic; who (I beseech your grace)
will give you more faithful council, then your own Progenitors and forefathers?
who can give you more safe and secure direction in government of your
kingdom, then your own Predecessors, who so happily, and so long time
governed it? who are so worthy to give you example, or whom can you with so
much honor imitate, as so many, so valiant, so prudent Princes? and yet they al
with one voice, counsel and request you, to follow in this so importa^t a
matter, not so much them selves, as the council of the wisest King that ever
was, yea of God himself in these words. Thine own Proverb. 27.
friend and thy fathers friend see thou forsake not, especially such a one, as
has ever been not only your own friend, and particularly your B. mothers
friend, but of al your Christian forefathers. Who as they have left unto your
grace their Crown and kingdom; so have they also bequeathed their faith
religion and friendship with the Sea Apostolic, as no small portion and stay of
their inheritance. We estieme your public acknowledging of Rome to be the
Mother Church, and your self to be behoulding to P. Clement 8. for his
temporal cariadge and kind offices, as sparks of a greater fire of love
inkindled in your Princely heart toward that Sea, which we beseech almighty God
so to increase, as it may one day burst forth to your own good, and the
universal joy of Christendom. Our Lord Jesus long preserve your Majesty with all grace, health, and prosperity

Your Majesty's duetiful Subject and daily Orator. S. R.

THE EPISTLE TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
AS no water (Christian Reader) waxes so could, as that which has been once
hot: no enemies become so cruel to a common wealth, as Rebels who have been
once subject: So none are so eager adversaries to Gods Church as Apostataes, S.
Maximus sermon. de Apost.
who heue once been her members, and children. Amongst Heretics none more
earnest against the Apostles then the S. Hieron. de Scriptor. in Petro.
first Apostata Simon Magus, who dared to encounter hand to hand with the
principal Apostle S. Peter, and labored to seduce by Baron. Annal. An. 68.
his magik, whom he by miracles had converted. Amongst the Tyrants, and
persecutors Nazianz. orat. 1. in Julian. Theodoret. lib. 3. c. 21.
none more cruel then Julian the Apostata, who by blood endeavored to wash away
his Christendom, and both by sword, and pen labored al he could, not only to
extinguish the religion, but also the very name, and memory of Christians.
Amongst Philosophers none more vehement then Porphirius and Julian. rabidi in
Christum canes. Hieron.
Porphyry the Apostata, who writ fifteen books against Christian religion, and
for his singular hatred thereof was syrnamed tou Christianon polemios the
Christians adversary. And in these our miserable days none have been so
spiteful, so malicious, so vehement against Catholics either in persecuting,
speaking, or writing, as they who have been once Catholics. And in England
now none shows him self, so forward, or so vehement against Catholics as
the Apostata Bell, daring, challenging and adiuring al Papists jointly, and
severally to the combat with him, being desirous as it seems of the title of
ton catholicon polemios. The Catholics adversary.

These Apostataes be like to him, who Luc. 11. v. 25. 26.
being delivered of one devil, the house cleansed with beesoms and trimmed up,
was afterward possessed with seven devils See S. Ireney lib. 1. c. 13.
worse then the former, and his end made worse then his beginning. For such is
the estate of this miserable caitiue Bell, who being once delivered from the
devil of Heresy, cleansed with the beesom of confession, and Penance, and
trimmed with patient sufferance for the Catholic faith, falling afterward to
idleness, and dissolute life, whereof him self since has boasted, is possessed
again of his old devil of Heresy accompained with seven other wicked sprits of
blasphemy, railing, pride, slaundering, lying, dissembling, and abusing of Gods
and holy Fathers words, and his end becomme far worse then his beginning was.
His spirit of blasphemy he descryeth in many places as p. 149. where he says
that God has given us those commandments which we can not possibly keep. This
the holy Father S. Hierom both calls, and accutseth as S. Hieron. epist. ad
Damasc. de exposi. ione fidei.
blasphemy in these words. We curse their blasphemy who say that God has
commanded to man any impossible thing. And no marvel. For what reason can there
be in God to command Quod rationem non habet dici non debuit. S. Eugenius apud
Victorem de persecut. vandal. l. 2.
a thing which he knows can not be done? what fault in us not to do that
which can not be done? what justice in him to punish, and that with eternal
death, the not performance of that which can not be performed? If never there
was man so void of reason as would command a thing, which he knew could not be
done, never Tyrant so cruel as would punish with temporal death the
vnperformance of impossible matters, shall we think it no blasphemy to God, to
attribute that to him which we can not imagine that any man who has any spark
of reason, or humanity would attempt? Having thus blasphemed against God no
meruail if he blaspheme against his Church of late days saying. p. 134. that
she is no sufficient witness of his truth, and p. 41. against our justification
calling it supposed holy whereby he gives us to understand that as he is fallen
from God and his Church, and lost holy justification, so he is an enemy to them
al.

His railing spirit he could so il master, as in the very first period of his
epistle to the Epistle to the King.
King, without respect of his Majesty he must needs call us the cursed brood of
traitorous Jesuits, and straight after speaking ex abundantia cordis, and
reuiling especially against the Jesuits, who have been his masters, he
avouches them to be traitorous, seditious, brutish, barbarous, cruel,
villainous, most bloody, treacherous, proud, cruel, tyrants, firebrands of al
sedition, thieves, murderers, right Macheuels, coosiners, malicious, and
dependers upon the devil. And of this Rhetorik I expect good store for my part,
but the more the merrier, such reprochful terms in this quarrel shall be to me
super millia auri, and argenti. His pride is more notorious then I need show
it. For if it were pride in Golias though a Giant to challenge any of Gods
host, what is it in this puny, not only to challenge, but to adjure al Papists
severally and jointly, being him self not worthy to carry the books after many
of them, as shall appear by his manifold ignorance, not only in deuinity, See
the Index.
but also even in Latin, principl^s of Logik, Histories, and Preaching, as shall
be made manifest in this answer.

His slau^ders reach even from the highest page: 17.
to the lowest, Kings and Emperors he slaundereth with no les matter then
opening the window to al Antichristian tyranny. Bells ingratitude.
Popes (who long time manteined him at school) with challe^ging power equal p.
16. 40. 106.
to God, with dispensing with one to marry his full sister, with burning the
Scripture, and the like. And Papists he slaundereth p. 22.
with killing Christ a thousand times a day, with affirming that the Pope can
depose Kings and Emperors, and translate their p. 1.
Linpires and regalities at his good will and pleasure, with attributing to the
Pope power equal to God, thinking the breach p. 16. p. 130.
of Lent to be a greater sin then adultery perjury, or murder. His other three
spirits, of lying, dissembling, and abusing Gods word every where show them
selves in his books, and now and then are noted in my answer.

No marvel therefore if one possessed of so many, and so wicked spirits be so
forward, so spiteful, so malicious, against Catholics, as to callenge, and
adjure them al jointly or severally to the combat with him. Oh that I would
please his Majesty to admit this combat, that Bell, and I (the weakest of many
thousands of Gods soldiers) might try the truth, not by writing, which blusheth
not (as Tully said) but face to face as the Bishop of Eureux, and Plessy did
before the French King. I doubt not but if there were any blood in Bells body,
or any shame of men in his mind, I should make it appear in his face. But
whiles this combat must be fought a far of, only by paper shot, and writing and
our writings kept from the view of the people, no meruail if Bell fear no shame
of men, whiles they may see him fight, and flourish, but must not behold either
defense or blows of his adversary.

If he be so confide^t in his Heresy (which he once vomited forth, and now like
the dog has lickt up again) as he makes show of, why has he not in all this
time of his Apostasy procured license for public disputation? or at lest, why
never repaired he to the Catholic Priests in prison? Let him procure but one
such safe conducte for Priests as the council of Trent granted Sess. 13. 15.
18.
three or four to Protestants (when none of our English Ministers durst accept
it) and he shall not need to challenge, or adjure, but shall be dared at his own
door. For Priests who willingly spend their blood in testimony of the truth
which they teach, will far sooner spend their breath in defense thereof, and are
ready (to make the like offer Epistle to the King.
as Bell does in a different matter) to justify it before indifferent judges
against him, or what Protestant soever upon peril of their lives, if their
adversaries will adventure the like peril. And upon this condition Bell I
challenge thee, and adjure thee, accept it if thou dare. What more could have
been done to bring this so weighty a matter, whereupon depends the eternal
salvation of so many millions of souls to trial face to face, then has been
done of Catholics by speaking, by writing, by petition, by supplication?
Puritans upon one only supplication have been admitted to Conference,
Catholics can upon none. And this is that which makes Bell so bold to
challeng us to the open combat, when he knows we can not appear in open
show, but upon hazard of our lives. And I would to God that with danger, yea
with loss of life we might be lyce^ced publikly to try this truth so important
to the eternal life of our dearest countrymen. But seeing there is no hope of
this, when I red Bells challenge it seemed to me not only an unlearned thing,
patcht up of objections gathered out of Bellarmin, and learnedly answered by
him, but a witles challenge of some coward, who seeing his enemy commanded upon
pain of death to keep his house, callengeth him to the open field, and more
like to condemn the Author of folly, and vanity; then the Catholic religion
of falsity before any discreet, and judicious Reader. Nevertheless because (as I
understood some months after the publishing of it) some unadvised Protestants
hearing Bells glorious vaunts and challeng, had conceived great hope of this
their Champion, and thought his book vna^swerable, I took it in hand not
knowing as then that any other would vouchsafe to Author of the Forerunner of
Bells dovvnefal.
meddle with it, and have left to my knowledge no one point therein unanswered,
attending more to solue what he obiecteth, then to confirm what Catholics
mantein, though this also I have done sufficiently (as I hope) for my intended
breuity.

He terms this challeng a downfall of What Bell impugneth.
Popery and yet in the greatest part thereof impugneth no point of Popery, but
either particular opinions of private men, or (which is worse) false imputations
of his own, being so desirous of quarrelling, as he fights with his own
shadow. And what he impugneth he does with so good success, as almost in every
Article he over throws With what succes^e.
what he meant to establish, and confirm. So that if he had given his book
the right name he should have called it the downfall of Bells foolery. Of these
eight Articles which he has picked out as most aduantagious for him self, and
in which there are some things, which as S. Austin speaks l. de vtil. cred.
c. 1. to. 6. may be impugned to the common peoples S. Austin.
capacity, but not be defended by reason of their difficulty but of few. In the
first he impugneth the Popes superiority over al Princes on page: 1.
earth, and his power to depose them at his good will, and pleasure. whereof the
first is but the opinion of some few Canonists commonly rejected of al
Catholics, and disproued at large by Bellarmin, whose doctrine Bell accounts
the Popes own doctrine, and says it is approved by him. The second no Catholic
holds, but it is Bells faulse slander of Catholics. In the second omitting p:
19.
the question of the being of Christ's body in the blessed sacrament, he
impugneth the being of his quantity therein as a thing (says he) held of al
papists as an article of their faith, which is untrue, as is declared in the
answer. In the third he inueigheth page 37.
against the Popes power to dispense in matrimony before it be consummated,
which likewise is an opinion of Canonists, and commonly refuted of Catholic
deuines. In the fifth omitting true merit which is a point of faith, he
impugneth condign merit as a thing defined by the Council of Trent p: 75.
which it is not. In the seventh Article in steed of Traditions containing
things necessary for man's salvation, which in the beginning of the article he
proposed to impugn, he impugneth an erroneous opinion p. 131. 132. 133.
of Papias about Christ's reign after his judgment, and an other of S. Ireney
about Christ's age, one history about Zachary S. Ihon Baptists father, and an
other concerning Consta^tins baptism, a probable opinion of Popes private
teaching the same doctrine with S. Peter, and an other concerning our Ladies
Co^ception without sin. In the eight he oppugneth the keeping of Gods
commandments in such a sense as no Catholic dreameth of. So that though he had
flong down al these matters, yet there had been no downfall of Popery. Is not
this fellow think you a jolly challenger of P^pists? a goodly downfeller of
Popery? Is not be one of ^hos 1. Timoth. 1
of whom S. Paul says willinge to be Doctors of the law, know nether what they
say, nor of what.

But if we mark the success which this Champion has, whiles he yet
florisheth by him self, before ^is adversary enter the field, and like Vergils
Bull. A Eneid. 12.


-- beats the wind withal his might
And casting sand does flourish to the sight.
it is admirable. For, omitting particular co^tradictions, almost in every
Article he flingeth down the very main point which he would establish. As art.
1. he would prove that the Pope has no superiority over Princes, nor power to
depose them: and yet affirms that some Kings, and Emperors have humbled page
17.
them selves, yielded their soueraign rights to him, and that Popes lived in
duetiful obedience page 2.
under Emperors until the year 603. which he proves by S. Gregory, and yet no
les then S. Fabian. S. Innocent. 1. Symmachus S. Felix 2. Anastasius 2.
Vigilius.
six Popes did in that time excommunicate their Emperors, and S. Gregory was
the first that decreed the deposition of Kings and Princes. In the second
article after he had talked long against the real presence and sacrifice of the
Mass he falls to call the sacrificing of (Christ's) flesh with Priests hands,
p. 26. 27.
golden words, and to say that if we would be judged by a doctrine of Bellarmins,
(which a little before he had said was the Popes doctrine) the controversy about
the real presence would be at an end. In the fourth article after he had long
labored to prove inuoluntary motions of the flesh to be formal sin, and called
the contrary damnable doctrine, he both affirms and proves such inuoluntary
motions in S. Paul to have been no sin, because they page 48.
were against his will. In the fifth Article after he had spent many leaves to
fling down condign merit, at the last he avouches, that if we would be judged
by Bellarmins and p. 78. 79.
others doctrine published in print, that controversy would be ended, and yet
immediately before he had affirmed that Bellarm. taught his doctrine of merit,
(which is the very some which commonly al Catholics hold) after mature
deliberation, and grave consultation with all the best learned Jesuits in the
world, and with the Pope him self. What is this but to confess that in vain he
impugneth the Popes doctrine of merit? Such is the force of truth (says S.
Austin) that it is more forceable to Lib. cont. Donat. post collat. c. 24. page
81.
wring out confession, then any rack or torment. In the sixth Article he
admits the distinction of mortal and venial sin in a godly sense (as he
says) and yet straight after concludes absolutely that al sins are mortal, and
says that we flatter our selfs in our cursed deformed venials. In the seventh
article after he had spent 27. leaves to fell down Traditions, called them
falsehoods, and vanities p. 93. and pronounced them accursed of S. Paul who
receive them: at last him self p. p. 134. 135.
134. and 135. accepts one Tradition about the Bible whither it be Gods word
or no; whereby he beats down whatsoever before he had set up against the
Traditions of the Church. In the last he grants that Gods commandments are
possible to be kept in a godly sense, and yet afterward absolutely concludes
that we can not possibly keep them. Thus we see this silly fellow p. 149.
as he has been of opposite religions and professions, so playing ambedexter,
now the minister now the Priest, now the Protestant now the Catholic. what
adversary need such a challenger who is so great an adversary to him self? what
success is he like to have of a mean adversary, who has this evil event of
his own brauado?

He promises to subscribe if one argument page 31. Preface to Jesuits Seminary
Preistes.
which he makes upon S. Austins words be answered, or if any could convince
him either to have alleged any writer corruptly or to have quoted any place
guilfully, or to have charged any other falsely. But all this is fraudulently
done only to gain credit with the simple, and ignorant Reader of a sincere and
invincible challenger. For himself well knows how often that argument out of
S. Austin has been solued by Catholics, against which solution because Bell
cold not reply he would quite dissemble it. And his allegations of See S. Hilary
lib. ad Constant. S. Hierom cont. lucifer. vincent. lyrin. cont. hereses.
Authors is too too shamful as shall appear in the process of this answer.
Scripture he alleges but as the Devil did, when he brought it against our
Savior, corrupting either the words, or meaning. Fathers he brings but quite
against their will, and meaning and no marvel for he forbeareth not his
professed adversaries such as in our days have written against Protestants,
and will make them will they nil they turn Protestants, as he has done, and
like the spider suck poison out of sweet flowers. And I doubt nothing more,
then that if he find this answer to strong for him to impugn, he will either
proclaim me a Protestant as Daue of Recusancy. page 22.
his breethren do Bellarmin, or procure him self (as his Father Jewel did) to
be quit by proclamation, against my book. But Bell, if thou did mean
sincerely to repent if thou be convinced, remember whence thou Apoc. 13.
art fallen and do penance: or if thou intendest obstinatly to fight it out,
harken to S. Hierome, Hieron. apolog. cont. Ruffinum.
and take some shame becoming a man, if thou wilst have none belonging to a
Christian, and deal plainly, set down the Catholic doctrine truly, alleadg
Authors incorruptly, cite the places rightly, answer directly yea or no to
every thing objected, and then in Gods name verte omnes tete in facies and
contrahe A Eneid. 12.
quicquid, sieve animo sine art v^les: and I dare warrant thee, it shall be
answered.

But thee (my dear Countryman) seduced by Bell and such like, who walking in
craftines adulterate Gods word, for whose sake all this 2. Cor. 4. v. 2.
pain is taken, I beseech for Christ's sake, have some care of thy salvation,
consider how of late your Church service and discipline has been condemned by
more then Petition exhibited in April. 1603.
a thousand ministers of enormities, and abuses not agreeable to Scripture, and
want of uniformity of doctrine, al your English Bibles (the very foundation of
your faith) adjudged to be il translated, and some to contein very partial, See
Conference at Hampton Court.
untrue and seditious notes, and too much savoring of dangerous, and traitorous
conceits, and order taken to make a new translation. Alas page 45. 46. 47.
what certainty can you have of that religion, which more then a thousand of
your Ministers profess to have no uniformity of doctrine, and abuses contrary
to Scripture? what goodness can there be in that faith, which is builded of an
evil foundation, as by your own judgments your Bibles hitherto have been? yea
what faith at al can there be in this mean time, whiles the old Bibles are
condemned as naught, and a new not yet made? If these Ministers had once
deceived you in a money matter, you would beware how you trusted them again, and
will you believe them still, they having by their own confession, hitherto
deceived you both in your Church service, and Bible, commending the one to you
as divine service, and the other as Gods pure word, and now condemning them
both. Open your eyes for the passion of Christ, and seeing public conference
will not be granted, where we might lay open unto you the deceits of your
Ministers, help your selfs as well as you may, read with indifferency such books
as are written for this purpose, make earnest intercession to God to see the
truth, and grace to follow it when you have found it, which God of his goodness
grant. Farewell. 2. Februar: 1605.

Thy servant in Christ IESV S. R.

A TABLE OF THE ARTICLES AND CHAPTERS.
ARTICLE I. Of the Popes Superiority.
BELLS argument against the Popes superiority answered, diverse his untruths and
dissimulations therein discovered. Chapt. 1. The opinion of Protestants touching
Princes supremacy set down. Chapt. 2. The opinion of Protestants touching
deposition of Princes. Chapt. 3. The practice of Protestants touching
deposition of Princes. Chapt. 4. Bells proofs of his assumption against the
Popes superiority answered: Chapt. 5. Bells answer to an argument of Catholics
for the Popes superiority confuted: Chap. 6. Some of Bells slanderous untruths
disproued: Chapt. 7. Certain falls steps of a ladder which Bell imagines the
Pope had to clime to his superiority disproued: Chapt. 8. The rest of Bells falls
steps, and slanderous untruths in this article disproued: Chap. 9.
ARTICLE 2. Of the Mass.
Bells reason against the real presence of Christ in the B. Sacrament answered,
his untruth and dissimulation therein discovered: Chapt. 1. Authorities
alleged by Bell against the real presence answered: Chapt. 2. Mass proved,
Bells argument against it answered, and his manifold untruths therein disproued:
Chap. 3. The rest of Bells arguments against the Mass confuted: Chap. 4.
Berengarius his recantation explicated and S. Austins authority answered: Chap.
5. Bells imaginary contradictions in the Mass answered, and true contradictions
in his communion showed: Chap. 6.
ARTICLE III. Of the Popes Dispensations: Chapt. 1.

ARTICLE IIII. Of original concupiscence in the regenerate.
The Catholic doctrine touching concupiscence explicated and proved: Chap. 1.
Diverse untruths of Bell disproued, his arguments out of S. Paul against the
doctrine of the former Chapter answered: Chap. 2. Bells arguments out of S.
Austin touching concupiscence answered: Chap. 3. Bells arguments out of S.
Ambros, S. Bid, and S. Thomas touching concupiscence answered: Chap. 4.
ARTICLE V. Of the merit of good works.
Of the Protestanis enmity to good works, and friendship with evil: Chap. 1. Of
Bells positions touching good works: Chap. 2. The Catholics doctrine touching
merit particulerly set down and proved: Chapt. 3. Bells arguments out of
Scripture against condign merit answered: Chap. 4. Bells arguments out of holy
Fathers against condign merit answered: Chap. 5. Bells arguments out of late
Catholic writers against condign merit answered: Chap. 6.
ARTICLE VI. Of the distinction of mortal and venial sins.
The true distinction proved, and Bells objection answered: Chapt. 1. A text of
S. Ihon epist. 1. explicated: Chap. 2.
ARTICLE VII.
The Catholic doctrine touching sufficiency of Scripture propounded, and proved
certain untruths of Bell disproued: Chap. 1. Bells arguments out of the old
testament, concerning the sufficiency of Scripture answered: Chap. 2. Bells
arguments out of the new testament, touching sufficiency of Scripture answered:
Chap. 3. Bells arguments out of Fathers, touching sufficiency of Scripturs, and
Traditions answered. Chap. 4. Bells arguments out of late Catholic writers,
touching sufficiency of Traditions and Scripture answered: Chap. 5. Of the
difficulty or easynes of Scripture: Chap. 6. Of the vulgar peoples reading
Scripture: Chap. 7. Of the translation of Scripture into vulgar tongs: Chap. 8.
Of Apostolical Traditions whether there be any or none: Chap. 9. Of the
certainty of Apostolical Traditions: Chap. 10. Of the examination of
Traditions: Chap. 11. Bells arguments out of Fathers about the examination of
Traditions answered: Chap. 12. Of the authority of late general Councils: Chap.
13. Of the oath which Bishops use to make unto the Pope: Chapt. 14.
ARTICLE VIII. Of keeping Gods commandments.
The possibility of keeping Gods commandments explicated and proved out of
Scripture: Chap. 1. The possibility of keeping Gods commandments proved out of
Fathers and reason: Chap. 2. Bells arguments out of Scripture against the
possibility of keeping Gods commandments answered: Chapt. 3. Bells arguments
out of Fathers against the possibility of keeping Gods commandments answered:
Chapt. 4.

THE FIRST ARTICLE OF THE POPES SVPERIORITY.
CHAPT. I. Bells arguments against the Popes Superiority ansvvered, diverse his
untruths and dissimulations therein discovered.
BELL like a man in great choler and very desirous to encounter with his enemy
begins his challenge very abruptly and hastily, yet not forgetting his
scholerschip or ministry he gives the onset with a syllogism full charged
with untruths and dissimulacions. You Papists (says 3. Untruths. 2.
dissimulations.
he) tell us that the Pope is above al powers and potentates on earth, that he
can depose Kings and Emperors from their royal thrones and translate their
empires and regalities at his good will and pleasure: But this doctrine is false,
absurd, and nothing else but a mere fable: And conseqently Romish Religion
consists of mere falsehoods, fables and flat leasinges.

2. Not without cause (gentle Reader) has Bell proposed these bloody questions
of the Popes supremacy and deposition of Princes in his first article, and
placed them in the forefront of his battle, for he hops that they will be his
best bulwark and surest defense in the combat, and that in such lystes he
shall not fight alone, but assisted with the Princes sword, wherein he deals
with Catholics as Puritanes (which Conference at Hampton Court. page 82. 83.
his Majesty prudently observes) do with protestants, who because they
could not otherwise make their parts good against protestants, appeal to his
supremacy. And as the old Arians Ambr. epist. 32. victor lib. 1. de preste^.
vandol.
did, who evermore accused the Catholics as injurious to the Prince, which
they al learn of the Jews, who being unable to disprooue Christ's doctrine
endeavored to bring him into the compass of treason, and Matthew. 22. v. 17.
at last procured his death as enemy to Caesar. Wherefore ymitating the example
of our Savior, when the like question was propounded to seek his blood, I
answer Bell briefly. That what is Cesars, we ought to Luc. 20. v. 25.
give to Caesar, and what is Gods, to God, and what is Gods Vicars, to Gods
Vicar. Only because Bell in his said syllogism charge Catholics most
falsely, and withal dissembleth the opinion of protestants touching the
supremacy and deposition of Princes. I will disprove his untruths, and
discover his dissimulations; and afterward compare the opinion and practice of
Protestants and Catholics touching this matter together: whereby the
indifferent Reader may, by Bells evil and corrupt dealing in the very beginning
of his challenge take a taste of the rest of his proceedings. for, as Tertullian
says well, what truth do they Tertull. l. do praescript.
defend who begin it with lies?

3. I demand therefore of Bell who they are whom he chalengeth, to whom he
speaks, and whom he understands by, You Papists; Surely I suppose he
writes in English to none but such as understand English, whom in his preface
he terms English Iesuyts, Seminary Priests, and Iesuyted Papists. If these
(Master Bell) be they whom ye mean, I tell you in their name, that as your
proposition has two parts, viz. the Popes Superiority over al Princes and of
his power to depose them, so it contains three (to use your own term)
flat leasinges.

For though, concerning Christians, they believe the Pope to be spiritually
superior above al whatsoever according to Christ's words spoken to the first
Pope S. Peter, Matthew. 16. viz. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock vvil I
build my Church, and Io. 21. v. 17. Feed my sheep, which sheep contain and
include as well Christian Princes and potentates as subjects and underlings.
And, concerning infidels, they also believe that the Pope ought to be
spiritually above them, and they under him in that they be bound to be
Christians: nevertheless, until these be Christened, he is not actually their
superior: until they be made members of Christ's Church, he is not de facto
their head: until they be in Christ's fould, he is not their sheape heard. For,
as Bellarmin writes; Bellarm. lib. 5. de Romans Pont. c. 7. Bell p. 29. 125.
whose testimony (says Bell) is most sufficient in all Popisshe affairs,
Christ was above as well infidels as faithful; But to S. Peter he committed
only his sheep, that is the faithful. Wherefore S. Paul as not acknowledging
that he had any superiority or jurisdiction over infidels said, what belongs
it to me to judge of them that are without? 1. Cor. 5. And although the Pope
may preach him self or send others to preach to infidels without their
license, yet this argues no more but that the commission which he has from
God to preach the Ghospel unto al nations is independent of the infidels, and
that they ought to be under his jurisdiction. Wherefore until Bell do prove
that there are no powers or pote^^ates on earth which are infidels, I must
needs tell him that he untruly avouches us to say that the Pope is spiritually
above al powers and potentates on earth.

4. And much less did we ever tell you that the Pope has temporal superiority
over al Princes on earth, but teach the quite contrary with, Walden,
Bellarmin, and Walden. tom. 1. lib. 2. art. 3. c. 78. Bellarm. lib. 5. de Romans
Pont. c. 4. Gelas. 1. de vincul. Anathematis. Nicol. 1. de 96. Can. cum ad
verum.
others. For as two most ancient Popes, Gelasius 1. and Nicolaus 1. taught us,
the Pope by his Pontifical dignity chalengeth neither royal soueraignity, nor
imperial name. But what royalties he has either in the Popedom or else where,
he chalengeth by the gift of Christian Princes whereof. Some (as your self
confess) have yielded Page 17.
up their sovereign rights, unto him. And what superiority we think him to
have over Christian Princes, he should have though he were not Lord of one
foot of land, but as poor, as he that said Math. 19. v. 27 Behold we have
forsaken al. For his S. Matthew
Papal superiority and authority is not temporal or of this world, nor the
weapones of his warfare carnal, but (as S. Paul speaks) S. Paul. 2. Cor. 10.
mighty to God, unto the destruction of munitious destroying Counsels, and al
loftines extolling it self against the knowledge of God, and having in
readiness to revenge al disobedience. Whereupon P. Innocent. Cap. per venerab.
extra qui filij su^^ legitimi.
3. professes that the Pope has full power in temporal matters, only in the
Popedom, and that Kings acknowledge no superior in temporal affairs. And this
also teach S. Ambros de Apol. David c. 4. and 10 Gloss. S. Ambros. tom. 4.
Lyra in psalm. 50. and others. By which it appears how much he is abused who
is made to believe, That the Pope present, challenges an imperial civil power
over Kings, and Emperors, or that English Papists do attribute unto him any
such power. For neither does Paulus 5. challeng more authority, then Innocent 3
did, not English Papists attribute unto him other authority over Kings then
spiritual. But do with tongue, and heart, and with the Popes good liking profess:
That our Sovereign Lord King James has no superior on earth in temporal
matters. If Bell reply that some Canonists have affirmed the Pope to be temporal
Lord over the world, let him challeng them and not like a wise man strike his
next sellows the English Papists, who mantayne no such opinion.

5. The second part of his Proposition touching the Popes deposition of
Princes page 1. 4. 17.
at his pleasure, though he repeat it thrice is most untrue. For no
Catholics, English or strangers, teach that the Pope can depose Princes but
for just causes, yea ordinarily (says Bellarmin) not for just causes, but when
Bellarm. lib. 5. de Romans Pontif. c. 6.
it is necessary for the saving of souls. And surely otherwise Princes should be
but his tenants at will, and he have more power over them, then they have over
their subjects* which is far from al Catholics imaginations, let us see
therefore how Bell proves us to teach Bell p. 1.
this doctrine.

6. Because (says he) Bellarmin sets it down Bellarm. de Romans Pontif. lib.
5. c. 7.
in these words, If therefore any Prince, of a sheep or a ram become a wolf,
that is to say, of a Christian be made an heretic, then the Pastor of the
Church 4. untruth.
may drive him away ly excommunication, and withal command the people not to
obey him, and therefore deprive him of his dominion over his subjects. Behold
(good Reader) the forsaid untruths proved with an other. Because Bellarmin
calls the Pope Pastor of the Church, Bell avouches him to think the Pope to
be above al Princes, and Potentates on earth; as if there were no Princes
infidels, or out of the Church: and because he teaches that the Pope may
excommunicate, and depose Princes for Heresy, that he may depose them at his
pleasure, as if matters of Heresy (which is one of the greatest sins that is)
were the Popes pleasure. An indifferent reader would rather have inferred, that
because the Pope is Pastor of the Church, he is not above any infidel, Prince,
or subject; which Bellarmin teaches in Bellarmin.
express words in the same book c. 2. etc. 4. And because he can not
excommunicate, so neither depose Princes for his pleasure, which Bellarmin
every where supposes, yea in the same book c. 6. avouches. That ordinarily he
can not depose Princes even for just causes.

7. But let us hear Bell disprove him self; Anatomy of Popish tyrany in the
Caveat to the Reader and lib. 2. cap. 4.. 10. etc. 9. 1. Contradiction.
Secular Priests (says he) write plainly and resolutly that the Pope has no
power to deprive Kings of their royal Scepters, and regalities, nor to give
away their Kingdoms to an other. In which opinion likewise the French Papists
do concur, and iump with them. Item. The Seculars, although they acknowledge
the Popes power supereminent in Spiritualibus yet do they disclaim from it in
temporalibus when he takes upon him to depose Kings from their empires and
translate their Kingdoms. And least we should think these few Priests, who
wrote so, were no Papists, Bell him self testifies that they are the Popes
dear Vassals and profess the self same religion with Epistle to the King.
other Catholics.

8. The third untruth contained in the proposition is that we teach the
doctrine of his proposition as a point of our faith: whereupon he infers in
his conclusion, our religion and faith to be false. Because we teach no such
doctrine at al and much less as a point of our religion or faith. And the
grauest and best learned amongst Catholics attribute to the Pope only
spiritual superiority over Princes, and power to depose them in that case
wherein our Savior said Math. 18. that it were better for a man to be cast into
the sea then to live, to wit, when they so scandalize others as their
deposition is necessary for the salvation of souls as I have already showed
out af Bellarmin, Bell. parag. 29.
whose testimony in this matter Bell can not refuse seeing he calls him the
mouth of Papists and avouches his doctrine to be the Popes own doctrine. And
this doctrine good Christian Princes account no more prejudicial or injurious to
their estates, then they do the like doctrine of S. Paul 2. Cor. 10. where he
professes him self to have power to destroy al loftines extolling it self
against the knowledge of God, and to be ready to punish al disobedience.

9. Wherefore, to requite Bell with a syllogism like unto his own, I argue
thus: you Bell tell us that we Papists say, the Pope is above al powers and
potentates on earth, that he can depose Kings and Emperors, and translate
their empiers at his good will and pleasure, But this your tale is a very tale
false, absurd, and nothing else but a mere fable: and consequently your late
challenge consists of mere falsehoods fables and flat leasings. The
proposition is your own words, the truth of the assumption appears by my
answer to your argument. And thus much touching Bells untruths uttered in his
proposition and proof thereof, now let us come to his dissemblinge.

CHAP. II. The opinion of protestants touching Princes Supremacy, set down.
LVTHER an Evangelist (as he terms him self, or as other account him,
Luther. lib. cont. stat eccles. in prologo, and in glossa cont. decreta Caesar.
Ex Sur. An. 1531. 1539. Pope of Recusamy p. 31. 32. Magdeburg. praefat. Centur.
7. Calvin in c. 7. Amos.
an Apostle, a prophet, a third Elias, a beginner of protestantisme, in his
book of secular power condemns those Princes, who prescribe laws to their
subjects in matter belonging to faith and the Church. Magdeburgians his first,
and cheifest childeren write thus. Let not Magistrates be heads of the Church,
because this Supremacy agrees not to them. Calvin says, they were blasphemers
who attributed the supremacy, to King Henry 8. And lest we should think that
only forayne Protestants are of this opinion. Antony Gilby in his admonition to
England and Scotland Gilby.
calls King Henry a monstrous bore for taking the supremacy, that he
displaced Christ, was no better then the Romish Antichrist, made him self a
God. And lately Willet contract. 791. part. 1. and 3. p. 269. 270.
Willet avouches. That Bishops and Pastors have a spiritual charge over Kings,
and that Kings ought to yield obedience to those that have oversight of their
souls. That Heathen Princes had the same power, and authority in the Church
which Christian Princes have, and yet soon after affirms. That heathen
Princes cold not be heads of the Church, that is to have the Souereingty of
external government Again. That the King is nether mistical nor ministerial
head of the Church, that the name of head is improperly given to the Prince,
and if any think it to great Kings not so much is ministerial heads of the
Church by willet.
a name for any mortal man we will not (says he) greatly contend about it. So
we see he denies both name, and authority of the head of the Church to Kings.

2. And his Majesty perceived that Reanolds, and his fellows aimed at a
Scottish Presbitry (which agrees with a Monarch, Conference p. 82 83.
as well as God, and the devil page 79.) and acknowledged his supremacy only to
make their parts good with Bishops, as Knox and his fellow ministers in
Scotland made his grandmother head of the Church thereby to pull down the
Catholic Bishops. Yea that the whole English Clergy is in their hearts of the
same opinion, appears by their open profession to agree in religion with
forayne Protestants, who plainly deny the supremicy of Princes: by their
writing and Apologia page 28.
teaching, that Christ alone can behead of the Church: by their condemning
Catholics for attributing such authority to man: and finally by their
Synodical explication of the article of supremacy: which they expound thus.
That Princes should rule al estates Lib. 39. Artic. art. 37.
and degrees committed to their charge by God whether they be Ecclesiastical,
or temporal, and restrain with the civil sword the stubborn, and evil doers,
wherein we see no power in Ecclesiastical causes granted to Princes, but only,
over Ecclesiastical persons. And we deny not that Princes have any power over
Ecclesiastical persons, yea in the very canon of the Mass, as priests pray for
Papa nostro N. and Antistite nostro N. for our Pope and Bishop, so they pray
for Rege nostro N. acknowledging the one to be their King as the others to be
their Prelates, and consequently both to have power over them. For as S.
Augustine said, and it is evident, Rex a Augustine in Psalm. 44. and 67.
regendo dicitur, a King is so called of power to govern. And as
ecclesiastical persons be civil or politic members of the common wealth.
wherein they live, so have they See Stapelton relectione Controuersiae 2. q. 1.
a. 1. ad 2. Victoria relectione de potesta. ecclesiastica sect. 7.
the same politic or civil head which that commonwealth has: for otherwise
either civil members should have no civil head at al, which were monstrous, or
not be under the head of that body, whereof they be members, but only under a
civil head of an other body, which is impossible. Wherefore, what some say that
Clergy men be exempted from the power of Princes, is not to be understood
universally but of their coactiue power which they have to punish the laity.
And of late Bilson Superintendent of Winton confessed to certain Catholics,
(if I be not misinformed) that the King is but a ceremonial head, that is
either a head only for fasshion sake, or only in matters of ceremonies, not
in all ecclesiastical causes. And albeit they subscribe Supplicat. to the King
in April 1603.
to the supremacy, yet perhaps they do that only in respect of time, as a
thousand ministers testify, that diverse of them did to the communion book,
some upon protestation, some upon exposition, some with condition, albeit it
contained (as they say) enormities, and abuses not agreeable to Scriptures,
rather (forsooth) then the Church should be deprived of their labors, but in
deed rather then they should be deprived of the Churches lyuings.

3. The true difference therefore betwixt Catholics and English Protestants
(if these durst utter their minds as strangers do) would not be, whether the
Prince or Pope, but whether the Pope or ministers ought to be head of the
Church, wherein I appeal to any indifferent man's judgment, whether be more
agreeable to Gods word, that the successor of S. Peter, upon Matthew. 16. Joan.
21.
whom Christ built his church and committed his sheep unto, should be head of
the Church, or they who are successors to none but beginners of them selves,
who (as S. Ciprian writes) no man creating them Cyprian. lib. de simpl.
praelat.
Bishopes, made them selves Bishopes. And wether be more secure to Princes that
he should be accounted head of Gods Church Constant. in edicto Constant. 5.
Phocas. Justinian. C. de summa Trinit. l. vlt. Valentinianus epist. ad
Theodosisi. See cap. 6. parag. 6. 7. Conference p. 79. 4. and 20.
whom the whole Christian world has ever acknowledged for such, and under
Whom the mightiest Monarchs have and do live as securely as any Protestant
Prince whatsoever; or they, who if they were permitted would erect such a
Presbitrie, as agrees with a Monarchy no better then the devil with God, who
have kept Kings without state and honor etc. and of whom some beardles boys
have braued Kings to their faces, and excommunicated them when they came within
there parish.

CHAP. III. The opinion of Protestants touching deposition of Princes.
LIKEWISE touching the deposition Germany. Luther. See Surius An. 1525.
Prodromu^ Staphil. p. 75.
of Princes, Luther as Sleidan testifies wrote to Princes: That subjects
neither cold, nor would, nor ought any longer, to suffer there government. And
benig asked his opinion touching the league of Protestans against their Emperor
Charles 5. answered. Because at this time so Sleidon l. 8. Sur. An. 1531.
doubtful, and perilous, many things may hapen, that not only right it self,
but necessity of consience may reach us weapons, we may make league for
defense, whither the Emperor him self, or any other make war. And a little
before his death said; Who Sur. An. 1546.
taks not arms whils he may, uses not things given him by God. And the
Protestant Princes in their rebellion against the Emperor, set forh
Proclamation wherein they write; Because the Emperor endeauoreth to dostroy
religion and Sleidon l. ^^.
liberty, he gives us cause to assail him with good conscience And again we
renounce (o Emperor) lib. 17.
the faith and duty vvherwith we are bound unto thee. This did German
Protestants.

2. In Swiserland Zwinglius teaches us. Svviserland. Zvvingl. to. 1. art. 42.
That when the King shall deal perfidiously and beside the rule of Christ, he
may in Gods name be deposed. Again VVhiles naughty Kings are not deposed the
whole people is punished of God. And as for the Protestants of Sweueland their
opinion Svveuela^d.
is manifest by their excluding the Catholic King of Pola^d from succeding
his Mercur. Gallobelg. An. 1603. Holland.
late father: And the Holandish Protestants wholly, or chiefly defend their long
rebellion against their Prince by coolor of religion. France. Calvin. in epist.
ante lib. institut.


3. In France Calvin their Arch-maister teaches that who reigns not to serve
Gods glory, rules not but plays the thief. And in an other place. Earthly
Princes depose them In cap. 6. Daniel.
selves whyls they rise against God, yea are unworthy to be accounted men. And
his scholar Beza accounts them Martyrs who dyed Beza in Praefat. Bibl. 1564.
Pantaleon. Responsum trium ordinum Burgu^diae 1563. Michael Fabritius ep. de
Beza fall. 62. Goodly Canons of Ministers. Protestants sworn to rebel and
depose Princes.
in batel against their King for religion, and at Cabilon in France 20.
Ministers in a Synod decreed to distroy the Church, Nobility, and Magistrates.
And again at Berna 1572. set forth Canons of this matter and decreed Can. 3.
That in every City al swore that they and their posterity shall observe firm
and inuiolated the points following. Can. 40. Until it shall please God in whose
hands are the hearts of Kings to change the heart of the French tyrant, and
restore the state of the Kingdom to better order, and raise up some neighbor
Prince, whom we may know by his virtue and notable marks to be the deliverer of
this miserable people, in the mean time every City shall choose a mayor to
govern them as well in war as peace Can. 40. Let all the Captains and leaders
have this axiom, as an undoubted and most certain Oracle, never to trust to
them (the King and his) who so often, and so notoriously have broken their
promise, the public peace and quietness. Nor ever let them lay down weapons,
as long as they shall see them persecute the doctrine of salvation, and the
disciples of the same. Item But if the evil be incurable, if Gods will be to
root them (natural Princes) out, then if it please God to raise some Christian
Prince to take revenge of their sins, and deliver his people, let them
subject them selves to that Prince, as to an other Cyrus sent to them from God.
In the mean space let them govern them selves by these rules which we have
prescribed unto them as laws. Behold the verdit of French ministers assembled
in Council. O if such rules had been made in Seminaries, what traitors and
rebels had the authors been? What exclamations would Bell and his fellow
ministers have made against them?

4. In Scotland Knox utters his, and Scotland.
his fellow ministers mind herein, in his appellation to the nobility and
people of Scotland. Knox. p: 36.
That I may say bouldly, the nobility, gouerners, judges, and people of England
ought not Protestants bond to kill Princes by Knox.
only to resist, and withstand. Mary Iezabel, whom they call their Queen, but
also put to death her, her Priests, and al others that aided her, as soon as
openly they began to suppress Christ's Gospel. And he sets down titles of
books which he would after publish, whereof the p: 78.
third is this. If the people have rashly preferred one manifestly wicked, or
ignora^tly chosen, such a one, who afterward shows him self unworthy of
government over Christian people (for such are al Idolaters and cruel
persecutors) the same people may most justly depose, and punish him.

5. Finally in England if we had asked England.
our ministers of what mind they were, while the Septer and sword was in
Catholic hands. Goodman in his book entitled Goodman c. 9. p. 118.
how we ought to obey superior Magistrates, tells us: But if they (Prince and
Magistrates do boldly transgress Gods laws, and See Couel of Church
government. cap. 4 p. 35. how this doctrine vas Caluins and the learn l^st
Protestants of that time. c. 13. p. 180. 181. 184.
command the same to others, then have they lost that honor, and obedience
which otherwise subjects were bound to give them, nor are hereafter to be
accounted Magistrates, but to be punished as private men. But who must punish
them? he answers the common people. If the Prince and al Magistrates do resist
Gods law, you people have express testimony of Gods word for your part, and
God him self will be your Captain, and leader, who commands not only Peers,
and Magistrates to take every evil from them selves, whither idolatry, blasphemy
or open injury, but requires this of the whole multitude to whom the svvord
of justice is in part committed. Wherefore if al Magistrates together vvil
despise justice and Gods laws, it is your part (o common people) to defend
and conserve them with as much violence and strife as you can against
Magistrates, and al others. For this God requires of you. Exodus: 17. this burden
lies upon the whole people to punish every idolater whatsoever none is
excepted, vvhither Princes must be hanged according to Goodman.
King, Queen, or Emperor. And a little after That fact is recounted number 25,
it is a perpetual example for all eternity, and a certain and sure denouncement
to the people that in like reuoult from the worship of God, they do carry to
the gallous, and hang their governors, who lead them from God.

6. And in particular touching Wyats rebellion l. 14 p. 203.
he says. None but Papists can accuse Wyatt of treason, or disobedience, it
was the duty of Protestants duty to rebel according to Goodman.
Wyatt and al others that amongst you profess Cbrists Gospel, to take in hand
that war, and they were true traitors, who either kept not promise to him,
or aided not his part. O most noble Wyatt thou now live with God, and these
noble men who dyed with thee in that cause. Yea noble men and Counselors
Traiters who do not rebel according to Goodman.
did not you condemn your selves as manifest and base minded traitors not only
to Wyatt, but even to God him self? O Gospellers is this the love of Gods
word you pretend, have you so learned the Gospel?

7. And albeit ministers having now gotten the Prince on their side, do in
words condemn Goodman, yet that their mind abhors not from this opinion,
may appear by the partial, virtue and seditions notes, and to much fauoringe
of dangerous, and traiterous conceits Conference p. 47.
as of allowing disobedience to Kings, and taxing Asa for deposing his mother,
and not killing her which his Majesty observed in their English Bybles, And
thus I hope the Reader sees that Bell had little cause to charge Papists alone
with deposition of Princes, but much better will he see it, if we compare
Papists and Protestants opinions herein together.

8. Catholics say, Kings may be deposed, Knox Good man. sup:
Protestants say, they may be deposed and hanged: Catholics say, it should be
Lateran ^3. c. 3. de Haer^: Knox sup:
respit: Proetstants say, so soon as they begin to suppress Christ's Gospel:
Catholics Goodman. sup:
be done by common people the Kings own subjects, who as common people rashly
and headely, and as subjects insolently and passionatly, are like to behave
them selves in controuling and correcting their Prince^ as the lamentable
examples herefter touched can testify. Besides what Catholics say of Note
this in differency of Catholics and partiality of Protestants.
an heretical Prince. they defend under a Catholic. Whereas Protestants
change their tune according as the Prince favors or disfauoreth their
religion. Now let us see the practice of Protestants.

CHAP. IIII. The practice of Protestants touching deposition of Princes
CONFORMABLE to their doctrine have been the practices of Protestants. For in
Germany under pretense of religion, Germany.
first the common people being Protestants Sleidon. l. 4. 17. 19. Sur: An:
1522. 1525.
rose against the nobles, in which insurrection there were an hundred thousand
of the common people slain, many castles and towares spoiled, and burnt. And
soon Sur: An: 1530. 1534.
after the nobles rose against their Emperor, gathered an army of eighty
thousand foot, Apud Sleid. Et sur: 1526.
ten thousand horse, and 130. feeld pieces. And George Duke of Saxony wrote to
Luther, that there was never more rebellions against Magistrates then through
his Gospel: Erasmus l. 3. de lib: arbit:
And Erasmus a holy Confessor in Foxes calender, gives this testimony of them.
Many disciples of Luther are so unapt to public quiet, as the Turk is said to
detest the name of Luthereans for sedition: Testimonium hoc verum est?

2. In Swiserland Zwinglius together Svviserland. Sur. An: 1531.
with Protestantisme sowed sedition, and brought his country to three pitched
battles in one month, and was him self slain in one of them. In Denmark
Protestantisme Denmark.
was no sooner settled, then the Commons Staphil. apol. art. 3.
rose against the nobles and the nobles against their King, whom they deposed,
and after Sur. An. 1532.
long banishment cast into prison, whereas it is reported they poysned him. In
Sweuland Svveuland. Mercur. Gallobelg. An. 1603.
the Protestants have lately excluded their natural, lawful, and crowned
Prince, the present King of Pole-land, and chosen his uncle. In Flanders, they
elected Francis Holland.
Duke of Alanson for their Prince, and have deprived two of their lawful
Princes, from a great part of the Low countries, and made war against them
almost 40. years.

3. In France Protestants have rebelled France.
against three of their natural and anointed Kings, Francis 2: Charles. 9.
Henry 3. they Genebrard. chron. Sur. An. 1563. Furores Gallici. Michael
Fabritius in epist. de Beza.
took by treason, or force, many of their cheifest cities, Roane, Orleans,
Lions and others, made league with the enemies of France, and given towns into
their hands, they have levied great armies of subjects, brought in great bands
of Strangers, and fought four main battles against their King, they deposed
their King and chose an other, and coined money in his name with title of the
first Christian King of France, They Sur. An: 1560.
opened the tombs of two of their Kings and burnt their bones. They conspired
to murder the King and two Queens, his wife and his mother, with his brethren
and nobility, and had executed their designments, if they had not been
prevented by their massacre. They slew the King of Nauar, Father to the
Fabritius sup. fol. 61. 66.
French King now regnant. And their horrible outrages in all kind of
dishonesties cru^^ties, and Sacrileges are unspeakable.

4. In Scotland the Protestants first took Scotland.
arm against the Queen dawager, Grand Sur. An. 1560.
mother to his Majesty, then regent of Scotland, and by their rebellions, and
tumults hastened her death, which his Majesty great Conference p. 81.
ly lamented in the conference. Likewise after infinite indignities, and perils
they drive Queen Mary of blessed memory his Majesty's Mother, their natural
and lawful Prince o^^ of her kingdom, and country, forced her to surrender her
crown and Scepter to a bastard, murdered her husband his Maiestes Father, and
thereof infamed her wrongfully (as was proved at her judgment in England) had
murdered both her self and his Majesty then in her womb, if a charged pistole
put to her womb would have given fire. And at last by Protestants she was put
to death against law of nations, And his Majesty confesses of him self that
in Scotland he was a King without state, without Conser. p. 4. and 20.
honor, without order, where beardles boys would brave him to his face, and
keept for the most part as a ward. And in what present danger he was of being
murdered by the Protestant Earl Gowry and his brethren, no man is ignorant.
And otherwhere graciously acknowlegeth, Basilicon doron.
That he found none more faithfil to him self, then such as had been faithful
to his mother (who were Papists) and them he fo^nd faithles to him self, who
had been such to his mother: and an honorable person yet liuin^ and Q. Elizab.
words and confidence of Catholics.
worthy of credit, and hard it, can testify that Queen Eelizabeth did
often^ymes say to my Lord Mou^tague a famous Catholic of worthy memory. That
if she ^el into danger, she would sooner put her life into his hands, and
others of his profession, the^ of any other subject she had. And if Queen
Elizabeth (though she were far more severe toward her Catholic subjects th^n
al Protestant Princes together have hi^erto been toward theirs) did
nevertheless put more affiance and trust in them, even after she had been
deposed of the Pope, then in any Protestant, what assurance may that Prince His
Majesty's speech to the Parliament 19 Mart. 1603. England.
have of the loyalty and fidelity of Catholics, who has used great lenity
toward them, and nether is, nor like to be deposed of the Pope.

5. Finally in England Protestants rebelled twice, and that in one year
against their Queen Mary; once under the conduct of the Dukes of
Northumberland, and Suffolk, erecting a false Queen, and so excluding as much
as lay in them, the Succession of his Majesty. And again under wyat, and at
both times she was defended by Catholics. The things I rather touch then
relate, because they are fresh in memory of many, or to be found in many
histories.

6. Now let us compare the practice of Protestants and Catholics practice
compared. 1 Carolus 5. 2 Francis 2. 3 Carolus 9. 4 Henricus 3. 5 Philippus 2. 6
Philippus 3. 7 Christiernus. 8 Sigismundus. 9 Maria Ang. 10 Maria Scot.
Protestants touching the deposition of Princes, with the practice of the Pope,
since the time that Protestants began. They have within this 70. years partly
deposed partly attempted, as far as lay in their power, one Emperor, three
French Kings, two Kings of Spain, one of Denmark, one of Pole-land, one
Queen of England, and one of Scotland. They have slain one King of Nauar, one
of Denmark, one Queen of Scotland, one Queens husband, and burnt the bodies
of two other Kings, and attempted to murder one French King, two French
Queens, and one King of Scotland. Whereas the Popes never slew any Prince at
al, but have saved the lives, and kingdoms of many, and since Protestants
began, have deposed one only King Henry 8. and one Queen Elizabeth and spared
both King Edward, the 6 and many Kings of De^mark, and Swe^land, besides a great
number of German Princes. And his Majesty is so far from danger of being
deposed by him, as he has already censueed See D. Giffords commission and
Mons. Bethunes letters. Proclamation 22. Februar. anno 1. Note this.
al those that moleste, or disturb his majesty; and his majesty, gratefully
acknowledges him self beholden to the Pope for his temporal carriage, and
diverse kind offices toward him, even then when there was less cause of such
kindness, then now is. Yea which is a point worthy of consideration. Never did
any Pope depose any King, or Prince merely for not professing the Catholic
religion, if he had not before embraced it; If any object, that the Pope has
beside King Henry, and Queen Elizabeth deposed the present French King, I
answer that it was before he had the Crown of France, and was only titulo
tenus King of Nauar; besides that the Pope upon his amendment has both restored
him to his dignity, and showed him many great, and extraordinary fouors. And
thus much of Bells dissembling the opinion, and practice of Protestants,
touching the Supremacy or deposition of Princes. Now let us come to his proofs
of his Assumption.

CHAP. V. Bells proofs of his Assumption answered.
BELLS proofs of his Assumption. I might let pass, as nothing pertaining to
us, seeing we teach no such doctrine as he therein affirms to be false:
Nevertheless because the Reader may judge, whither he be a more fond disputor or
false reportor, I will set them down and answer them severally. His first
proof is out of their famous Bell p. 2.
(says he) Pope Gregory the great lib: 2. epist. 61. where writing to the
Emperor Mauritius, he calls him. Sovereign Lord, and professes him self
subject to his command, and to owe him obedience. Whereupon Bell infers that
for 600. years after Christ, Popes lived under Emperors in all dutiful
obedience, that is (as he understands) in all causes Ecclesiastical and civil.

2. Mark (good Reader) how many and how gross errors he commits in this
one silly proof. First he shows small skill in choosing Authors for his
purpose, because none make more against him in this matter then S. Gregory. For
he is the first P. whom we find to have made a flat decree touching the
deposition of Princes in these words. If any King, Prelat, Judge, or seculer
person lib. 12. epist. vlt. lib. 11. epist. 10.
of what degree or highness soever (do violate the privileges of S. Medards
monastery) let him be deposed. And upon the 4. al: 5. poenit: psalm he writes
that no reason allows him to be King who alienateth men from Christ and
enthralleth his Church: and sharply inueigheth against the Emp: for usurping
right of earthly power over the Church of Rome, which he calls the head of al
Churches and Lady of Nations, and tells him that it were better for him to
acknowledge her his Lady, and submit him self to her according to the example
of godly Princes.

3. And as for the place which Bell cites In this suggestion I speak not as
Bishop, nor as subject, by reason of the common wealth, but by private right of
my own, because you have been my Lord since that time when as yet you were not
Lord of al. And therefore by the foresaid words he means no otherwise, then a
loving servant does, when upon courtesy to his old Master though he have left
him, yet he still calls him Master, and offers him self and his service at
his command. His second error was, in inferring upon the bare words of one P.
speaking of him self alone, not only his dutiful obedience, but also of al
his Predecessors for 600. years together. He would epsy his error, if I should
infer the same o^ al. S. Greg: his successors for 600. years after him. And
though every English Priest do call his Majesty Sovereign Lord, profess them
selves subject to his command, and to owe him obedience, as far as Bell can
show that ever S. Gregory did to the Emp: yet will he not suffer me to infer
that they live in all dutiful obedience to their Prince, but will condemn them
al of high treason. For with him (as of old with Donatists) Quod volumus
Sanctum est.

4. His 3. error is, in granting that Popes Contradict. Gelas. epist. ad
Anastas. Theodoret. lib. 5. cap. 18. Sozom. l. 7. c. 24. Paulin. in vit.
Ambros. Lib. cont. Gentil. Eusebius. lib. 6. c. 26. Niceph. lib. 13. c 39. Gelas.
d. 96. con. Duo sunt. Georg. Patriarcha in vit. Chrysostom. Symach. ep. ad
Anastas. Stapleto. de Eccl. Romans Platina i^ Gelasio.
for 600. years after Christ, lived in all dutiful obedience to Emperors,
wherein he quite overthrows what he meant to prove in this Article. For if
that be true, he can not think that to excommunicate or depose Princes upon
great causes, is against the duty of Popes. Because (to omit S. Ambrose his
exco^municating of the Emperors Theodosius and Maximus, and S. Babilas his
exco^municating an other Emp: whom he drove (says S. Chrisost) out of the
Church as if he had been a base slave and of no account) no fewer then five or
six Popes have excommunicated their Emperors in that time. As S. Fabian
excommunicated Phillip the first Christian Emperor S. Innocent 1. the Emperors
Arcadius and Eudoxia, P. Symachus and P. Anastasius, and (as some say) P.
Gelasius excommunicated the Emperor Anastasius, and P. Vigil Baron. An. ^84.
Contradict.
the Empress Theodora. And S. Gregory him self proceeded further (as you
heard) even to depose Princes. Moreover Bell Writes p: 8. that Barbarians
possessed al Italy from the year 471. until Charles the great 801. How then
says he here that Popes lived under Emperors until 603.

5. His fourth error is in confessing S. Gregory the great to be ours, that is,
a Papist, whereupon follow many things to his utter confusion. First that the
old Rom, religion (for I hope what is above a 1000. years old is old) which
him self p: 83. confesses to be Catholic, sound, and pure, is Papistical.
2. That the first Christian religion which our English Anceitours (having been
ever before bondslaues (says S. Bedal. 2. c. 1. of Idols) received from S.
Gregory by his legate S. Austin, was Papistical. 3. That al Christendom was in
S. Gregory's time, Papistical, because it communicated with him in faith and
religion as is evident by his Epistles written to al parts of Christendom.
Thus we see this man's small wit in proving his untruths: Now let us see his
good will.

6. Very loath he is to grant the Pope the Bell page 3. S. Ignat. ep. ad Mariam
Cassab.
name of Pope, which Saints, Councels, Princes, Catholics, and Schismatiks
have ever given him. Bishops of Rome (says he) S. Justin. ep. ad zenam and
seren. S. Aug. epist. 92. 95. 261. S. Hiero. ep. ad Damas. Amb. ep. 81*
Vince^t. cont haeres. liberatus in breuiar. cap. 22. Council. Calcedon. as. 16.
Carthag. and Mileuil. apud August. ep. 90. and 92. Epirot. ep. ad Hermis.
Constantin. in edicto. Galli Placidici epist. ad Pulcheriam Choniatas. Vide
epist. trium Council. Africon. ad Damas. to. 1. Camil. Protestants call us
Papists of the Pope and yet vvil not call him Pope. Victor de persecut.
va^dalica. lib. 1. Bell p. 3. Gregor. Turon. de glor. mart. cap. 25. 30. and 79.
now called Popes. And when not Sir? did not S. Ignatius who lived in the
Apostles time call S. Anaclerus Pope? did not also S. Justin even as the
Magdeburgians confess? did not S. Austin, S. Hierome, S. Ambrose, Vincent:
Lirin: and others above a thousand years a go? did not the Council of
Calcedon, of Carthage, of Mileui of Epirus? do not the Gretians call the Bishop
of Rome Pope. Was he not always called Pope as well in England as in all
Christendom else until the 26. year of Henry 8. when having reuoulted from
the Popes obedience, he commanded this name to be razed out of al writings
calendaties, and Holy Doctors whatsoever.

7. And a maruailous thing it is to consider the contradictious spirit of
Protestants. They will call us nothing but Papists (as Arians called Catholic
Romans) and our religion Popish, which are bynames invented of them selves, and
derived from the name of Pope; and yet will they not call him Pope, which has
been his name ever since the Apostles time. And thus much touching Bells proof
of his Assumption out of S. Gregory.

8. Next he alleges S. Ambrose saying David being King was subject to no
human law. But (besides that the word (human) is not in that place) S. Ambrose
freeth Kings only Bonus impetator intra non supra ecclesia^ est. Ambr. epist.
32. Theodoret. lib. 5. cap. 18. Sozomen. l. 7. c. 24. Paulin. in vita Ambros.
Ruffin. lib. 1. c. 2. Theodoret. lib. 4. cap. 5.
from penalty of civil or temporal laws. For how subject he thought them to be
to Ecclesiastical laws, appears by his excommunicating the Emperors
Thodosius, and Maximus; beside that Constantin and Valentinian professed them
selves to be under Bishops. And doubtless the human laws enacted by the
Apostles Act: 15. v. 18. and 1. Cor: 7. v. 12. exempted no more Princes then
private persons; S Hierome, Bell affirms to teach the same that S. Ambrose: but
neither alleges his words, nor quoteth either book, or chapter, perhaps
because he made less show for him.

9. Euthimius he cites because he writes. Bell p. 3. Euthym. in Psalm. 50.
Glossa ordin. and lyra in Psalm. 50. S. Thom. 2. ^. q. 12. art. 2.
That David as a King had God only judge over his sins. But he means of a
temporal judge as do also the Gloss, and lita cited by him. And though S.
Thomas prove of set purpose. That the Pope may depose Princes, yet is not Bell
ashamed to cite him because he says 1. 2. q. 96. art. 5. That a King is not
subject to compulsion of his own laws. As if therefore he were subject to no
law. Hereafter the Reader need not maruail to see Bell citing Scriptures, and
Fathers for his purpose, seeing he abstayneth not from his professed
adversaries. For with him al is fish that comes to net, and as little make the
one for him, as the other. Lastly he cites Hugo Card: writing. That God alone
is above al Hugo Card. in psalm. 50. cap. 1.
Kings. But this is meant in temporalibus as before we cited out of Innocent. 3.

10. After these proofs of his Assumption Bell p. 4. 5.
Bell hudleth up six untruths together saying. The good Kings Iosue, David,
Solomon, Untruths 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10.
Iosaphat, Ezechias, and Josias knew right well they had authority above al
Priests: and therefore took upon them not only to command and control them;
but also to depose even the high Priests them selves. For proof of these
untruths he refers us to his Golden Balance, and I refer him for
confutation of them, to Doctor Stapletons Conterblast against Horns vain
blast, and his Relection con: 2. q: 5: ar. 1. Only I say that Iosue was no
King, nor the Scripture affords any color of saying that any high Priest was
deposed by any of the said Kings, except Abiathar by Solomon 3. reg: c. 2: v.
35. et. 27. And yet (as it is gathered out of the 3. Reg. 4. v. 4.
4. chapter where he is accounted Priest in Salomons reign) Solomon deposed
him not, but only for a time confyned him to his house for his conspiracy with
Adonias, and so debarred him from executing his Priestly function. And though
he had deposed him he had not done it as King, but as Prophet fulfilling as the
Scripture testifyeth the Prophisy against the house of 3. Reg. 2. v. 27.
Hely, from whence Abiathar descended. And this is al which Bell obiecteth
against the Popes superiority over Princes Now let us see how he answers one
objection of Catholic in answers whereof he spends the rest of this article.

CHAP. VI. Bells answer to an argument of Catholics for the Popes authority,
confuted.
BELL for better satisfaction (as he says) Bell p. 5.
of the vulgar sort propounds one objection of Catholics, but yet so
nakedly, and without al form or fashion of argument (setting down an
Antecedent without any consequent) that thereby one may guess ^e means
nothing less then to frame (as he promisseth) a plain, and sincer solution
unto it. And yet the objection though so sillily propounded, not only much
trobleth many vulgar people (as he says) but pusleth him self so, as after
seven leaves spent to divert the Readers mind, and to make him forget (as
Heritiks The manner of Protestants in answering Catholics.
use to do) the argument, which he can not answer, he fyndeth no better
solution, then to grant what the Antecendent contains and to say nothing to
the consequent following thereof.

2. Wherefore because Bell was so trobled with the matter of this objection, as
he forgot the form, I will supply his default, and argue thus in form. He by
whose authority the Empire was translated, the electors of the Emperor
appointed, and the elected is confirmed, and whose superiority over them many
Emperors have willingly acknowledged, has some superiority over Emperors: but
the Pope is such, as by his authority the Empire etc. Ergo the Pope has some
superiority over Emperors. The form is syllogistical and good. The Proposition
is manifest, for no power or dignity can be truly translated, or confirmed by
inferiors or equals, but only by superiors: none (especially) willingly
acknowledge as superior, whom they think is not.

3. The Assumption contains three parts expressed in the Proposition, whereof
the first vz. That the Empire was translated by the Popes authority Bellarm: l.
de transl: Bellarmin.
Imper: c. 4 proves by the testimony of 33. writers etc 5. by the confession
of 11. Emperors: and Princes, and c. 6. by assertion of 7. Popes. Yea Bell
(though with much a do) confesses it page. 12. saying. That Charles the great
(to whom the Empire was first translated) was made Emperor by Pope Leo 3. for
restoring him to his place, and dignity, being driven out by the Romans, though
soon p. 13.
after he condemn the Pope of treason for this translation. But differing the
question of treason til a non (which hinders not the verity of the translation
if the translator have power to transfer: as a soldier may by gift, or sale
truly, and yet traitorously translate his arms, and munition to the Enemies) I
ask of Bell, whether the Pope did truly translate the Empire, or no. If he did,
then has the Pope power to translate Empires: If he did not, then was nether
Charles the great, nor any of his successors to this day true Emperors. And if
the Pope be Antichrist (as Bell avouches) for deposing some few Emperors for
just causes; Bell may be well accounted Lucifer, for deposing at once, and for no
fault at al, the Emperors of the west, which have been these 800. years. But
Protestants have great Protestants can make and unmake Emperors when they list.
cunning in making and vnmaking Emperors, according as it redoundeth in their
opinion to the grace or disgrace of Popes. For when the Pope deposes them,
they be true Emperors, but when he makes, them, they have only (as Willet
writes) the name Willet Contract. 4. q. 10. p. 178.
title, and image of Emperors. But let them answer this dilemma. These Emperors
whom the Pope deposed since Carolus Magnus, Likewise when willet list the
imperial authority is in the Pope loc. scit. But when he list not, he is no
temporal Prince. ib. q. 8. p. 154 155.
were true or false Emperors? If false, he did a good deed in deposing them: If
true, then has the Pope authority to make true Emperors, and translate Empiers.

4. The second part included in my Assumption vz. That the Pope appointed the
electors of the Emperor, and confirmed the elected, touching the apointing of
electors is confessed by Bell page 14. and touching the confirmation is
contested by many histriographers, and practiced by as many as are crowned
Emperors. The last part vz, that Emperors have acknowledged the Popes
superiority Bell him self confesses page 17. where he says, That some
Cbristian Kings and Emperors have upon a blind Zeal humbled them selves to the
Pope, yea (which is more) have yeldeed up their sovereign rights to him. And
shall not the Pope be superior to them, who have humbled them selves and yielded
their soueraingties unto him?

5. But what shift has Bell to avoid this? page 17. O dolor fraudata sunt tali
magisterio tempora antiqua. August. lib. 1. cont. Gaudens. c. 19.
forsooth that those Christian Princes were blind. O most blind answerer? not
seeing that he grants more then his adversary requires. Catholics argue
that Kings, and Emperors have acknowledged Popes their superiors, this Bell
grants in confessing their humiliation to Popes, which is never done, but to
Superiors. and adds that they have yielded up their Sovereign rights, which
is more then the objection contains. And what he adds of blind zeal makes
nothing to the purpose. Because the question is not upon what cause Kings, and
Emperors humbled them selves to the Popes, but whither they did or no. And
because they have so done (as Bell confesses) Catholics infer the Pope to be
their Superior. Unless perhaps Bell think blind zeal to disanul every fact, or
gift, and so say the Jews persecuted not the Church, because they did it upon
blind zeal. To. 10. v. 2. nor our Catholic au^cetors gave any livings to
Churches, because they did it upon blind zeal (as Bell must think) for
maintenance of Papistry. Nevertheless because the Reader may see whither is more
likly to be blind, a dooble turn coat Minister, or so many Princes as have
humbled them selves to Popes, I will name only a few Emperors, omitting for
breuity sake both Christian Kings, and the Cassiodor. Miscell. vid. Baron. anno
452. Eusebius. lib. 6. c. 25. Nicephor. lib. 13. c. 34. Bell p. 1^3. Edictu^
Constantini.
heathen Attilas miraculously made to reverence Pope Leo.

6. Philippe the first Christian Emperor about the year 246. reverenced Pope
Fabian. Constantin worthily (faith Bell) syrnamed the great held the stirrup to
Pope Siluester about the year 323. Soon after in S. Ambr. de, dignit. sacerd.
c. 2. Chrisosto. hom. 4. and 5. in illud Isaiae. vidi Dominum. The l^ke S.
Hilary. l. cont. Constant. Gelas. 1. ep. ad Anastas. S. Greg. in 4. Psalm.
paenit. Baron. anno 536. ex Anastas. Miscell. zonora. Naucler. General. 18.
Platina in Co^stantino. Naucler. general. 24. Council. Florent. per Iouerium.
Platina in Adrian. 1. Naucler. general. 26. Centur. 8. c. 10. col. 724. Platida
in Stephan. 4. Naucler. general. 28. Platina in Nicolao 1. Plat^na in Gregor.
7. Naucler. general. 36.
S. Ambrose and S. Chrisostomes time as them selves witness Emperors bowed their
necks even to Priests knees and laid their heads under their hands, the same
testifies Pope Gelasius of Anastase Emperor of his time, and S. Gregory of
Emperors before his time. Justin about the year 525. humbled him self to the
ground to Pope Ihon 1. Justinian 534. humbled him self to Pope Agapet and
worshipped him. Justinian the second about the year 710. kissed the feet of
Pope Constantin. Ihon Paleologus would have kneeled to Pope Eugenius 4. in the
year 1438. And thus did the Emperors of the East.

7. Of the western Emperors Charles the great about the year 773. cold not be
held by Pope Adrian I. from kissing his feet. Lewis his sone sent the
honorablest of his court to meet Pope Steven 4. him self went a mile and as
soon as he saw him, lighting from his horse, with great veneration brought him
into the city in the year 817. Lewis 2. went a mile to meet Pope Nicolas 1.
and putting his hand to his horses b^ydle brought him into his Camp about the
year 860 Henry 3. 1077. baresooted in the depth of winter attended upon Gregory
7 Henry 4. IIII. kissed the feet of Pope Pascal 2. Frederick 1. about the year
1155. held the stirrup to Pope Adrian 4. and Platina in Pascali 2. Naucler.
general. 38. Platin. in Adrian. 4. Alexand. 3. Naucler. gener. 40. Onuphrius in
chron. Plat. in Ioa^. ^2. Naucler. general. 48. Surius in co^mentar.
1177. kissed the feere of Pope Alexander 3. Sigismund 1418. prostrate on the
ground, with most great veneration kissed the feet of Pope Martin 5. Charles
the 5. 1530. 1538. kissed the feet of P. P. Clement 7. and Paul 3. and would
have held the stirrup of Pope Clement 7. of al these Christian Emperors it is
recorded in publik histories how they humbled them selves to Popes, and of no
Catholic Christian Emperor is written that he refused to do the like.

8. Let now any indifferent Reader be judge, whither the Pope have reason to
think him self to be Superior to Christian Emperors, seeing so many, and they
the most wise, most valiant, and most famous, of al, even the very first and
last of them, have acknowledged him their Superior. And whither it be likly
that. Bell should see, and al these Christian Emperors together with their
Counselors, Nobles, Prelates, Diuins, and Commons, be blind; yea so blind as
they should not see that their humiliation to the Pope opened the window (says
Bell) p. 17.
to al Antichristian tyrany.

9. Usual it is for Heretics to condemn See S. Austin lib. 2. cont. Iul. c.
10. to, 7.
not only former Catholics, but even Heritiks of blindness if they disagree
from them: So the Caluinist condemns the Lutherian, the Puritan says the
same of the Protestant, the Brounist of the Puritan. And King Edward, sixtimes
condemned K. Henry's religion of blindness, and those found the like measure in
Queen Elizabeth's Petition exhibited to his Majesty in April 1603.
time, and she had fared a like, if more then a thousand ministers, who
condemn her proceeding of Enormities, Superstitions and abuses contrary to
Scripture, had obtained their petition. But of them al we may say as Tertullian
said of Heritiks in his time. Tertull. lib. de praescrip.
To these alone, and to these first was the truth revealed forsooth, they
obtained greater favor, and fuller grace of the diuil. For light they have but
2. Cor. 11. v. 14. Conference p. 71.
such as comes from him who transfigureth him self into an angel of light,
and brag of it til as the Kings majesty said of the Scottish ministers) they
go made with their own light. And thus much of the Catholics objection and
Bells answer thereto. Now let us come to his sleunderous untruths.

CHAP. VII. Some of Bells slanderous untruths disproued.
BELL perceauing that the slightnes of his forsaid answer would have easily
appeared, if it had been set down immediately after the Catholics objection,
without dazeling the Readers eyes before with some other matter, though best
before he answered it to slander both Pope and Papists, and to tell the Reader a
long tale of steps devised by him self, in an imaginary ladder of his own.
Many absurd things (says he) have page 5.
been affirmed by Popes parasits for advancement of his primacy. I^ one ask
him? what these absurd things are, and who were these parasits. He names none.
For dolosus versatur in generalibus. But let us hear him prove his saying 11.
untruth. Victoria de potestate ecclesiae relect. 1. sect. 6.
As Victoria does testify in these words. Sed glossatores iuris hoc dominion
etc. The glossors of the law have given this dominion to the Pope, they being
poor in substance, and learning.

2. Here in steed of proofs I find an untruth. For nether does Victoria in
these words spe^ke of many things, but only of this dominion (meaning temporal
over the world) nether yet does he call it absurd. This want therefore Bell
thought to supply When he spealeth a lie he speaks of his own. Joan. 8. v.
44. 12 untruth.
of his own store, and therefore Englishing Victorias words, he adds (and
these lordly titles) and then as having a sure foundation, he rayseth his lie
somewhat higher, saying. That Victoria affirms, ignorance and poverty were
the beginning of al lordly Popery. Whereas Victoria speaks only of temporal
dominion over the whole world, and Bell him self Bell p. 17. 4. Contradict.
herafter makes Kings and Emperors authors of the Popes dominion. Bell p. 7.


3. Having thus dealt with Victoria he falls to slander the late Popes
saying. That they have challenged more then human, and royal power even that
power which is due and proper to God alone. True it is that both late and
ancient 13 untruth.
Popes have challe^ged more then human, and royal power. For such is al
spiritual power as shall hereafter be proved. But most false it is that any Pope
ancient or late, challenges any power proper to God, or that any Catholic
attributes such power unto him. As his brother willet tells him in these
Willet co^trad. 544. prel. 3. p. 210. Calvin 4. instit. c. 20. parag. 4.
Magistratus praediti sunt diuina authoritate. Melancthon. apud Sur. 1501. Bell
p. 6. Gerson de potest. eccl. confid. 12. p. 3.
words The Pope by their own confession can not do all that Christ did. But
what say you Sir to Calvin attributing duine power to Magistrates? And to
Protestants arrogating greater, more intolerable, and les excusable authority
and power, then ever the Pope did, as Melanthon writes, or to other calling
Princes Gods, as you shall hear a none. Now let us see what proofs he brings
of his slander. Gerson (says he) reports that some Popish parasits say that
Christ has given all that power in heaven and earth, to S. Peter, and his
successors which was given to him self, and that he has written in the Popes
thighe King, of Kings, and Lord of Lords. And that there is no power
Ecclesiastical or temporal but from the Pope.

4. Behold good Reader Bells evil dealing with Popes. He charge al late Popes
with challenging power proper to God, which is a most heinous and Luciferian
crime, and for proof thereof brings not one word, or deed of any one of
them, but ones report of speeches of some nameles fellows, without proouing
that any Pope either allowed, or liked, yea heard of such speeches. were such
dealing with any private man tolerable? And how much les with so great Princes
as Popes (at least) are. Suppose parasits had attributed to Popes power
Protestants call Princes Gods.
proper to God, does it therefore follow that they challeng it? Do al Princes
challeng what their flatterers impose upon them? Did Q Elizabeth challe^g to be
a Goddess because Case Cambden and other Protestants Case in ep. suop
Policorum. Cambden in Berqueria, in Natis ad lectorem. in Cantic. and Epist.
Bell in his epistles to the King and to B. of Durhom. Act. 14. v. 10. 11. 12.
called her a Goddess? She (says Cambden) is the only Goddess of Britans.
She^ shall be my Goddess, the ground where she was borne is rather to be adored
then adorned she is Numen to be worshipped of the whole word. Or does his
Majesty challeng to be head of the Church of France, or Toby Matthew to be the
ornament of learning, and religion, because Bell so terms them? did S. Paul
and Barnaby challe^g to be Gods, because the Licaonians did so account them?
does not the Pope profess him self to be Christ's Vicar, and servant of his
servants? How stands this with the challeng of equality.

5. But I deny that ever any Catholic attributed to the Pope power proper to
God: let us therefore consider Gersons report. The first point is, that Christ
has given all the power in heaven and earth to S. Peter, and Bells slander
touches as well S. Peter and the ancient Popes as the late.
his successors which was given to him self. But beside that, these words
concern no les the Ancient then the late Popes, namely S. Peter him self,
though Bell be ashamed to charg them with this staunder, are these words of
Popish parasits? do they give to men power proper to God alone? Then was S.
Chrysostom a Popish parasite, and S. Chrysostom. lib. 3. de sacerdot.
gave to Priests power proper to God, when he said. Priests have al power of
heavenly things, and the very self same al kind of power which Christ had of
his Father. S. Basil says, S. Basil. homil. de poenitent. S. Leo sermon. 2. de
Natali Pet. and Pauli.
that Christ gave this authority to others. S. Leo writes that S. Peter had
those things by participation, which Christ had proper by power. or does Bell
think that our King in creating a deputy in Ireland, and giving him authority
to govern that Kingdom, gives him power proper to Kings? Are deputies Kings
are they no more subjects? True it is that the power which Popes have, came
from God alone as the authority of deputies comes from Kings, but such power
by commission is no more proper to God, then the like in deputies is proper to
Kings.

6. The second point in Gersons report is that the forsaid nameles persons call
the Pope Lord of Lords, and King of Kings. If these be parasits words and make
men equal to God then was Daniel a parasite, and he made Nabuchodonozor equal
to God in calling him King of Kings. Unless Bell allow this Daniel. 2. v. 37.
title in a heathen Prince and account it blasphemy in a Christian. Besyds the
Scripture Exodus 7. psalm. 81. Io. 10. psalm. 104. Esaiae 45. S. Bernard. l. 2.
and 4. de co^siderat. Calvin. lib. 4. instit. c. 7. paragr. 22.
it self does apply the very names of Christ and God unto men. And S. Bernard
no parasite but a holy writer (in Caluins opinion) calls the Pope Prince of
Bishops, leader of Christians, hammer of tyrants, father of Kings, Vicar of
Christ, Christ of the Lord, and God of Pharao. And thus spoke S. Bernard even
in those books, where (according to Caluins Calvin. l. 4. c. 11. paragr. 11.
judgment) he spoke it so as truth it self seemed to speak. And albeit the
Pope do not entitle him self King of Kings but Servant of Gods servants, which
is a more humble style, then any Prince uses: yet rightly might he, because he
has twoe Kingdoms, vz. Naples and Sicily, Feudatary, The Pope gave Irla^d to
the King of England. Stow. ann. ^^71.
and temporally subject unto him, as he had also Ireland, before he gave it
unto the crown of England in K. Henry 2. time.

7. But because Bell is so hard aconstruer of some Catholics words, let us
hear, not a parasite, but a Protestant Prelat, speaking not in absence but in
presence of the King and realm. Bilson in his late sermon Bilson.
at the Kings coronation says Kings be Gods by office, they have the society
of his name, are in his place, their very robes are sanctified, every thing
belonging to them is sacred, are pertakers, with Christ in the power, honor,
and justice of his Kingdom on earth, and partake with Gods homage, Behold he
calls Kings Gods, and partners with God in his name, power, honor, and
homage, and yet no Catholic chardgeth Protestants that they attribute to the
King, or that he challenges power proper to God alone.

8. The third point reprehended by Bell in Gersons report, is that
ecclesiastical and temporal power is said to come from the Pope. This (says
Bell page: 16.) is to make the Pope author of al power, a thing proper to God.
14. untruth. 15. untruth.
This say I is for Bell to utter two untruths at once: for neither do they
speak of al power, but only of power in earth, which they divide into
ecclesiastical and temporal, besides which there is power in heaven of God, and
Saints: neither do they make the Pope, author of al power in earth, but only
say it comes from the Pope, which is not to make him author thereof, unless
Bell will make every officer author of what he does in the Princes name, every
instrument author of the effect it works by virtue of the cause. And thus
much touching this slander of Popes, imposed by Bell. Now let us come to
others, for no other stuff we are like to hear hereafter in this article.

CHAP. VIII. Certain false steps of a ladder which Bell imagines the Pope had
to climb to his superiority, disproued.
BELL having upon the foresaid words of some nameles Catholics, taken occasion
Bell page 17.
to slander Popes, goes on in like sort for many leaves together, setting
down steps in a ladder, which (as he imagines) the Popes had to climb to
their superiority. The first step (says he) was the departure of the
Emperor Constantine from Rome to Constantinople: but if he had better
considered, he should have found that as the city of Rome decayed by
Constantines departure, and Constantinople increased: So the Sea of Rome rather
fell thereby in external Eusebius. and Hieron. in chron. Conc. Constant. epist. ad
Damasc. Gelas. ad Episcop. Dardaniae.
dignity, and the Sea of Constantinople rose, then otherwise. For whereas before
Constantines going to Constantinople (which was about the year. 330. that
church was but new, and a parish of another church as Gelasius witnesses,
soon after in the year 381. it was made a Patriarchate Cone. Constantin. c.
5. Council. Calced. act. 16.
next to Rome, and in the year 451. the Grecians gave it equal privileges
with Rome. And not content with this, about the year 600. that Patriarch
arrogated the title of Ecumenical, that is over the whole world. And finally
in the year 1054. claimed Sigebert. in chron.
the place of the first Patriarch, alleging the Pope to have lost his primacy
by adding filioque to the Nicene Creed.

2. But Constantine (says Bell) at his departure page 7.
did as the Popes parasites tell us, give lardge gifts to the Pope, even his
whole power, dominion, and territories, both in Rome, Italy, and all the west.
Behold a man (as the Proverb is) having a wolf by the ear, which he dare
neither hold nor yet let go. For if he grant, that Constantine gave the Pope
his whole power and dominion over Rome, Italy, and all the west, he must needs
grant that the Pope of right has imperial power over all the west. If he deny
it, he shows not how Consta^tins departure was a step for the Pope to
climb to higher authority. Besides that, not Constantins departure, but his
guifte should have been made the step. Notwithstanding choosing rather to
condemn him self, of not showing how Constantins departure was a step for
the Pope to climb, then to grant that the Pope has so good right to imperial
power over the west, he inclines to denial of the gift, and cites Valla,
Volaterran, Cathalan and Cusan, four late and obscure writers against it, and
terms them Popish parasites who affirm it.

3. But against these four late writers I oppose four most ancient, Isidor,
Photius or Balsamon, Gratian, and Iuo, and many late writers, besides two Jews
Rabby Abraham, and Aben Esra, who al avouch Constantins gift, whereof Photius
and the Jews were professed enemies of the Pope: and Bell him self confesses
that some Emperors have given the Pope their sovereign rights. In which kind
no Emperor excelled Constantine. yet Bellarmine (says Bellarmin. lib. 5. de
Roman. Pont. ^. 9.
Bell) seems to doubt of this, and such like donations. Wherein Sir? In these
words (says he) there are extant at Rome the authentical evidences of these
and the like donations, and if there were not, prescription of eight hundred
years would abundantly suffice. For Kingdoms unjustly gotten are in process
of time made lawful. as he proves by the Roman Empier gotten Prescription of
30. years suffices by civil law.
by Caesar, the Kingdom of England by Saxons, and others. What show is in these
words of doubt? or rather not of certainty? For Bellarmin affirms that the
Pope has two just titles to hold his estate: The first is free gift of
Princes, whereof he can show authentical evidences: the other prescription of
time.

4. The second step (says Bell) was the fall page 8.
of the Empire in the west, in the year 471. and vacancy thereof for almost
330. years. But how this fall and vacancy of the Empire was a step for Popes
to climb, neither he shows nor any can imagine, especially if (as he writes
straight after) in this vacancie of the Empire Rome was spoiled with fire and
sword, and the very walls thrown down to the ground, and al Italy
possessed of the Barbares until Carolus Magnus, who was the first Emperor
after the vacancie, if in this vacancy Rome was destroyed, and al Italy
possessed by Barbares (who for the most part were heathens, or heretics) how
could it be a step for the Pope to climb, and not rather to fall?

5. Evident it is out of histories of those times, that Popes in that vacancy
were sometime under Barbares, sometime under Emperors of the East, according
as the one prevailed against the other (for false it is that Barbares possessed
al Italy until Carolus Magnus yea Bell before said that Popes lived under
Emperors until the year 603.) and page 2. ^.
betwixt both lived in great danger, subjection, and misery. Three of them
died in Siluerius. Johannes 1. Martinus 1. Leo 3. Sergius. Gregorius 2. vid.
Platinam in vit. Pont.
banishment or prison, one pitifully mangled and beaten, others should have
been imprisoned and murdered, and diverse were straictlie besieged of their
enemies. And for a long time none could be freely elected without consent of
the Barbares, or Emperors. And can we think that this was a time for Popes to
climb to greater authority? I omit, that before Bell said Popes lived in
duetiful obedience under Emperors until the 5. Contradict.
year 603. how does he now say that they climb to tyranny from the year 471.

6. The 3. step (says Bell) was the volu^tarie page 8. 9.
Charter which Constantin the Emperor of Constantinople made to Pope
Benedict. 2. vz. that whosoever the Clergy people and Roman souldires
should choose to be Bishop, al men should believe him to be the true vicar of
Christ, without any tarying for any authority of the Emperor of
Constantinople, or the deputy of Italy, as 16. untruth
the custom and manner was ever before that day. Thus (says he) writes
Platina. And the Platina in Benedict. 2.
Popes almost for the space of 700. years could have no jurisdiction, nor be
reputed true Bishops of Rome, without the letter patte^ts of the Vbicunque
est impudentia ibi est vltio. Chrisosto. hom. 4. in illud Esai. vidi Dominu^.
Emperor.

7. Behold the impudency of this fellow. Platina says, vt antea fieri
consueuerat, Bell affirms him to say, it was the custom ever before that
day. where is in Platina the word (ever) where (til that day) Nay does not
Platina say that Pelagius the second Platin. in pelagio and in Siluerio.
Nauclerus general. 18. Bland. De^. 1. l. 3.
was created iniussu principis without command of the Prince, that Siluerius
was made Pope iubente Theodohato at the command of Theodate a Gothishe King?
Did not Bell him self tell us that Barbarians ruled page 8.
in Rome, and possessed al Italy for 330 years, until Charles the great? How
then could it be, that before Benet the second never Popes could have
jurisdiction, and be accounted true Bishops of Rome without letter patents of
Emperors, who were professed enemies, and made war upon most of these
Barbarians? or is Bell so mad even to imagine, that Pope Anaclete (to omit S.
Peter's want of Neroes letter patents) could have no jurisdiction, or be reputed
true Bishop of Rome, without letter patents of Domitian the Emperor, Clement
without Traianus? Cornelius without Decius? Caius without Diocletian? or the
other holy Popes that were martyred under heathen Emperors, without their
letter patents?

8. What therefore Platina says had been wont to be done before, about
expecting the confirmation of the Emperor, or his deputy in Italy, he
understood of the time since Pope Vigilius (excepting Pelagius 2.) until
Benedict the second; for Justinian the Emperor having in the year 553. quite
subdued the Goths, and recovered Rome and Italy, which had been lost to the
Barbares in the year 475. or 476. (Bell wronglie says 471.) imitating the
tyranny page 8.
of the Gothish Kings, who being Arians much oppressed the Popes, appointed
that they after their election, should expect the Emperor or his deputies
confirmation, before they were consecrated, or used their function. And this
order endured from Pope Vigilius his time, until Benedicte the second, for more
then one hundred years, at what time Constantine the fifth, in the Platin. sup.
year 684. moved (say the writers) at the holiness of Benedicte 2. abrogated
the said order, permitting as well the consecration, as the election of Popes
unto the Roman Clergy, and people.

9. Hereby we see, that the creation of Popes without Emperors consent, was
no new thing begun first in Benedict. 2. but an ancient liberty begun even
with the Popedom it self, and continued under Papistry above a thousand
years old yet new with Bell. page 2.
Constantine the great and other Christian Emperors until the time of the
barbarous Gothish Kings, and restored again by Constantine the fifth. but
mark good reader how Bell before confessed Gregory the great (who died about
the year 604.) to have The same declared Justinian about the year 532. epist.
ad Ioa^. P. and Valentinian ep. ad Theodosium long before. page 83. 2. Pet. 3.
v. 8.
been a Papist, and here acknowledges the Emperor Phocas in the year 607. to
have declared Rome to be the head of al Churches: likewise Constantine the
fifth in the year 984. to have declared the Pope to be Christ's true vicar:
yet nevertheless will have Papistrie, and Popes supremacy to be new things. So
to him a thousand years are as one day.

10. The fourth step Bell makes the deposition of Childrick King of France by
Pope Zachary, which (he says) the Pope did for hope of aduaunceme^t. But as
for the deposition, it was most just, for it was done, not only with the
consent of the whole This Childrick was surnamed the Idiot or sensles. Claud.
Paradin. Annal. Fra^c. Naucler. general. 25. Platin. in Gregor. 3.
realm of France, no man reclaiming, but at their request as testifies
Sabellius aeneid 8. and Blandus Dec: 1. lib: 10. out of Alcuin: Paul and
others, at what time the Sarazins possessing al Egypt, Siria, Afric, and
Spain, had not long before invaded France, with many hundred thousands of men,
and Childrick being extremely slouthful, and careless of the commonwealth, not
only France, but al Christendom was in great danger to be ouerrunne with
those Sarazins.

11. And that Pope Zacharies intention was just, appears by his great
holiness of life, who (as Anastasius and others write) was so good as he would
not requite evil with evil, and much less for his own advancement
wrongfullie depose a King, as Bell upon meare malice, without al proof does
calumniate him, taking upon him to know the secrets of hearts, and Judge an
others servant. 2. Paralip. 6. Roman. 14.
Besides, that neither was he any way advanced by Pipin, nor can it be justly
presumed, that he expected to be. But for what end soever it had been done, it
could be no step to the Popes superiority over Princes, but an act of such
authority already gotten.

12. Whereupon Bellarmin out of this so Bellarm. lib. 5. de Romans Pontif. c. 8.
ancient example, above eight hundred years ago, proves Popes to have such
authority, whereat Bell so stormeth that he page 10. 17 untruth 18 untruth
says. Jesuits teach that the Pope can set up, and pull down Kings at his
pleasure, and that they are grand masters, and Architects of seditions,
rebellious, and bloody treasons, which are but false slanders of his own. Et
quis innocens erit si accusasse sufficiat. And advises Christian Princes page
11.
that if the Pope send any into their dominions, with his Bulls and
excommunications, they deal with them as Phillip the fair dealt with
Boniface the eights Nuncio, whom he imprisoned, and burned their bulls: and as
Charles the sixth, who gave sentence that the bulls of Benedic. 13. should be
rent in pieces, the bearer set on the pillarie, and traduced in the pulpit. But
withal he forgot to tell what befell to Phillip for his evil dealing with
Boniface, vz. That he him self was Genelrard. in chron. Antonin. 3. part. art.
20. paragr. 20.
killed with a fall of his horse, his three sons untimely died, their wives
shamefullie taken in adultery, and the crown translated from his Issue to an
other line. Of Benedic 13. no marvel if he and his messenger were so handled,
because he was no true, but a false Pope; and thus much of Bells first our
steps, now let us se the rest.

CHAP. IX. The rest of Bells false steps, and slanderous untruths in this
article disproued.
THE first step (says Bell) was the decaie Bell page 11.
of the Empire in the East about the year 756, at what time Pipin being
called into Italy by Pope Steeuen 2. to deliver Rome from the siedge of
Lombards, and ouercomming them gave up the government 19 untruth
of Italy into the Popes hands. Here Bell hudleth up store of untruths. That
the empire decayed in the East about the year 756. For it decayed long before
about the year 635. under Onuphr. in chron. Platin. in Honorio 1. art. 623.
Balmerin. in chron. 639. Onuphr. in chron.
the heretical Emperor Heraclius, when the Sarazens conquered Palestin, Siria,
and Egypt, and about the year 697. al Afric, and went more and more decaying
according as it revolted from the faith and obedience of the Roman Sea, until
in the year 1452. it was utterly extinguished, Constantinople being taken by
Turks, and the Emperor slain. And about 756. whereof Bell speaks, the
Eastern Empire lost little or nothing, except a very small piece of Italy,
called the exarchate which the Lombards had conquered in the year 751.

2. That Pipin gave up Italy into the Popes hands. Whereas Pipin subdued only
that part of Italy which the Lombards held: that in Pipins conquest ended the
whole power of the Emperors 21 untruth.
Lieutenants in Italy. This is doubly untrue. First because Pipin conquered
nothing from the Emperor but from the Lombards, who four or five years
before, had taken the exarchate of Reuenna from the Empire. Secondly because,
besides that which Pipin then conquered, or the Lombards had before taken from
the Empire, the Emperors had both then, and long Naucler. general. 27. Platin.
in Leone 3. Bland. Dec. 2. lib. 1.
after great dominion in Italy, vz almost all the kingedome of Naples which he
governed by Lieutenants.

3. But what was the end of this untruth? forsooth that we should Imagine, that
in Pipins time the Pope became Antechrist. For now (says Bell, was he taken
away, who page 12. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
as the Apostle teaches us hindered the coming of Antechrist, meaning the
Emperors dominion in Italy. Mark good reader in the year 476. or as Bell
says 471. not only al Baron. annal. Onuphr. in chron.
Italy, was taken from the Emperor, by the Herules, but he also deposed, and
the weasterne Empire utterly dissolved. And albeit in the year 553. the
Grecian Emperors recovered Italy again, yet soon after in the year 568.
they lost a great part thereof to the Lombards, which they never Onuphr. in
chron. Palmer. in chron. 572.
recovered. And in neither of these times Bell thinks the hinderance of
Antichrists coming, whereof S. Paul spoke, to have been taken away, because
then he finds no color to make the Pope a new Antechrist.

4. But when the Grecian Emperors lost to the Lo^bards the exarchate of
Reuenna (a Naucler. general. 26.
petit dominion of five Cities, and one shire called Emilia, though they held
still a good part of Italy) then the hindrance of Antechriste was taken away,
because forsooth soon after, that exarchate being taken by Pipin from the
Lombards, it was by him given to the Pope, who thereby became Antechrist, as if
Bishops become Antechrists by temporal livings, a reason smelling ranckely of a
puritan spirit, which would pull down Bishoprics; but if temporal dominion
made the Pope Antechrist, he was long before Pipin: for in the year 699.
Aripert King of Lombardy gave to him the Coctian Alps where Geneua is, which
Ado in chronic. Bland. Dec. 1. lib. 10. Magdeburg. cent. 8. c. 10. Regino Ado
Sigebert. in chron. Magdeburg. supra.
donation confirmed King Luithprand in the year 714. as the Magdeburgians
confess. and King Pipin in the year 755. added the exarchate, and a good
piece of Italy which he had conquered from the Lombards.

5. As for the hindrance of Antechrists coming whereof S. Paul speaks, it
was not the petit dominion which the Emperors had in the exarchate of Reuenna,
but the Roman Empire it self; as testify S. Chrysostom, and others upon
that place, S. Chrisost. S. Ciril. S. Hierom. S. August. tom. 5.
S. Ciril Catech. 15. S. Hierom q. 11. ad Algasiam: S. Augustine lib. 20. de
ciuit. c. 19. and other fathers who out of that place affirm, that Antechrist
shall not come until the Roman Empire be quite taken away, which is not yet I
let pass a contradiction of Bell saying, p. 8. that Barbarians possessed al
Contradict.
Italy unto Carolus Magnus, and page 11. that in Pipins time who was Carolus
his father ended the power of the Emperors Lieutenants: in Italy. For how
could the Emperors have Lieutenants in Italy until Pipin, if Barbarians
possessed al Italy unto his sons time.

6. But the quick sight of this fellow, who before called so many Kings and
Emperors blind, I can not let pass. He writes (page 11.) that Pipin gave
up the government of Italy into the Popes hands, a thing (says he) so
apparent as it can not be denied, and yet (page 14.) confesses, that he can
not see how the Pope was King in Pipins time. So blind he is that he can not
see, that to give up the government of a Kingdom into ones hands, is to make
him King, Again he can not see, page 14. His brother willet controuers. 4. q.
10. p. 7. page 178. says that the imperial authority is in the Pope. Naucler.
general. 26. Palmerius in chronic. Paradin des alliances Genealogiques.
how if Pipin as Sigebert vvriteth had Italy in his possession in the year
801. and Bernard made King thereof by Carolus Magnus 812. that the Pope was
either then or now any King at al. Surely Bell is either shot sighted or
starcke blind. For what Sigebert writes of Pipin, he means not of Pipin
Carolus his father and giver of the exarchate, who died 768. but of Pipin
Carolus his son: and neither his possessing Italy 801. nor his son Bernards
kingdom thereof 812. does prejudice the Popes regality over the exarchate and
Coctian Alps, given him before by King Pipin and Aripert, any more then it
does prejudice the regality and dominion which the greek Emperors had at the
same time Naucletus general. 27. Platina in Leone 3. Bland. Dec. 1. l. 1.
over a great part of Italy, vz. From Naples and Manfredonia to the sea of
Sicily.

7. For besides that Lombardy (whereof Pipin and Bernard were kings) was then
called Italy, as is evident out of Charles his Nauclerus general. 18.
testament, where he says. Itali. which is also called Lombardy, because they
alone in Italy were then called Kings, and possessed the best part thereof,
they were entitled of the whole: as the Kings of England were before the union
of Scotland by strangers called in latin Kings of Britanny. And as for Charles
the great, he was so far from taking from the Pope, what his father Pipin had
given, as he added thereto (says Nauclerus) the i will of Corsica, and what is
from Luna to the Alps confines of Italy, and what betwixt Leo Ostiensis lib.
1. chron. Cassinen.
Parma and Luca, together with the Dukedomes of Spoleto and Beneuent.

8. But yet far greater blindenes it is, not to be able to see how the Pope can
be now any King at al, if others were Kings of Italy 800. years ago, can he
not se how kingdoms may be altered not only to different families, but even to
diverse nations in less then eight hindered years? are not the Normans and their
descent Kings of England because they were not 800. nay 600: years ago? are
not Spaniards Kings in Italy, because they were not 400. years ago? could
not the Popes in eight hundred years space come to a kingdom either by guifte
of Princes or by just ware, or at least by prescription of time, which they had
not before.

9. As for the Popes besides the gifts of Constantine, Aricthpert, Pipin, and
Carolus Magnus before mentioned, Ludouic: Pius Emperor and son to Carolus
Magnus Gratian. d. 63. can. ego Ludouicus.
confirmed the donation of his grandfather Pipin, and afterward Countess Leo
lib. 3. chron. c. 48.
Maud, gave to the Pope Liguria and Tuscia in the year 1079. of which gifts
the authentical evidences (says Bellarmin) Bellarm. de Romans Pont. c. 9.
are extant in Rome. which suffiseth to let Bell see how the Pope may be now a
King, though he were none in the year 812. besides that (page: 17.) he could
see how some Christian Kings and Emperors have yielded up their sovereign
rights to the Pope, and (page 11.) how Pipin gave up the government of Italy
into his hand, and is he stricken blind in the midest, so that (page: 14.) he
could not see how the Pope is now any King at al. Thus much of Bells blindness
out of his own confession. Now let us see as much of his small credit by the
like confession.

10. Bellarmin (says he) must be credited at Bell page 14. Bellar. sup.
leisure, when he tells us that Pipin gave Rauenna, and Pentapolis to S.
Peter and S. Paul, meaning Ex Adone loc. cit. and lib. 3. c. 3. ex regione and
Sigebert. ^^ chron. Bland. Dec. 1. lib. 10. Magdeburg. cent. 8. c. 10.
the Pope, and yet him self tells us (page: 11.) that Pipin gave up the
government of Italy into the Popes hands. If Bellarmin must be credited at
leisure, for saying Pipin gave to the Pope a small part of Italy, though he
prove it by many witnesses, and Bell confess it to be so apparent that it can
not be denied. Surely Bell p. 12. Bell not to be credited.
him self must not be credited at al, for saying without al testimony, yea
contrary to his own testimony (page: 13.) that he gave Italy to the Pope. I
omit a petit untruth of his saying that Meroueus was the first christian King
of France. So blind he is that he Anual. Gall. Claude Paradin des Alliances
Gnealogiques. Bell page 12.
can not discern the grandfather from the grandchild, Meroueus from
Clodoueus, a heathen from a christian.

11. The sixth step, Bell makes the translation of the Empire by Pope Leo 3.
from the Greeks to the French, or Germans in the person of Charles the great,
of this translation we have spoken before, and it is rather a notorious act of
the Popes superiority over Emperors, then a step thereunto. But because
Sigebert in recounting Sigeb. chronic. 801.
it says Romani animo desciuerant ab Imperatore Constantinopoli. Which Bell
Englisheth page 13.
revolted from the Emperor, he infers diverse untruths: first that Popes
were subject to 23 untruth.
Emperors 800. years after Christ. Secondly that the translation of the
Empire implied flat treason 24 untruth
in the Pope, and Romans. Thirdly that Sigebert 25 untruth.
says they surrendered the right of their sovereign to an othor.

12. To disprove the two first untruths Bell disproued by him self.
I need no other witness then Bell him self, who (page: 8.) affirmed that from
the year 471. until Carolus Magnus (which was 801.) Barbarians possessed al
Italy. If from 471. until 801. Barbarians possessed al Italy, how Contradict.
7. Contradict. 8.
were Popes 800. years under Emperors? how committed they treason against
Emperors, in making Carolus Emperor, if at that time, and above 300. years
before, they were not under Emperors, but under Barbarians.

13. The truth is that Barbarians possessed Baron. in annal.
Italy from the year 476. for more then 80. years, after which time the
Grecian Emperor in the year 553. recovered al Italy, and albeit they lost
shortly after in the year 568 a great part thereof, yet they kept Rome until
about the year 726. Onuph says 731, when both Rome and Onuphr. in chron.
Baron. in annal.
Italy revolted from Leo 3. Emperor of Constantinople for his heresy against
Images, and would then have chosen an other Emperor against him, if Gregory
the second then Pope had not dissuaded them. Since which time Rome was never
under the Emperors of Constantinople. And therefore neither were the Popes
subject to Emperors 800. years after Christ: nor did Pope Leo commit any
treason against the Grecian Emperors, by creating Charles Emperor in the year
801. which was almost a hundred years after the revolt of Italy from the
greeks. As for the third untruth it is evident, because Sigebert does not call
the grecian Emperor sovereign to to the Romans: And the word desciuerant
signifies any for saking or leaving of one, whether he be his sovereign or no.

14. But Bell goes on in erring the Pope Bell page 13.
not to be true King of Italy, because writers agree not about the Pope to
whom, or time, when this regality was first granted. Mark good reader, him
self before affirmed that King Pipin gave up the government page 12. 13.
of Italy into Pope Steeuens hands and that this truth is apparent by the
testemony of many renowned Bell denies what him self says cannot be denied.
Onuphr. in chron. Nauclerus general. 25. An. 750. Claudius Parad. des alliances
Genealogiques. Ado Regino Sigebert. in chron. Blond. Dec. 1 l. 10. Mag
deburgens. cent. 8. c. 10. Leo Ostien. lib. 1. chron. c. 9. Onuph. sup.
Cronographes, and can not be denied, and now in the next page denies both the
fact, and contestation of historiographers. What will he not deny, who denies
that which him self says can not be denied?

15. The truth is that Pipin gave not the exarchate to Greg. 3 who died in the
year 741 or as other write 740, fourteen years before Pipins entrance into
Italy, neither was Pipin then a King, but made afterward by Zachary successor
to Gregory as Bell testifies page 19. but to Pope Steeuen 2. as is apparent (to
use Bells words) by the testimony of many renowned Cronographers, though some
call him Steeuen 3. because they reckon his predecessor, whom others omit,
because he lived but four days, likewise al writers agree that Jews pius
confirmed the donation of his grandfather Pipin Apud Gratian. did. 63. can.
ego Ludouicus. Leo Ostien. lib. 3. chron. c. 48.
unto Paschal. 1. and his name is in the donation, as also that Countess Maud
gave Liguria, and Tuscia unto Gregory the seventh.

16. And Bells proving the historiographers Bell page 13.
to disagree, because Blondus and Platina (says he) write that Pipin gave the
exarchate to Gregory the third, Regino refers it to Steeuen, and Sigebert
says Pipin had Italy in his own possession in the year 801. is like the rest
of his proceedings. For that of Platina is a manifest untruth, for he says
Platina in Stephan. 2. Naucler. general. 26. Palmerius in chronic. Claud.
Paradi. in Pepin. paragr. 6. 7. 8. 9.
Pipin gave the exarchate in Pope Steeuen the second his time, and Sigebert
means not of King Pipin the giver of the exarchate who died 768, but of his
grandchild son to Carolus Magnus, and how his possession of Italy does not
preiudicate the Pope, is before explicated. Regino says that which is truth,
for best authors agree, that Pipin gave the exarchate in the year 755. at What
time Steeuen 2. al. 3. was Pope.

17. But suppose writers did not agree about the Pope to whom, and time, when
Pipin made his gift of the exarchate, must we therefore needs deny the gift
in which they al agree? So we might deny that Christ Was borne, because
writers agree not about the time: is it not usual for historiographers to agree
in the substance of the narration, and yet differ in some circumstance of the
person, or time?

18. Last of al least we should think the Grecian Emperors, acknowledged
Charles made by the Pope to be true Emperor, Bell page 14. Sigebert. An. 805.
he tells us out of Sigebert, that they had indignation against Charles, and
therefore he with often Embassages procured their friendshipes: yea Blandus and
Platina (says he) affirm constantly that Charles agreed with Irene, and
afterward with Niccphoras, that with their favors the might rule over the west.
Behold the drift of Bell, to make us think that Charles became Emperor, not
by creation of the Pope, but by grant of Grecian Emperors: so loath he is to
confess the Pope had so great authority above 800. years ago. Wherein the
silly fool overthrows what he before said. For if the Pope did not translate
the Empire, then was it no step to his tyranny, as he imagines.

19. But let us hear how he proves, that the Grecian Emperors did not
achnowledge Charles the great for true Emperor, first forsooth because
Sigebert says, they had indignation against Charles; what then? are never
Emperors offended for any thing lawfully done, especially if they think it
prejudice their estate and dignity? and albeit Sigebert affirm, that some
Grecian Emperors (who them selves came unlawfully and by tyranny to the
Empire, and that after Charles was crowned Emperor) had indignation against
Charles; yet none write that Irene (who was the only and lawful Empress at
that time, when Charles was created) was offended with his creation, but rather
content, as may be gathered by her purpose which (as Zonoras and Cedrenus
write) she had to marry him, Yea Nauclerus says, she was deposed for Naucler.
general. 28.
the favor she bore to Charles, besides the indignation of those Emperors vz.
Nicephorus, Michael, and Leo, was not so much for the Imperial dignity taken by
Charles, as because, as writes Eginhart, Charles Eginhart in vita Caroli.
his secretary, they greatly suspected least he should take the Empire from
them; which they might justly fear, because by tirany and deposition of their
predecessors, they had gotten it, and yet notwithstanding their indignation, of
their own accord they sent Ambassadors to Charles, and made league and
friendship with him, as the same Eginhart, Ado, and others testify. Yea the
Magdeburgians add, that the Grecians in a manner consented to Charles his
Empire.

20. His other proof out of Platina contains an untruth, for Platina writes
that Platina in Ieone 3.
Charles being made Emperor, Irene sent Ambassadors to make peace and league
with him, and to divide Italy betwixt them, which league Nicephorus renewed:
but he has no word of Charles his ruling the west with their fouours, more
then of their ruling the East with his. And the like says Blondus. Blond. Dec.
2. l. 1. Bell page 14.


21. The seventh step (says Bell) was the constitution of the seven Princes
electors of the future Emperor by Pope Gregory 5. by the favor and free
grant af Otho then Emperor. But this was rather an act of superiority in the
Pope over Emperors, then a step until it. And seeing this constitution has
ever since been inuiolablie observed, and the Emperors so elected accounted as
true Emperors throughout al Christendom, a sign it is that Christians think
the Pope has authority to appoint Electors, who may choose what Emperor they
please, by the authority given them from the Pope. Wherefore I would Bell
answered me this dilemma. The seven Electors have authority to choose an
Emperor, or not? If they have then the Pope who gave them that authority, had
the same, because none can give what he has not him self; if not, Bell
deposes at once more Emperors and Princes, then al Popes have done.

22. The eight and highest step of this ladder Bell page 15.
(says Bell) d^d reach up even to the highest heaven, and to the very throne
of our lord Jesus. here is a great cry! now let us see quid dignum tanto fert
hic promissor hiat^ because (says he) Extrauag. Bonif. 8. vtiam sanctam de
maioritate and obedientia* untruth.
they challenge the royal right of both swords throughout the Christian world,
and have made thereof a flat decree. But first I deny that the Pope, as Pope,
challenges royal right of either sword. For his right to the spiritual sword
is not royal, but of a different nature, as is evident, and shall be declared
hereafter: and his royal right to the material sword, is neither over al
christendom, as Bell untruely avouches, but only over the Popedom: nor he
challendgeth it by his Papacy, yea (as Pope Gelasius wrote) Popes Gelasius de
vincul. anathematis. and Nicol. 1. dec. 96. can. cum ad vetum. page 17.
Bernard. lib. 4. de consideratione.
have not challendged royal sovereignty, but by the guifte of Princes, who as
Bell says have given their rights to them. And albeit the decree do (after S.
Bernard) give to the Pope right of the material sword; yet neither has it the
word royal, nor means of Royal right, as is evident because it teaches, that
this sword is not to be drawn, or used by the Popes hand (as no doubt it
might, if he had royal right unto it) but by the hand of the soldier, at the
commandment of the Emperor, and beck of the Pope. Whereby we see, that the
decree attributes royal right, of the material sword, only to the Emperor,
who is to command the soldier to draw, and use it, and to the Pope only
authority to direct the Emperor in his command and use of his sword.

23. But suppose that Popes did challenge royal right of both swords,
throughout the christian world, is this to climb to the highest heaven and to
Christ's throne? does the christian world reach to the highest heaven? or yet
to the bounds of the earth? does Christ's throne rule no more then the
christian world? or does royal authority under him, reach to his throne?
surely Bell has a base conceit of Christ's kingdom, if he imagine that
Popes, or Princes by their authorities, reach to his throne, who (as S. Paul
says) is above al powers and princedomes, Ad Ephesians. c. 1. v 21. Bell condemns
that in the Pope for blasphemy, which he judges treason to deny to Princes.
thrones and dominations, and above every name which is named, either in this
world or in the next, but mark good reader, how Bell condemns that for
horrible blasphemy in the Pope, which him self accoumpteth as high treason
to deny to other Princes. For what is supremacy in both ecclesiastical and
civil causes, but (as he speaks) royal right of both swords, and to deny this
to temporal Princes, he deemeth no less then high treason.

24. Secondly he proves his foresaid page 14. Did. 22. can. omnes.
slander out of Pope Nicholas 1. his words, Christ committed to S. Peter the
right both of heavenly and earthly empire. which Bell seems to understand of
spiritual, and temporal power. Answer. Suppose the words were meant of
spiritual and temporal power, they make nothing for royal right, but may be well
expounded according to the meanig of the foresaid decree. That S. Peter had
from Christ right to both empires, vz. to govern the one, and to direct the
other, but of royal right there is no word in P: Nicholas: Nicol. 1. ep. ad
Michael. Imper.
yea he prosesseth that Christ distinguished eclesiastical and imperial power
by distinct acts and dignities, that in spiritual matters the Emperor should
need Bishops, and in temporal, Bishops use Emperourrs. But indeed Pope Nicholas
means not of temporal power at al, but only of spiritual given to S. Peter,
Which he calls both earthly and heavenly dominion, because according to our
Saviors Words (Math: 16. to which he alludeth what he loses in earth is
loosed in heaven.

25. I omit a gloss cited by Bell, because it Glossa F. C^lestis.
only says that the Pope has both swords, vz, in the sense before explicated.
But what he brings out of an obscure appendix of P. Boniface his making a
constitution, Appendix Fulde^^s.
wherein he affimed him self to be spiritual and temporal Lord in the whole
world, is untrue, as is evident by the constitution, and words before cited
out of it. And Pope Clement 5. declared extrauag. Clemens 5.
meruit Charissimi: de priuilegij^: that Pope Boniface his constitution did
nothing prejudice the kingdom of France. But what the appendix says of
Boniface his sending to Phillip King of France to have him acknowledge, he
held the kingdom of him, may well be expounded by that Platina writes Platin.
in Bonifac. 8.
vz. That Phillip having against the law of nations imprisoned a Bishop, whom
Boniface sent unto him to persuade him to make ware against Infidels, the Pope
sent the Archedeacon of Narbo to procure the Bishops liberty, and otherwise
to denounce, that the kingdom of France was fallen to the churches
disposition, for the offense of the King.

26. But let us go on with Bell. Since this ^el page 16.
ladder (says he) was thus framed. Popes have tiranized above measure, deposed
Kings and Kingdoms, and taken upon them authority, pertaining to God alone.
Omitting Bells strange phrase of deposing Kingdoms: if to depose Kings for
never so just cause be to tiranize, Protestants have tiranized far more in the
space of 70. years, then the Pope has in these 300. years since that decree
was made. For in all these 300. years, besides one or two Kings of Naples, who
were his liege men, I find deposed by the How many deposed by Popes in 300.
years. Clemens 5. extrauag. ad Certitudinem.
Pope one Schismatical and heretical Emperor of Greece Andronicus Paleologus,
and one other doubtful Emperor Ludouick the Bauarian, two French Kings Philip.
4. and Ludouick 12. and one King of Bemeland George, and one King of Navarre,
besides King Henry 8. and Queen Elizabeth, and these al for heinous crimes.
whereas Protestants in 70. years (setting Hovvmany by Protestants in 70. years.
aside the injustice of their quarrel) have as much as lay them, deposed one
Emperor, six or seven Kings, and two absolute Queens, slain two Kings, one
Queen, and one Queens husband, as before has been told. c. 4. paragr. 6.

27. And Bell who so much observes Sacerdotes nunquam tyranni fuerunt, sed
tyrannos saepe sunt passi: Amb. ep. 33.
the deposition of Emperors and Kings by the Pope, and omitteth both their
injuries to him, and his benefits done to them, shows him self to be no
indifferent man. For omitting almost 33. Popes put to death by heathen
Emperors, Christian Emperors, vid. Platinam in vit. Pont. Six Popes murdered.
Princes, and others, have murdered six Popes vz. Felix 2. Johannes 11.
Johannes 15. Benedictus 6. Clement. 2. Victor 3. besides Gregory 2. and diverse
other whom they have attempted to murder. They have banished four vz.
Liberius, Sieuerius, Vigilius, Martin I, Four banished.
besides many others whom for fear of their lives they drove into banishment.
they have imprisoned six vz. Johannes 1. Johannes Six emprisoned.
9. Paschorlis 2. Boniface 8. Vrbanus 6. Clement. 7. besyd Sergius 1. and
others whom they attempted to imprison. They have deposed as much as they could
sixteen vz. Johannes 12. al. 13. Benedict. 5: Gregory 5. Benedict. Sixteen
deposed.
8. and 9. Alexander 2. Gregory 6. and 7. Gelasius 2. Innocent. 2. Alexander 3
John 22. Urban 6. Martin 5. by Alphons King of Arragon, Platin. in Alexand. 3.
Liberality of Popes toward England. Stovve an. 1171. Polidorus lib. 16.
Comin. ventura in relation. de Napoli. When would Luther and Calvin have
given three Kingdoms to England.
Eugen. 4. by procurement of Philip Duke of Millen and Julius 2. whereas on the
contrary side (to omit spiritual benefits) Popes have bestowed the Empire upon
almost al them Emperors whom they deposed, and have refused to take the Empire
from the Germans though they have been much solicited thereto by the Grecians,
and to let pass their liberality to other Princes, they have bestowed the
Kingdom of Ireland upon Henry the second, and of Naples and Sicily upon Henry
3. and the most honorable title of defender of the faith upon Henry 8. Kings
of England: hereby may the indifferent reader (even setting aside the justice
of the cause, and considering only the fact) clearly perceive, whether
Christian Emperors and Princes have more tiranized over Popes, then Popes over
them, now let us come to Bells proof of his old slander here again renewed,
of the Popes taking upon them power proper to God alone.

28. A Closse (says he) affirms the Pope Bell page 14. Gloss. lib. 1. tit. 7.
c. 3.
to have celestial arbitrament, to be able to alter the nature of things,
applying the substance of one to an other, and to make something of nothing:
and the Pope (says Bell) is well pleased there with. Answer. As for the Pope
being pleased with the foresaid words, it is more then Bell knows, but sure I
am he detesteth them, if they be meant of power to create, or proper to God
alone. But well I see that which does not displease Bell, if it be given to
Princes; he condemns as intolerable blasphemy, if it be attributed to Popes.
For the foresaid words are al in the civil law, and by the Emperors applied
either to them selves, or to the Pope: as the Emperors Gratian, Valentinian,
and Theodosius de sum. Three Emperors say the P. has celestial arbitrament.
Trin. lib. 1. affirm the Popes to have celestial arbitrament, and condemn
them as infamous heretics, who follow not the religion of Pope Damasus: and
his arbitrament in spiritual matters, may be called heavenly, because his
authority therein came from heaven. That of altering the nature of things, and
applying the substance of one to an other, the Emperor Justinian C. communia
de leg. lib. 2. applies to him self Of what things Popes or Princes can
alter the nature.
and means of civil contracts, as legacis and feoffees in trust, which by his
imperial power, he can alter and change. and the like power (says the gloss)
has the Pope in contracts pertaining to spiritual matters. But of altering the
nature of natural things, neither the Emperor, nor the gloss dreamed.

29. But the words which Bell most urges are, that the Pope can make de nihilo
aliquid something of nothing. For (says he) it is a thing proper to God to
make something of nothing in all cases and at al times. But besides that the
gloss neither says that the Pope can make de nihilo aliquid, but de nullo
aliquid, neither yet in all cases, and al times, as Bell adds: the foresaid
words are taken out of Justinian. C. de rei vxor. act. lib. 1. where the
Emperor Of what nothing Popes or Princes can make something.
says, that because he can make to be accounted a stipulation, where none is,
much more he can an insufficient stipulatio^ to be sufficient: and the like
authority in humane contracts touching spiritual matters, the gloss
attributes to the Pope? and this he meant when he said, the Pope can de nullo
fecere aliquid of no contract make one. which Bell would apply to creation and
making creatures of nothing as God made the world.

30. Secondly he proves his slander, out of Gersons rep ort before answered,
and thirdly out of Gregory 9. saying. Ad firmamentum Gregor. 9. lib. 1. de
cre^. tit. 33. c. 6.
Caeli etc. to the firmament of heaven that is of the universal church, God
made two lights, Pontifical authority, and power Roial, that we may know there
is as much difference between Pope and Kings, as bet wixt sun and moon. Is
here any word of authority belonging to God? or yet of deposing Kings? but only
a comparison, of Pontifical and Royal power with the sun and moon (allowed
by the public letters Written 1279. and one exta^t in Baron. tom. 10. an.
996. Matthew. 16. verse. 19. and 18. Job. 21. v. 15. 16. Act. 20. v. 18. Matthew.
28. v. 19.
of three Princes electors) and a preferring of the Pontifical before the
Royal, which if Bell had any feeling of Christianity in him he would not deny.
Is not the loosing and binding of sins in heaven and earth, of preaching the
ghospel, admnistring the sacraments, of feeding Christ's sheep, and the like,
which belongs to Bishops, as is evident out of scripture, far more excellent
then Royal power? which as well women and children, as men: infidels, as
Christians may have.

31. The sun and moon are of the same Royal power far inferour to Pontifical
nature and quality, differing only in more or less light, but Royal power is
both of nature and quality far inferior to Pontifical: thas is more humane and
begun by Constantin called Bishops Gods and professed him self under them
Ruffin. lib. 1. hist. c. 2.
men, this supernatural and instituted by God: that common to Infidels, this
proper to christians: that passes not earth, this reaches to heaven: that
concerns only the body, this the soul: that helps men to worldhe and
transitory quietness, this to heavenly and everlasting rest. Bell could not
abide Pope Gregory saying Pontifical authority excelled Royal as far as the
sun excels the moon, nor the gloss saying, it excelled it 47. times, how
then will he abide S. Chrisostom saying it excels the kingdom Chrisost. l.
3. de sacerd. Ambros. lib. de dignit. sacerd. c. 2.
as much as the soul douth the body, or S. Ambrose saying that nothing can be
equal to Pontifical dignity, and that Royal glory, and Princes crowns, are
far more inferior to it, then lead is to glistering gould. And again nothing
in this world is more Ibid. cap. 3.
excellent then priests, nothing higher then Bishops. or S. Ignatius saying
that nothing is more honorable Ignat. epist. ad Smirnenscs.
in the church then Bishops, and that we owe the first honor to God, the
second to Bishops, the third to Kings. he exclamed against the gloss for
affirming the Pope to have celestial arbitreme^t, what will he say to S.
Chrysostom Chrisosto. hom. 5. in illud Esaiae vidi Dominum, and homil. 4. item
hom. 60. ad populum.
(worthily in his own judgment Surnamed the goulde^ mouthed doctor) auouching
that the Priests throne is in heaven, that he has authority to judge of
celestial business, and that God has put the very Princes head under the hands
of the priest, to teach us that the priest is a Prince greater then he. And in
an other place affirms hom. 83. in Matthew. Hom. 2. in 2. in Timoth. Gregor.
lib. 4. epist. 31. S. Ciprian. lib. 3. epist. 9. notes that the beginning of
Schisms and Heresies is by contempt of Priests and Bishops. Themistius in l.
consul. apud Socratem. l. 3. c. 25. Arian Bishops more for the palace then for
the Church. Hilar. l. co^t. Constant.
a Deacon to have greater power then an Emperor, and advises us that who
dispiseth the Priest, at length falls to contemn God. and S. Gregory writing
to the Emperor him self says priests are certain Gods amongst men, and
therefore to be honored of al even of Kings. But Bell in debasing priesthood,
and too too much exalting Princes, shows him self to be a right Apostata
from priesthood, and a right heretic, who, as Themistius said, honor not God
but Princes. And thus much of Bells eight steps.

32. Thus thou see Christian reader that of these eight steps, which Bell
imagined the Pope had to climb to his superiority over Princes, two of them to
wit the first and second were steps rather to fall, then to climb by, three vz.
the fourth, sixth, and seventh, were evident acts of such authority already
enjoyed, and acknowledged by Princes, the third was but a recovery of his
ancient liberty, the fieft is no more a step for the Pope to climb, then
temporal livings are to other bishops. And the eight and last is a manifest
untruth. But the true step he Matthew. 16. v. 18. Joan. 21. v. 17.
omitted, which is Christ's promise to S. Peter to build his Chruch upon him.
and his commission to feed his sheep, by virtue whereof, al S. Peter's
successors challendge to be spiritual superior to all that are in Christ's
church, or be his sheep, be they Princes, or subjects, as is evident out of
the Bonif 8. extrauag. vna^ sanctam. de maioritate and obedientia. Sed epist.
Joan. 2. ad Iustinianum Imper. Gregor. lib. 1. epist. 24. Bell page 17. Bell
slandereth Princes.
foresaid decree of Boniface 8.

33. Bell having thus (as you have heard) slandred Popes, thought not to let
either Kings, or Emperors pass free, but says that some of them have opened
the windovv to al Antichristian tyrany. Greater injury he could not do to
Christian Princes, then to accuse them of such horrible impiety of opening the
window not to some, but to al Antichristian tirany. No marvel if he spare
nether Pope nor Priest, who thus handles Princes? If one ask proof of his
slander, he brings none, but it suffizeth that he has said it, his word
alone is sufficient to condemn many Kings, and Emperors. This is the respect
Protestants bear, even to the greatest Monarchs, when they are against their
proceedings. So Luther said Princes for Luther. lib. de saecular. potest. edit.
1523. lib. cont. duo edicta Caesaris 1524. Lib. cont. Henric. Regem Angl.
the most part were either the veriest fools or arrantest knaves. And again.
The Turk is ten times better and wiser then the Emperor, and other Princes
whom he calls idiots doults, mad, furious, and frantik fools, and namely
King Henry 8. he reuileth with such shameful, such spitful, and scurrilous
terms as I am ashamed to write. And amongst Protestants nothing more usual
then to call Princes, Antichrists, and slaves of Antichrist.

34. Bell not yet satisfied with iniuring page 17. untruth 26.
the Pope, adds that he has made it sacrilege to dispute of his power,
which is a manifest untruth disproued by him self art: 2. p: 26 where he
affirms that the Pope allows Bellarmins works, who at large disputes of
his power. And because Sigebert (whom Bell untruly calls the Popes dear
friar, untruth 27. Trithem. in Sigebert.
for he was his utter enemy, and to his power favored the schismatical and
Excommunicated Emperor Henry 3, in whose behalf he fained diverse things as
Baron. proves Baronius.
tom. 9. An. 774.) reprehendeth them, who taught the people that they owe no
obedience to evil Kings, Bell inueyeth against Catholics. Whereas Catholics
utterly Art. 15. damnat. in Council. Constantien.
defy such Doctrine, and condemned it long since in the Protestants great
grandfather wiclife and have learned of the first Pope S. Peter to be subject
in all fear, not only to good and modest 1. Pet. c. 2. v. 18. Cap. 3. parag,
4. 5. 6.
masters, but also to way ward. But Protestants teach that and worse Doctrine,
as appears by what has been said before, and by Godman, who (as Couel
writerh) published to the world, that it was lawful to kill Couel of Church
government. c 4. p 35.
wicked Kings, and whitingham a deane of no small account, in his preface
before Godmans book, of firmed it to be the doctrine of the best learned,
meaning Protestants think it lavvful to kill evil Kings. Bell page 18. 28 vnttuth
29 untruth 30 untruth
(as Couel thinks) Calvin and the rest.

35. Finally because the end of this article should not be unlike the beginning
he concludes it with three untruths as he began it, saying. That the Popish
religion has been always condemned of great learned Papists. If he had named
the men, and points of religion, as he told the time, the three untruths would
have appeared in their likeness. As I guess he means of the Popes power for
deposing Princes, which I confess some Papists have denied, but nether were
they the greatest learned men, nor always were there any such, nor has he
proved it to be a point of Popish religion; And thus much of Bells first
Article. Wherefore remember (Bell) from whence thou art fallen and do penance.
Apoc: 2.

THE SECOND ARTICLE TOUCHING THE MASS.
PREFACE.
Bell deuideth this Article into four members, in the first whereof he impugneth
the real presence of Christ in the Eucharist; in the second the sacrifice of
the Mass; in the third he inueigheth against the recantation which Berengarius
made when he adjured Bells heresy; and in the fourth he treats of apparent
contradictions which (says he) are in the Mass. And the like method we will
keep in our answer.

CHAP. I. Bells reason against the Real Presence of Christ in the B. Sacrament
answered, his untruth and dissimulation therein discovered.
S. Paul prophetied. That in the 1. Timoth. 4. v. 1.
last times some shall depart from the faith, attending to the spirits of errors
and doctrine of diuils. Which prophecy is most manifestly fulfilled in these
heretics who impugn the Catholic doctrine of the B: Sacrament. For of
Berengarius Berengarius
(first public enemy of this Sacrament) Malmesburienses an English Chronicler
Malmesbut. lib. 3. in Guilielmo 1. p. 114.
of his time, writes, that when he came to visit S. Fulbert B: of Charters
lying on his death bed, the holy Bishop commanded him to be put forth,
protesting that he did see a huge diuil standing by him, and corrupting many to
follow him by his flattering hand and alluring breath.

2. Luther him self confesses l. de Luther. Saints repetit. de Euchar. c.
10. Bellarm. l. 1. de Missa c. 5. Surius in comment. 1534. Genebrard. in chron.
Erasm. cont. epist. non sobriam Lutheri. Carolstadius. Zuinglius. Lindan. ep.
dissuasor. p. 114. Occolampadius. Brent. in Recognit. Iezlerus lib. de diuturn.
belli eucharist.
Missa Angul: to: 7: fol: 228. to have disputed visibly with the diuil and been
persuaded by him to abrogate Mass. And of this his conference with the diuil,
besides others, Erasmus a ioly confesser in Fox his calender is a most
sufficient witness. To Carolstadius a great friend at the first of Luther
appeared a diuil as he was preaching as testifies Erasmus Alberus. Zwinglius
an eger enemy of the real presence testifies of him self l. de subsid:
Euchar: That about the Eucharist he was instructed of a spirit which (says he
I know not, whether it was black, or white. And Luther l. cit: writes that he
thinks Occolampadius, and others to have been choked by the diuil. And the
Lutherans call the Zinglians diuilish heretics, possessed and obsessed of diuils
and their opinions diabolical.

3. Finally Calvin, epist: ad Bucer. confesses Calvin.
that he had a familier, to which he Genium.
imputes his vain of cursing. Thus we see the very Fathers of Protestantisme
to have been haunted, and instructed of diuils. Who therefore can doubt but
their doctrine is the doctrine of diuils, and they, such as having departed from
the Catholic faith, wherein they were christend, and bred, did harken to the
spirits of errors, and teach the doctrine, which they had learnd of the diuil
appearinge in visible form. Now let us see how Bell like a good scholar
defends his black masters and oppugneth the Catholic, doctrine.

4. He begineth his second Article as he Bell page 19.
did the first, with a syllogism with dissimulation, and untruth. Aquinas
(says he) 31. untruth.
Bellarm: the Council of Trent, and the rest of the Conc. Trid. sess. 13 can 1.
Aquinas 3. p. 76. art. 1. Bellarm. l 1. de Euchar. c. 2.
Romish brood hold constantly, as an article of their Christian faith, that the
true organical and natural body of Christ, which is localy in haven, is also
truly, and really under the form af bred and wine in the sacrifice of the
mass: but this (sait^ he) is impossible, as which imply^th flat contradiction!
ergo etc. I accept Bells confession of the Catholics constancy in their faith,
which is Catholics* constant in their faith.
a virtue far from him self, who has twice altered lis religion.

5. Bells dissimulation is evident, for he 3. dissimulation.
could not be ignorant that Luther, and his Lutherish brood hold the real
presence of Christ's body, and blood in the Eucharist, no les then Catholics,
though otherwise then they do. For Luther accurseth them Luther. in praefat.
lib. Sueuarum. In postrema confess. fidei de caena Domini. Et thesti. 15. and 27.
and accounts them blasphemers, and damned forever, and in plain teatmes
defines them to be heretics and out of Gods church, who deny the body and
blood of Christ to be received with carnal mouth in the venerable Eucharist.
This was Luthers sentence and judgment upon them that deny the real presence,
Joan. Lauatherus. Joan. Ieclerus.
which his brood defend with tooth and nail, as is evident by their endless
and mortal wars against the Zuinglians and Caluinists, whereof two
Protestants have written two books.

6. Bells want of fidelity appears in this proposition whereof he makes no
doubt. For albeit al Catholics believe as a point of their faith, that Christ's
true and natural body and the very self same which in heaven is organical, is
in the B: Sacrament: yet nether the Council of Trent, S. Conc. Trid. sess. 13.
can. 1. S. Thom. 3. p. q. 76. art. 1. Bellarm. lib. 1. de Euchar. c. 2.
Thomas nor Bellarmin in the places quoted by Bell, affirm as a point (and much
less as an Article) of their faith, that it is there organical. For
organization being an accident of the body depending of quantity, they hold no
otherwise his organization, then they do his quantity to be in the Sacrament.
The Council only defines whole Christ, that is every substantial part of him
to be in the Eucharist, without any mention of his quantity or other accidents
as appears by the words of the Canon. If any shall deny the body and blood
together with the soul and Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, and consequently
whole Christ to be in the Eucharist etc. be he accursed. And in the same sense
said S. Thom: 3 p: q. 76 ar: 1. that according to the Catholic faith whole
Christ is in the Sacrament. And though art: 4. he teach that Christ's quantity
is also in the Sacrament, yet affirms he it not as a point of faith. In like
sort Bellarm: in the place which Bell cites teaches, and truly, that Christ's
quantity is in the Sacrament, but not with Bells addition, as a point of faith.
And though l 3. de Euchar: c. 5. he call it the common sentence of the Schools
and Church, yet condemns he not the contrary as heretical, but only as false
and erroneous. And as for Durand accom Gabriel Durand. 4. d. 10. q. 2. Occam 4.
q. 4. and tract. de Eucharist. c. 29. mayor. q. 2. Gabr. art. 2. concl. 2. and
lect. 43. in Can.
Mayor, and Satus also as Saints reports (whom Bell can not deny to be of
the Romish brood as he scornefully speaks) they thought that Christ's body had
not his quantity in the Sacrament and consequently must needs think that it
was not there organical. And to disprove Bell, Iuel in his apology writes,
that some Papists affirm Christ's quantity to be in the Eucharist, others deny
it. For some being persuaded in Philosophy, that quantity essentially requires
aptitudinal commensuration to place, so that if it be put in a place it must
needs be coextended to the place, and thinking that they cold sufficiently
verify Christ's words by teaching the substance of his body to be in the
Sacrament denied his quantity to be there, saying that God supplieth the effest
thereof so far forth as is necessary for the soul to inform the body, as in all
Deuines opinion, he supplieth the effect of coextension to place, which also is
a natural disposition required to life and information of a body or matter. But
other Deuines of greater learning and gravity (judging it an inconvenient thing
to grant Christ's lively body to want in the Sacrament his quantity and figure,
and considering better of the nature of quantity, found that no commensuration
to place was essential unto it, but only a natural propriety, and therefore
separable by Gods power from it, as light is from the Sun) taught that
Christ's has his quantity in the Sacrament as a natural accident accompaning
his body. And albeit this be a certain truth and not only the common opinion
of Schools but seems also to be the common sense of Catholics, yet says
Suarez a learned author Tom: 3. in 3. part. Suarez
disput: Si stec: 2. It is to hard a censure to condemn the contrary of
heresy. For (says he) I find nether express definition nor irrefragable
testimony of Scripture against it, nor yet any thing which can be convinced out
of revealed principles, and all the reasons made against it, are deduced out of
Philosophical Principles, true and certain but not altogether evident. In like
sort Claudius de Saints repetit. 4. de Euchar: c. 4. testifies Saints.
that this matter is not clearly defined by the Church or Scripture. What shame
therefore must it be to Bell to avouch that al Catholics hold as a point of their
faith that Christ's body is organical in the Eucharist, and declining the
principal question about the being of Christ's body in the Sacrament (which is
an undoubted point of our faith, and against which his chief argument, which
as he says all the Papists in England can not answer takes no hold) to impugn
the being of Christ's quantity in the Eucharist.

7. Nevertheless because it is a thing most true and most agreeable to our
faith. I willingly undertake the defense thereof. Let us see therefore how Bell
disproueth it. Forsooth because it implies contradictio^ for a greater body as
Christ's is to be contained in a lesser as in a cake. page 20. Reason the ground
of Bells faith.
Behold the foundation of Bells faith, the best weapon of this stout
challenger, the strong reason which al English Papists can Scripture. Matthew 26.
v. 26 28. Marc. 14. v. 22. 24. Luc. 22. v. 19. 20. 1. Cor. 11. v. 24. 25.
not solue. We bring Christ's express words auouching that what he gave to his
Apostle at his last supper was his body given, and his blood shed for remission
of sins, which undoubtedly he meant of his true body and blood. For he never
gave bred, nor shed wine for remission of sins. We object also his other
words where he calls his flesh truly meat and his blood drink, as it were,
preventing Joan. 6. v. 55.
the figurative exposition of Caluinists. Besides the words of S. paul
testifying, that who receaueth vnvvoorthily the B: Sacrament is guilty 1. Cor.
11. v. 29.
(not of bread and wine il received) but of the body and blood of our Lord.

8. To these testimonies of holy writ Fathers.
we adioyne the uniform consent of Fathers, who not only continually call the
Eucharist the body, and blood of Christ, and not once a bare figure, but withal
some Damasc. l. 4. de fid. c. 14. 7. Synod. Act. 6.
of them affirm that it is no bare figure, but the very body, and damn the
contrary, as abominable and extreme madness, contrary to tradition of Apostles,
and Fathers, and against the Chrysosto. hom. de Euchat. in Eucenijs. Cyril.
catech. 3.
verity and propriety of Christ's words. Others deny it to be bread albeit our
taste so judge. Others say that the nature of bread is changed, Nissen. orat.
mag. catech. c. 37. Cipria. sermon. de Caena. Cyril. Alex. ad Calosyr. Chrysosto.
hom. cit. Damas. sup. August. lib. 2. cont. aducrs. legis and Prophet. c. 9.
tom. 6. Leo sermon. 6. de ieiun. 7. mensis. Aug. sermon. 1. in psalm. 33. tom. 8.
Hilar. 8. de Trinitat.
that bread changed in nature, not in show; is by the omnipotency of God made
flesh: that bread and wine are turned supernaturally into the verity of
Christ's proper flesh. Others say we eat Christ's flesh and drink his blood
with our mouths, that what we believe with faith we receive with mouth.
Others avouch that Christ at his last supper carried him self secundum litera^
(that is truly and really) in his hands. Finally others say that as Christ is
the true son of God, so is it true flesh and blood which we receive and
drink. These kind of speeches and many other of the like sort can never be
verified, unless the real presence of Christ in the B. Sacrament be defended.

9. Against al these irrefragable testimonies Quod intelligimus debemus rationi
quod credimus authoritati. Aug. l. de vtil. cred. c. 11. Heretics shift to
expound scriture figuratively. Joan. 10. v. 30. Heretics be figure slingers.
10. 1. v. 14.
of Gods word, and holy Fathers, Bell opposes humane reason, though he expound
them figuratively, because he dare not deny them in bare words which has been
cuer the shift of heretics. For so the Arrians being urged with these words,
I and the Father are one expounded them figuratively, because they durst not
deny them, and their reason could not conceive how two persons should be one
nature. Likewise the Marcionits understood those words. The word was made
flesh figuratively because by reason they could not understand how two natures
should be in one person. And for the self same cause Bell and Protestants Tantum
ritati obstrepit ad ulter sensus quantum corrupt or stilus. Tertull. lib. de
praescript. Scripture teaches more plainly Christ's real presence in the
Sacrament then it does his Godhead and humanity. S. Augustine. lib. 3. de
doctrine. Christian. cap. 10. tom. 3. Calvin. 4. instit. c. 17. parag. 20. and
23.
understand these words, This is my body given for you, my blood shed for you
in remission of sins, figuratively. For these words do as plainly teach the
verity of Christ's body and blood in the Eucharist, as those other teach the
verity of his Godhead or humanity, yea more plainly, because in these words it
is expressed what body, and blood is in the Eucharist, vz. that which was given
for us and shed in remission of sins, which kind of addition is not in those
other words.

10. But as S. Austin says If an opinion of error have preoccupated the mind,
whatsoever is otherwise affirmed in Scripture men vvil understand it
figuratively. Hereupon Calvin said that the reverence of Gods word was no
sufficient pretense to reject his reasons: And calls it foolish stubbernes to
contend upon the words of Scripture, and them catchers of sillables, foolish,
superstitious, who stick fast to Christ words. What is this good Reader but
to make reason the rule of faith, and not to captiuare our understanding to
Gods word, but to captiuate it to our reason, and make it speak properly, or
figuratively, according as reason Magdeburg. in praefat. centur. ad reginam
Elizabeth.
can comprehend it. Truly therefore wrote the Magdeburgian Protestants of such
as deny the real presence. With philosophical reasons they so make void the
testament of God, that the body and blood of Christ concerning the presence and
communication thereof according to Christ's own most clear, most evident, and
most powerful words, they wholly remove, and with marvelous perplexity of
words do coulorably deceive.

11. But to come to Bells reason. How proves he it to be co^tradiction for a
greater S. Aug. l. 14. cont. Faust. c. 9. S. Ambros. l. de initiatis. c. 9.
tom. 4. Joan. 6. v. 52. Omnes haereticorum and Gentiliu^ quaestiones eaedem
sunt quia non Scripturarum auctoritatem sed humanae rationis sensum sequu^tur.
Hieron. in Oseae 7. S. Chrisost. hom. 60. ad populum and 83. in Matthew. S.
Ephren. lib. de natura Dei minime scrutanda. Chrisosto. sup.
body to be contained in ales. Surely not at al, but as Pithagoras autos epha
or as Faustus the Manichist who as S. Austin writes said it, and away. Should
not he want al reason, who for such a reason proposed without al proof, should
forsake Christ's express words, and plain testimonies of holy Fathers? Breefly
I might answer with S. Ambrose. What seek thou the course of nature in
Christ's body, seeing he was against natures order borne of a virgin, and
admonish Bell of the faithles Capharnaits asking. How can he give his flesh to
be eaten? For to what other end tends Bells reason then to ask. How can God
give us his flesh? Let him harken to S. Chrysostom, S. Ephrem and others,
aduising him not to be curious but faithful, not to trust to humain sense, and
reason, which is ofte^tymes deceived, but to Christ's word. He has said
(writes S. Chrysostom) This is my body, let us have no doubt, albeit it seem
absurd to our sense, and reason, which he says* let his word in all matters,
but espetially in the Sacraments overcome our sense, and reason, which is
oftentimes deceived, as Bells is here.

12. For albeit it be contradiction for a How it is contradiction for a
greater body to be in a les, and how not.
greater body occupying a place proportionate to it greatness, to be contained
in a les (for so it should be both contained, and not contained in the les:)
yet no contradiction at al it is for a greater body retayning it greatness, to
be so coarcted by Gods omnipotency, as it fill a place far les, then is naturaly
due, or proportionate to it greatness. For in this case it follows not, that
it should both be contained, and not contained in the lesser body (as in the
former case) but contained only. And thus we say has Christ disposed of his
body in the sacrament. And that God ca^ thus dispose of bodies, we Proofs that
God can put a greater body in a lesser. S. Beda in Lucam. S. August. de haeres
c 82. tom. 6. Ambr. ep. 81. Leo ser. 1. and 2. de natiu. Nissen. ser. de
occursu Domini. Damasc. l. 4. de fid. c. 14.
do not only barely affirm, as Bell does the contrary, but can prove by many
ways.

13. First because Christ's body in his nativity opened not his virgin mothers
womb. Ergo then it occupied not a room naturally proportionat to the greatness.
The consequence is evident. The Antecedent I prove, because it is a point of
the Catholic faith as testify S. Bid and S. Austin, and appears by
universal consent of al Fathers as S. Ambrose: S. Leo: S. Nissen, S. Damascen:
and others, and professed in our Creed, that Christ was borne of a virgin,
which undoubtedly Ideo clausa quia virgo. Ambr. de instit. virg. c. 7. August.
sup. and l. 1. cont. Iul. c. 2. to. 7. Iouinian said Christ's body should be a
phantasme if our lady had remained a virgin in her trauail. Aug. cont. Iul.
cit. Hieron. in Ezechiel. 44. Ambros. lib. de instit. virginis c. 7. Aug. sermon.
18. de tempore.
is meant of a perfect virgin, as well in body, as mind. And the contrary was the
heresy of Iouinian, who (as S. Austin writes) affirmed that our Ladies
virginity was lost pariendo by child bearing, which he could not otherwise
understand then by the Child's opening her womb, because virginity can not be
otherways lost pariendo by child bearing, and sure it is she lost not
virginity by conceauing.

14. Moreover holy Fathers prove this truth out of that prophecy of Ezechiel
44. v. 2. of a gate shut and not opened by which the Lord alone should pass
understanding by this shut and vnopened gate the virginal womb of our B: Lady.
And Albeit some Fathers use the word of opening the womb in their speech of our
Ladies child birth, yet they mean not properly, but use the name of the effect
for the natural cause thereof. For because children naturally do open their
mothers wombs, both Scripture, and Fathers do sometimes call child bearing
opening the womb, and barennes shutting the womb. Of Scripture this is evident
out of Gen: 20: 29: 30. and 1. reg: 1. of Fathers it is manifest by S. Hierome
who though he S. Hierom. dial. 2. cont. Pelagian.
say Christ opened the gate of the virgins womb, yet he adds that it
continually remained shut, whereby he explicateth how before he took the opening
vz. of Child bearing without any proper opening, for otherwise the womb could
not remain still shut.

15. Nevertheless Protestants, because it makes for the Catholic Doctrine of
the B: Sacrament, deny the Antecedent, and Willet proves their denial, because
as S. Willet cont. 13. p. 453. S. Luc. 2. v. 23.
Luke says, Christ was presented in the temple according to the law. Every
male opening the matrice shall be holy to the Lord. But by the like reason he
might prove that Christ was conceived by man's seed, because S. Luke in the same
chapter writes that our Lady was purifyed according to Moises law, which was
as we read leu: 12. of a woman which having received seed had borne a male
child. The answer to both places is the same. Because naturally women conceive
by receiving seed, and children are borne by opening their wombs, therefore the
law used these terms. But as the one law affirmed not, that no woman could
conceive without receiving seed, so nether the other, that no child could be
borne without opening his mothers womb. And as willets heresy made him to open
our Ladies wo^b, so his conscience made him to shut it again. For why should
he teach that it was shut after her delivery, if he did not think the opening
did prejudice her virginity? The like proof might be drawn out of Christ's
entering to his Apostles See S. Hilarie lib. cont. Constant. prope fine^.
the doors being shut says S. Luke, and of his issuing out of the sepulchar
before the Angel had removed the stone.

16. Secondly God can by his omnipotency bring a Camel through a needles eye as
well as a rich man into heaven: but he can bring a rich man to heaven keeping
his riches, Ergo a Camel keeping his greatness through a needles eye. The
Proposition is evident out of our Saviors words Math* 19. v. 24. 26. The
Assumption is manifest and approved by S. Austin epist. 89. quaest. S.
Augustine. tom. 2.
4. And the same S. Austin lib. de spir. and lit. c. 1. and Nazian. Orat. 36.
affirm that it is S. Gregor. Nazianz.
possible for God to draw a Camel through a needles eye. Thirdly God made the
furnace Daniel. 3.
of Babylon, though never so hot, not to heat, yea to refresh the three
children, why then can he not make a great body to occupy but a small room?
For to occupy place is an effect and accident of quantity, as to heat is of
heat. Moreover nature by condensation does make a body to occupy less room
then is due unto it, as appears in the freesing of water, and this it does
with out destroying any quantity thereof, as many excellent Philosophers even by
natural reason do gather. And can not God work the like effect without
condensation by some other supernatural means? Finally Bell teaches that every
sin of it nature Bell art. 6. p. 81.
excludes grace, and yet God of his power makes some sin to stand with
grace: why then can he not make quantity to exclude no body out of the place,
though of it nature it should so do. And thus much touching Bells reason. Now
let us see his authorities.

CHAP. II. The Authorities alleged by Bell against the Real Presence ansvvered.
AFTER the forsaid reason he alleges Bell page 20.
some few authorities. The first is of Caietan who affirmed as Angles (says
he) reports. That there is no text that conuinceth the Reader to understand
these words. This is my body properly. But Bell greatly wrongeth both Caietan
and Angles, in changing the word Heretik into Reader. For Angles in 4. q. 4.
attributes that opinion to Caietan only concerning Heretics, and adds q. 5.
that he seems to have recalled it. But how conuincent Luther. ep. ad
Argentinenses. vid. Bellarm. lib. 1. de Euch. c. 1.
the Scripture is in this point let Bell learn of Luther writing. That he was
willing to deny the real presence and endeavored vvithal his power, but could
not satisfy the Scripture.

2. But suppose Caietan had said as Bell alleges. what then? Does he therefore
deny the real presence, or think those words not to be understood properly? no
surely? yea he plainly avouches both. Or does Bell think that euety point of
faith is so evidently delivered in Scripture, as the very words suffice to
convince any reader though never so obstinate? why then are not al heretics
converted by reading Scripture? yea why admytteth Bell p. 134. 135.
he a tradition which is not at al in Scripture? If not, why infers he the
Scripture not to teach the real presence if it teach it not clearly?

3. The second is S. Tho: Aquinas who S. Thom. 4. d. 10. q. 1. art. 1. Bell p.
20.
(says he) affirms constantly. Corpus Christi non esse in pluribus locis
simul, secundum proprias dimensiones, that Christ's body is not in many places
at once, according to the proper dimensions thereof. Whose assertion (says Bell)
is my flat position. But Bell herein 1. contradicts him Contradict. 9. untruth
32.
self 2. belyeth S. Thomas 3. understands him not. He contradicts him
self, for before he said Aquinas held constantly as an article of the
Christian faith, that the true body of Christ is truly and really in the
Sacrifice of the Mass: and now he says that he affirms constantly an
assertion which is Bells flat position to the contrary. How can Aquinas hold
constantly two contradictory points? He belyeth Aquinas, for he is so far from
maintayning Bells position, as in the very place which Bell cites, his
conclusion is this. Under the Sacrament of the altar, is contained the true
body of Christ which he took of the virgin, and to say the contrary is
heresy. Lastly he understands not Aquinas. Bell understands not Aquinas.
For he thinks that Aquinas by the forsaid words means, that Christ's body
can not be in many places at once with his proper dimensions, and thereupon
infers, that Aquinas thinks Christ's body can not be in many places at
once, because (says Bell) it can not be without those dimensions which
naturally pertayne unto it. But (to omit Bells impious assertion, that God can
not keep a body without his natural appurtenances) Aquinas meaning is plain
and evident vz. That the total cause of Christ's body being in two places at
once, is not his own dime^sions alone, but they together with the dimensions
of the body converted into his body. For he thinks Christ's own dimensions to
be the cause of his being in that place where he is naturally, and the
dimensions of the body which is transubstantiated, the cause of his being,
where he is Sacramentally. Which opinion of his, about the cause of Christ's
being in many places, makes nothing to this purpose.

4. Thirdly he cites Durand whom he Bell p. 20. Contradict. 10. untruth 33. p.
34.
says holds the very same opinion. But in this also he both contradicts
him self, and belyeth Durand. For in the fourth member of this article, he
tells us, that Durand holds the form of bread to be changed vz. into the
body of Christ. True it is that Durand (as before I cited) thinks the
quantity of Christ's body not to be in the Eucharist, yet nevertheless most
constantly, he both affirms and proves the substance of his body to be there.

5* Fourthly he alleges S. Austin writing. page 20. S. Aug. epist. 57. ad
Dardanum. De consecrat. did. 2. con. Prima quidem. lib. 20. cont. Faustum. c.
it. tom. 6.
That Christ as man is in aliquo loco Coeli propter very corporis modum: in
some place of heaven for the manner of a true body. Again. His body must be in
one place Item. He can not be at once in the Sun Moon and on the cross
according to corporal presence. But in all these places he speaks of the
natural manner of bodies being in place, as appears both by those words
(propter very corporis modum) and because he disputes against the Manichists,
who Ex August. epist. cit.
douted (as the Protestant vbiquists do now) that because Christ's body was
united to his Godhead, it thereby became every where as God is, which (says S.
Austin) Ibid.
is to destroy the nature of a true body, nether follovveth it (says he) that
what is in God be every where as God is.

6. But that Christ's body being naturally in one place, might be Sacramentally
in an other S. Austin never doubted, yea expressly S. Augustine. tom. 8.
affirms ser: 1. in psalm: 33. where, he says. That Christ at his last supper
carried him self in his own hands secundum literam (that is truly and
properly) and as no other man can carry him self. And lib: de cur: pro: mort.
c. 16. He S. Augustine. com. 4.
doubts whether Martyrs be at once in different places which argues that he
thought they could be. And S. Chrisostom S. Chrisost. com. 4.
hom: 17. in epist: ad hebr: In many places is offered not many Christ's, but
the same Christ every where, here and there whole, one body not many bodies.
And thus much of Bells first member of this article against the real presence.
Now let us proceed to the second against the Mass.

CHAP. III. The Mass proved, Bells argument against it answered and his
manifold untruths therein disproued.
S. Ignatius epist. ad Smyrnen. writes S. Ignatius apud Theodorerum. dialog. 3.
of old heretics. That they admit not oblation and Eucharist, because they
confess not the Eucharist to be the flesh of our Savior which suffered for
our sins. And therefore no marvel if Bell having in the former member impugned
the real presence, do in this inueigh against the oblatio^ or sacrifice of the
Mass, where, according to Christ's own action and institution, his body and
blood under the forms of bread and wine, are offered unto almighty God. That
Christ at his last Christ offered sacrifice at his last supper.
supper made an oblation to God is proved many ways.

2. First because he did then give his which is given, which is shed. Therefore
then did he give his body, and shed his blood to some person for his Apostles,
though soon after he gave, and shed them after an other manner on the Cross.
Secondly because in S. Luke it is said of Luc. 22. v. 19. 20.
of sins: but at the passion there was no Cup powered out. Ergo at supper the
Cup was powered out for remission of sins. The proposition is out of the Greek
text, where the word powered out agrees with the Cup, and with none else touto to
poterion en to aimati mou to ecchunomenon. The assumption is plain for there
was no Cup at the passion. Thirdly at the same time when Christ's

3. Many things more might have been said in defense of Mass which are
largely, and learnedly handled by Bellarm. in his 2. book de Missa to. 2. and
something shall be added hereafter as breuity will permit, and occasion shall serve.
Only here because the Denial of Mass proper doctrine of devils. Luther. l. de
Missa angul. to. 7. fol. 228. Saints repetit. 1. de Eucharist. c. 10.
Bellarm. l. 1. de Missa c. 5. Surius comment. 1534. 1517. Genebrard. in chron.
See Erasmus cont. epist. no^ sobriam Lutheri.
Reader may perceive from what spirit the hatred of Mass proceeds I
advertise him that Luther writes of him self, that he had said Mass 15.
years together thinking it had been a holy thing, until on a time Satan
appearing visibly unto him, and disputing with him against Mass, persuaded him
to detest it. From this spirit proceeded first the hatred of Mass, and this
confession God would Luther should him self make, and publish in print, that al
Christians who had any care of their souls, should detest such doctrine, which
the chief precher thereof professes he learnt of the devil, and highly
reverence that which the devil so much hates.

4. On the other syd S. James his Mass S. James Mass.
is yet extant, and Jewel in his sermon at Paul's Cross 1560. confessed that
the Mass Rastal in confutat. p. 156.
had Ch^ists institution. Which is breefly to confess that Mass was
instituted by Christ and the Apostles, and that our Mass is good, which in
substance is al one with that of S. James. Likewise the Masses of S. Basil and
S. Chrysostom are yet extant and S. Basil and S. Chrisost. Mass S Ambros
Mass. S. Ambros. l. 5. epist. 33.
at this day used of the Grecians, as the Mass of S. Ambros is used in Milan
where he was Bishop, and of him self he writes thus. I abode in my function
and began to say Mass. S. Austins use and reverence of Mass appears by his
words sermon. 91. de temp. In S. Augustine. tom. 10.
the lesson which shall be read to us at Mass etc. and by his complaint ser:
251 of some that compelled the Priest to shorten the Mass and by his testimony
of a miracle wrought, by offering the Sacrifice of Christ's body l. 22. de
ciuit: c: 8: which Sacrifice says he con: 1. in psalm: 33. 17. de ciuit: c. 5
and li: de fid: ad Pet: is frequented in all the world.

5. S. Gregory's devotion to Mass, him S. Gregory.
self testifyeth in these words we every day say Mass in veneration of
Martyrs. l. 7. epist: 29. Councels.
Indict 1: And to omit the Councels of Ephesus, Agatha, Mileuit, and others,
which Tom. 1. Conciliorum. S. Beda lib. 1. histor. 23. 25. and 26.
approve Mass; it may suffice for Englishmen that certain it is that S.
Austin who first converted our English nation to Christ's faith, both said Mass
and wrought miracles in confirmation of that faith and service of God which he
preached. And in honor of Mass have our Ancestors named diverse England names
the feasts of the yeear of Mass.
principal feasts of the year as Christ-masse Candle-masse Michael-masse
Martin-masse, builded Churches, erected aultars, founded Monasteries, and
endued Bishoprics and benefices, and lived and dyed in use and honor of Mass.
And not only they, but all the Christian world as Grecians Armenians,
Protestants confess that al Christians use Mass. Chytreus orat. de statu
Ecclesiae in Graetia. Clauin. l. 4. c. 18. and parag. 1. and 11. Lindan. ep.
dissuasoria. p. 108.
Ethiopians, Moronits, Syrians, Russets and others, as testifyeth Chytreus a
Protestant. And Calvin confesses that the whole world believed Mass to be a
propitiatory Sacrifice, and that in this the Fathers are against him. And who
is so careless of his salvation as to forsake the Fathers together with the
whole world, and follow one lewd Minister condemned of buggery, as the
authentical process yet extant in Noioun does record.

6. Now then let us hear Bells or rather Bell p. 22.
the devils arguments against Mass. The Apostle (says he) tells us that
Christ rising from untruth 34.
the dead dies no more: The Papists tell us that Christ dies every day, nay a
thousand times aday in the daily Sacrifice of their Mass. But better might we
say that Bells tale of the Papists, conteyneth a thousand untruths. For Papists
(as Calvin confesses) l. 4. instit. c. 18. Calvin.
paragr. 5. profess. That they nether vvil nor can kill Christ. But say with
Bellarmin. That it Bellarm. l. 1. de Missa. c. vltimo.
is sacrilege to say that Christ dies at Mass. Yet will Bell wring the
contrary out of Bellarm: as water out of a flint. First because he page 22.
Bellar. sup. c. 2.
grants. That a Sacrifice implies intrinsecally the consumption of the
thing sacrificed. But this is answered out of Bellarmin teaching that Sup. cap.
vltimo.
Christ has two kinds of being to wit naturally and Sacramentally. And the
consumption of his Sacramental being, in the August. lib. 13. de ciu. c. 3.
Mass, is no killing, because it is not by real separating his soul and body,
but only by consuming the Sacramental forms in which he was Sacramentally.
Bell p. 22. Sup. cap. 13. S. August. l. 2. q. euangel. q. 3. S. Ambros. in psalm.
38. and in 1. Luc. S. Chrisost. hom. 24. in 1. loc. and hom. 17. ad Hebr. Luc.
2. v. 22. 1. Reg. 1. v. 25. Leuit. c. 2. Bellar. l. 1. d^ Missa c. 12.


7. Again Bellarmin (says Bell) tells us that Christ's body and blood are
offered truly and properly in the Mass. True: and the like says S. Austin, S.
Ambros, S. Chrysostom, and others. But does Bell think every thing offered to
God to be killed? then was Christ killed when he was offered in the temple,
Samuel, when he was offered by his mother, and bread, wine, and frakincense
offered in the law, were killed. Thirdly he proves it out of Bellarmin,
writing that flesh and blood are not fit for meat unless the beast (as Bell
translateth) dye or be slain, Here Bell cold not imagine that Bellarmin spoke of
Christ (as in deed he does not) unless he think he called Christ a beast. But
because flesh and blood of beasts are not fit for our meat before the beasts be
killed, he proves by parity that Christ's flesh and blood were not fit to be
proposed in manner of meat before he was sacrifyced. And thereupon gathers
that he did Sacrifice him self at his last supper in an unbloody manner, and
after the order of Melchisedech before he gave his flesh, and blood as meat and
drink to his Apostles. Which reason he took out of S. Gregory Nissen: whose
words shall be S. Gregor. Nissen. homil. 1. de Resurrectione. Sup. cap. vlt.
alleged herafter. And of Christ's body Bellarm: professes. That it takes no
hurt, nor leeseth his natural being, when the Eucharist is eaten.

8. His fourth proof is out of Bellarm: Bellarm l. 1. de Missa. c. vltimo.
when he says. That a true and real Sacrifice requires true and real killing
quando in occisione ponitur essentia sacrificij, which Bell translateth Bell page
22. False translation. untruth 35.
thus Seeing the essence of a Sacrifice consists in killing, which (says he)
is the constant doctrine which S. Paul inculcateth to the hebrews: 9: v. 17.
25: 26. 27. 28. But this proof relyeth only upon Bells false translating the
word Quando Seeing which he should have translated when. And Bellarmins mind is
that the true Sacrifice requires true killing, when the essence thereof
consists in killing, as it does in all bloody Sacrifices. But as for the
Mass, he avouches it to be no Loc. iam cit.
Sacrifice but Sacrilege to say that Priests really kill Christ. And most false
it is that S. Paul ever thought the essence of sacrifice to consist in killing.
For beside the unbloody Sacrifice of Melchisedech, he was not ignorant of
diverse unbloody Sacrifices in the old law, as of incense, for which there was a
special altar, and of bread and wine. And in the places quoted by Bell he
affirms that it was necessary for Christ to dye, and by once dying to redeem
the world, which makes nothing to this purpose.

9. These proofs out of Bellarmin he Bell page 23.
confirms by a constant position, and general received axiom (as he says) in
the Popish untruth 35.
Church, that by virtue of the words of consecration Christ's body is put a part
from his blood, and his blood from his body, and he so slain. But omitting Bells
fond inferring Christ to be killed, if his body and blood be put a part how
soever, because not to put body and blood a part where they were not before,
but to separat them where they are united, is to kill: Else God should kill a man,
if he created a soul and body a part. Omitting I say this fond illation, a
manifest untruth it is to affirm, that to be a constant position and general
axiom in the Popish Church which she condemns as heresic in these words.
Accursed be he who shall deny that whole Christ is ^onc. Trid. sess. 13. cau. 3.
etc. 3.
contained under either form of bread and wine. And the contrary is his Master
Luthers doctrine as testifyeth Bellarm: l. 1. de Euchar: c. 2.

10. But let us hear what coulor he has Bell p. 23. Bellarm. l. 1. de Missa.
^. 12.
of this so notorious untruth. Bellarm: (says he) teaches. Ideo in cena
seorsum consecratur corpus, and seorsum sanguis etc. which Bell thus Englisheth.
Therefore is the body consecrated a part in the supper, and the blood asunder,
that we may understand the presence of the body, and blood in the supper, to be
there after the manner of a body slain, and dead. But what? is to consecrate a
part, to put a part? But Bellarm: tells him that it is a far different
thing, and that albeit Christ's body and blood be severally consecrated, yet
they are not separated, nor one without the other in the Sacrament, because as
the Counsel of Trent Conc. Trid. sess. 13. c. 3.
says, they are so naturally, and necessarily united in his resurrection, as
they can be no more disioyned. Which union because they wanted in the time of
Christ's death, if then Mass had been said, they had not only been consecrated
severally but also put a part. But what inconvenience infers Bell S. Thom.
3. p. 476. art. 1.
hereof? None at al. And thus much of his first argument against Mass.

CHAP. IIII. The rest of Bells arguments against Mass confuted.
HIS second argument consists of Bell page 23. 24.
many absurdities, and gross impieties, which (says he) follow of the Mass,
and he reckeneth diverse. First that Christ at his last supper was both sitting
at table, and borne in his own hands. But if this be absurd and impious,
impious, and absurd was S. Austin, S. Augustine. sermon. 1. in psalm. 33.
when he said that Christ at his last supper carried him self in his hands
secundum literam that is properly, and therein did more then any man can do.
But what absurdity is it more, then for a body to be in twoe places? for that
being once done, one may carry him self as well as an other. As the soul
because it is in all parts of the body, as it is in the legs carries it self
as it is in the body. The second absurdity is that Christ at his last supper
was both living and dead. But this follows not, for he was a live in the
Sacrament, though there he showed no acts of life, and as long as he is a live
according to his natural being, he is never dead in the sacrament, because his
sacramental being is a memorial of his natural being representing, and
depending of it.

2. The third absurdity is that Christ was both visible and invisible. Nether
does this follow. For though he were invisible in the Sacrament, yet it is not
true to say absolutely, he was invisible, because he was there visible in his
proper form. But that he was visible in his proper form, and invisible in
Math. 29. Mar. 16. Luc. 20. Joan. 20. 21.
the sacrament, is no more absurd, then that after his resurrection he was
visible to the Apostles, and invisible to the Jews, visible to S. Paul, and
not to his Companions Act. 9. v. 7. Willet says that S. Paul did see Willet
Co^trou. 4. q. 3. p. 11^.
no man. But we will rather believe Ananias saying that Christ appeared to him in
the way. Act. 9. v. 17. The fourth absurdity is, that Christ was at his supper
long and short, broad and narrow, light and heavy. But rather these follow, for
what length breadth or weight Christ had in his proper form, the same he had in
the sacrament, albeit it had not there the like effects of filling room, or
weighing; as nether he had when he was Math. 14. Marc. 6. Joan. 6.
borne, and walked upon the Sea.

3. The fifth is, that Christ was a sacrifice for our sins before he dyed for
us. This which Bell condemns of impiety, we have before proved it out of
Scripture to be certain verity, and for such the holy Fathers avouch it, let
Bell hear one or twoe for all. S. Gregory Nissen. orat. 1. de Resurrect. Christ
offers S. Gregor. Nissen.
him self an oblation and host for us being both the Priest, and the lamb of
God. When was this? when he gave his body to be eaten and his blood to be
drunk to his disciples. For it is manifest to every one, that man can not eat
of a sheep unless slaughtering go before eating. Seeing therefore he gave his
disciples his body to be eaten, he evidently showed that the sacrifizing was
already perfect, and absolute. S. Chrysostom also hom. de S. Chrysostom.
proditione Iudae. tom. 3. says. On that table was celebrated both Paschaes of
the figure, and of the verity. Again Judas was present, and partaked of that
sacrifice. And the Fathers are so plain for this matter, as Kemnitius
confesses Kemnitius.
they usually say that Christ's body and blood was at this supper a sacrifice,
an oblation, an host and victime, and he could not escape their authorities,
but by casting of a figure.

4. The Sixth and last absurdity or impiety which Bell infers is that al
Christ's sacrifice at his supper was imperfect, or at his passion needles. But
nether this follows. For Christ's sacrifice at his supper was a most perfect
vnbloodly sacrifice according to the order of Melchisedech, and yet his
sacrifice on the cross was needful, as the peculier price which God exacted at
his hands, for the redemption of the world, that Hebr. 2. v. 15.
as the apostle says, by death he might destroy him, who had the Empier of
death. For albeit not only Christ's whole body and blood in the Eucharist, but
even the least drop of his blood, had been a sufficient sacrifice to redeem
the whole world: nevertheless God, partly to show his great hatred toward sin
(whereof Christ bore the punishment: partly to manifest his infinite love
toward man kind, for whose salvation he would not spare the life of his only
son: partly for many other causes, exacted of Christ the superaboundant
price, and ransom of his bloody sacrifice on the cross. But let us hear how
Bell disproueth this.

5. He cites four places out of S. Paul Heb 9. and 10. to prove that one
oblation of the cross was sufficient to take away al sins in the world, and
that by it once made we are made holy, and after it once done Christ sits
at the right hand of God. But what is this to the purpose. For we affirm not
Christ to have offered sacrifice at his last supper, because his sacrifice on
the Cross was not sufficient, or we not made holy by it: but because the
scripture and fathers teach so, and Christ thereby executed the function of his
priesthood, according to the order of Melchisedech, and applied unto his
apostles the virtue of his bloody sacrifice, as he applies it unto us by the
daily sacrifice of the Mass: and did not make perfect and consummate his
bloody sacrifice, as Bell falsely chardgeth us to think. As Bellarmin (whom
only I cite because Bell accounts his testimony most sufficient) shows at
lardge lib. 1. de Missa cap. 25. Where also he answers Bells arguments. But he
should do well to object the aforesaid words of S. Paul against Calvin
blaspheminge lib. 1. instit. 16. number. 8. and 10. That nothing had been done
for us if Christ Calvin. 2. instit. c. 16. paragr. 10.
had only suffered corporal death, but we needed a greater, and more excellent
price. For this is plainly to say, that the oblation of Christ's body once was
not sufficient, nor that Christ perfected al by one oblation, which is expressly
against S. Paul Hebr. 10. v. 10. Hebr.
12. 14. And thus much for Bells second argument against the Mass.

6. The third is this, The Eucharist is a testament. Bell p. 24.
ergo either no sacrifice at al, or of no value before the testators death
because S. Paul Hebr. 9. Hebr.
v. 17. denies a testament to be of force before the testators death. Answer.
The Antecedent we grant with S. Luke 22. v. 20. though Bell him self deny it
soon after. The consequence we deny? for as the blood of calves, where with the
old testament was confirmed, was both the peoples sacrifice to God and his
testament to them as appears Heb. 9. 20. and Exodus 24. v. 8. so Christ's blood
at his supper was both his sacrifice to his father, and his testament to his
apostles: And as a sacrifice it took effect immediately, because a sacrifice
is an absolute gift made to God, dependinge of no condition to come: as the
sacrifice of Abel and Noe Genesis 4. and 8.
pleased god immediately. But as a testament it was not of force, til (as S.
Paul says) it Hebr. 9. v. 17.
was confirmed by death; because a testament is a deed of gift, not absolute,
but upon condition that the giuers death ensue.

7. Bell having (as you have heard) labored to prove the Eucharist to be no
sacrifice, 11. Contradict.
because it is a testament, straight after infers thereupon, that it is not
really Christ's blood, because it is not really a testament. Bell page 25.
For (says he) as Christ said in S. Matthew. Math. 26. v. 28. Luc. 22. v. 30.
This is my blood of the new testament: so he said in S. Luke this cup is the
new testament in my blood: But it is not really the new testament, because
remission of sins is referred to sheddinge of his blood, which was on the
cross, not at supper, Answer: The proposition I grante, and deny the
assumption: for not only the last will of the testator, but even the
authentical evidence thereof is properly called a testament. So we call the
Bible the testament, and Circumcision is called a testament, Ecclesiast. 44. v.
21. and a covenant Genesis 17. And Christ's blood is the authentical evidence of
his last will, or else he made none.

8. And Bells reason makes quite against Bell reasons against him self.
him self. For Christ's blood was shed at his supper for remission of sins, as
we proved before, and him self testifies saying then in the present tense,
which is shed for remission of sins, as the Evangelists both in Greek and
English bibles testify. But because it was not shed or powered out then in a
bloody manner, and proper form, Bell How Christ's blood was povvred out at the
last supper.
will not verefie Christ's words in that tense wherein he spoke them, not
consideringe that even then Christ's blood being in a chalice in form of wine,
was in that form powered out into the mouths of the Apostles for remission of
their sins; and Exodus 24. v. 8. Hebr. 9. v. 20
his testament thereby made, as the old was by the sprinkling of Calves blood
upon the Jews: though the ratifying and confirmation thereof, was afterward by
his death.

9 B^ls fourth argument is out of S. Paul Bell page 25.
Heb. 10. v. 18. ouc eti prosphora peri hamartias. There is not hence forth an
oblatio^ for sin, Some Catholics answer that the Apostle means an other
oblation in substance, as the oblations of the Jews were, who offered daily
different beasts, and the oblation of the Mass is in substance al one with
the oblatio^ of the Cross. This Bell impugneth, because then the Mass
sacrifice should be of infinite value, which no Papist dare avouch. Here is an
untruth 36.
untruth for many learned Papists avouch it, as Caietan, Siluester, Canus,
Ruard, Soto: Caiet. 3. part. q. 79. art. 5. Siluest. verbo Missa. q. 9. Can.
12. de locis. c. 13. ad 10. Ruard. art. 16. parag. 2. Soto 4. d. 14. q. 2. art.
2. S. Thom. 4. d. 45. q. 2. a. 4. Scot. quodl. 20. Gabriel lect. 26. in Con.
Bellarm. l. 2. de Missa c. 4. Scholastici 4. d. 45.
and others, though they grant the effect thereof to be finit, as the passion,
and intercession of Christ are of infinite valewe, though the effect they work
be but finit, because fevv are saved. But others as Thomas, Scotius, Gabriel,
Bellarmin: and deuines commonly deny Bells illation, for though the host
offered in Mass be of infinite value, yet the offeringe of it by men, is of
finit value. Because al men's actions have that value which God by his grace
gives to them, which is but sinit. And Bell by the widows offeringe Luc. 21.
might know that the value of the offering is not always correspondent to the
value of the thing offered. For rich men's gifts exceeded her 2. mytes, and yet
their offering was inferior to hers. And much more inferior is men's offerings
to the offering of Christ, though they offer the self some host.

10. But in deed the Apostle in the place cited by Bell, does not so much deny
an other oblation in substance, as an other full and perfect partakinge of
Christ's oblation, teaching the Hebrews (as he had done before and as again in
this Chapter v. 26.) that if after they have been baptized they return again
to the old law and Apostatate from Christ, they cannot have the like abundant
remission of sins applied to them as was in baptism. And this he meant by
those words, where there is remission of those (sins) now there is not an
oblation for sin, which he utters more plainly v. 26. If we sin
willingly after the knowledge of the truth received, now there is not left an
host for sins, but a certain terrible expectation of judgment. Because God
having once pardoned by baptism both offense and punishment, afterward uses
not the like mercy, but punishes sin.

11. After this Bell turns to his old custom Bell page 26.
of iniuringe his Master Bellarmin, charginge him with denial of the Mass to
be truly and properly propitiatory, because Bellarm. l. 2. de Missa c. 4.
he says, that Christ being now immortal can neither merit nor satisfy.
Whereas Bellarmin cap. 2.
spends one whole chapter of that book to prove Mass to be a propitiatory
sacrifice. And straight after those words which Bell cyteth aproueth Mass to
be a satisfactory cap. 4. cit.
sacrifice, because by it, Christ's passion according to his institution, is
applied to take away the temporal pains of the live and dead. And by the
words which Bell cites, only means that Mass is not properly propitiatory
as it proceeds from any act which Christ now has, because now he can
neither merit nor satisfy. Wherefore falsely Bell does accuse. Papists that with
them Mass is one while a propitiatory sacrifice and an other while not. For
the Tridentin Council whom they al follow, Conc. Trid. sess. 22. c. 2. and
can. 3. Bellarm. c. 2. cit.
has defined it to be truly a propitiatory sacrifice. And Bellarmin proves
it at lardge out of Scripture, Fathers, and Counsels. See Origin hom. 13. in
Leuitt. S. Chrisostom. Origin. to. 1. S. Chrysostom. tom. 5. and tom. 3. S.
Augustine. tom. 4. Bell page 26.
lib. 6. de sacerd. and hom. de prodit. Iudae S. Austin q. 57. in Leuit. S.
Beda lib. 4. Hist Chap. 22.

12. His fifth and last argument against Mass is taken out of the decree and
gloss de consecrat D. 2. Can. Hoc est thus translated by Bell. As therefore the
heavenly bread, which is the flesh of Christ, is after it manner called the body
of Christ, when in deed it is the Sacrament of Christ's body, of that body which
is visible, which is palpable, mortal, and nailed on the cross. And that
oblation of flesh, which is made by the hands of the priest is called Christ's
death, and Crucifixion, and not in truth of the thing, but in a mystery
signifyinge the thing: so the Sacrament of faith by which baptism is
understood is faith. Hitherto the decre now the gloss thereof: The heavenly
Sacrament which represents Christ's flesh truly, is called the body of
Christ, but improperly, wherefore it is said after it manner, but not in the
truth of the thing, but in the thing: signified that this may be the sense, it
is called Christ's body (that is to say) it signifies his body. These (says
Bell) are golden words (as God would) by pens of Papists delivered.

13. I accept his confession. First then S. Cratian. de consecrat. d. 2. can.
Hoc est.
Austin and S. Prosper are Papists, for (as Gratian out of whom the decree is
taken testifies) the words of the Decree were first delivered by S. Austins
pen, and after recorded S. Austin and S. Prosper Papists. Sacrificing of flesh
by Priests hands allowed by Bell. 2, False translat.
by S. Prosper. Secondly I hope Bell hereafter will allow of sacrificinge or
offering flesh by the hands of the priests, because these are part of the
golden words of that decree. For this so gentle confession, I will dissemble
with a little fault of Bells translatinge, quod visible quod palpabale mortale in
cruce positum est. Thus, which is visible palpable mortal and nailed on the
cross. When he shoud have said, which being visible palpable mortal was nailed
on the cross. Now let us hear what he gathers out of the aforesaid words to
the confusion (as he says) of Papists but he should have said to his own.

14. 1. That the blessed bread of the Eucharist is page 27.
called the Body of Christ. What is here against Papists? who willingly so call
it, but rather against Protestants who seldom or never call it so. 2. That it is
also called the passion and 37. untruth
death of Christ. This is an untruth: for not bread of the Eucharist, but the
sacrificing of flesh with Priests hands is so called. 3. That it is not Christ's
body truly. This is most true, for the bread or rather the form thereof, in
the Eucharist, is not Christ's body truly and properly 4. That it is Christ's
body as the Sacrament of Baptism is faith. This is nothing against us, who
confess bread (or rather the form thereof, called bread because it so seems
to sense) to be but a Sacrament of Christ's body.

15. 5. That it is not Christ's body in truth but in signification. This S.
Austin says not but only that the oblation of the flesh of Christ by the
priest is his death and passion not truly but in a mystery signifyinge his
death, which makes nothing against us or to this purpose. The gloss in deed
says that the Sacrament is not Christ's body in truth, but in signification and
the same say al Chatholiques namely Bellarmin Bellarm.
l. 1. de Eucha. c. 14. The Sacrament of the Eucharist is not Christ's body but
contains Christ's body, for a Sacrament is asensible sign, and this sensible
sign of bread and wine, is that which the gloss said is not in truth Christ's
body but is improperly so called: which is so far from being the vpshot of the
controversy, or not admitting any solution, (as Bell fondly boasts) as in man's
sight that Bell page 27.
has eyes, it requires no solution. For who will think that one denies
Christ's body to be truly in the Sacrament, because he denies the Sacrament
(which is the sensible signs of bread and wine) to be truly his body? So Bell
may gather that a body contains not a soul, nor a place a body, because the
continents, are not the thing contained. But (says Bell) if Christ's body were
in the Sacrament really it should be there in rei veritate truly. As if the
gloss had denied that Christ is in the Sacrament in rei veritate. Suerly this
shows that Bell never meant to deal in rei veritate. And thus much of the 2.
member of this Article. Now let us go to the third.

CHAP. V. Berengarius his Recantation explicated and S. Austins authority
answered.
POPISH decrees (says Bell) tell us a long Bell page 28.
tale of one Berengarius some time Deacon of a church in Gaunt. No maruail if
this tale seem long to Bell, which recounteth the foil of his heresy against
the real presence, Berengar. condemned of 113. Bishops. Lanfranc. de Sacram.
Eucharist.
in Berengarius the first brocher thereof, in a general council at Rome under
Pope Nicholas the second, about the year of Christ 1060. where he recanted
publikly and (as him self says) willingly, denouncinge al such to deserve
eternal curse, who denied Christ's body and blood to be really in the Eucharist.
Bell makes him Deacon of Gaunt, whereas Bell lacks latin.
he was Archdeacon of Angiers in France, not being able to distinguish Andeauum
from Gandauum Angiers from Gaunt; and because he abiured his heresy, Bell
terms him a silly Deacon, though his brother Buckly call him an excellent and
holy man. In deed Bucleis answer to 8. reasons p. 62.
he found more mercy at Gods hands then I read of any Arch-hereticke, and dyed
a penitent Catholic. For dying on twelf day said (as Malmesbur. an English
author Malmesbur. l. 3. histor. Angl. in Gabriel. 1. p. 114.
at that time writes.) In this day of his apparition my lord Jesus will appear
to some, to glory as I hope for my repentance, or to punishment as I fear for
others seduced. The like repentance I pray God send to Bell ere he dye, that as
he has imytated Berengarius in heresy, and in abiuration also of it at Rome
(if I be not deceived) he may likewise imitate him in repentance and penance.

2. But because Berengarius in his recantation, which was afterward put amongst
Distinct. 2. ^it.
the Decrees, professed that Christ in the Eucharist sensualiter manibus
sacerdotum tangitur, frangitur, and dentibus fidelium atteritur, is sensibly
touched with hands of Priests, broken, and chewed with the teeth of the
faithful, Bell exclaymeth mightily, calling his recantation (but yet without al
proof) cruel, barbarous, villainous, blasphemous, and horrible impiety. Gladly
he would have the reader believe, that Catholics profess Christ's body to be
in it self broken, and torn in pieces one member from an other, though him
self soon after not only allege Bellarmin to the contrary, but confess
also that by the Popes p. 29.
doctrine Christ's body can not be broken or torn truly, and in deed, and cite
the Gloss upon the said decree saying, that it were a worse page 30.
heresy to think we made parts of Christ, then to deny him to be in the
sacrament. And this is evident by the Mass it self where we say, Christ
nether broken, nor divided is received Missa de corpore Christi.
whole, and no cuttinge is of the thing, the breach is only in the sign.

3. Nevertheless Christ's body is said to be touched, broken, and chewed in the
Eucharist, because the sign of bread in which it really is, is so used. As God
is said to have been crucified, because the humanity in which he was, was so
handled, and Christ touched when his garment was touched. And these kind of
speeches we learnd of the holy Fathers. For S. Chrisostom. speakinge S.
Chrysostom. hom. 24. in 1. Cor. to. 4. Hom. 83. in Math. to. 3.
of the sacrament says expressly that Christ's body is broken, In other place we
see, feel, eat, and have Christ within us. Again Christ gave him self to us
to touch, to eat, and Hom. 46. in Ier. to. 3. and 61. ad populum to. 5.
Tertul. l. de Idolatria.
fasten our teeth (mark Bell) on his flesh. Tertullian inueighinge against
unworthy receauers says Corpus Christi lacessunt. They vex Christ's body. S.
Ciprian of the same affirms: They use violence to Christ^ body and S.
Ciprian. sermon. de lapsis.
blood and with their mouths do offend him. And they learnt these speeches of
Christ him self saying: This is my body which is broken. 1. Cor. 11. v. 24. in
the greeck.
Will Bell now condemn Christ and these holy fathers of wickedness, villainy,
blasphemy, and horrible impiety? Surely they use the very words of touching,
breaking, and fasteninge, or chewing with teeth. Nay Bell page 30.
will he condemn both English, and many forrayne Protestants whose constant
doctrine Bell admits Christ's body to be consumed.
(says he) is that Christ's body is broken torn and consumed with mouth and
teeth. Behold good reader. for Papists to say Christ's body is touched, broken,
and torn, is villainy wickedness, blasphemy and horrible impiety: but for
Protestants to say the same and ^dde consuming too, is good doctrine.

4. But Bell will say that he adds, that al Bell page 29.
these are to be understood significantly and sacramentally. True. And the same
add we. For as him self cites out of Bellarmin lib. 2. de Council. c. 8. It
is and al ways Bellarm.
was certain that Christ's body being now incorruptible can be nether broken
nor torn but in a sign or sacrament. But the difference is in the
understanding. For we say Christ's body is Catholics and Protestants agreement
and difference about the breaking of Christ's body.
broken in a sign, which really, and truly contains it; and Protestants say
it is broken in a sign, from which Christ is as far as heaven is from earth,
and to express this difference, and to exclude the sense which Berengarius
used, and the Protestants have learnt of him, the Pope and Council made him to
profess. That he believed this to be in rei veritate in the verity of the
thing. Not as if Christ's body wear in it self so handled, for thereof there
was never doubt, but that it was not handled so in a bare sign, but in such a
sign as in rei veritate truly contains Christ's body. As the woman Luc. 8.
did in rei veritate truly touch Christ when she touched his garment, in S.
Luke.
which he truly was: as appears by his words ib. v. 46. Some body has
touched me: But the Crucifiers, when they parted the S. Ihon. 19. v. 23.
same garments, did not touch him in rei veritate truly, because then he was
not truly in them. And hereby appears how the contrariety, which Bell notes
betwixt the page 29.
Council and Bellarmine, is none at al, and how protestants can not verify the
breakinge of Christ's body, so well as Catholics can, and least of al can (as
Bell imagines) verify Christ's words of his body given, and blood shed for
remission of sins, because never was any bare figure given or shed for
remission of sins

5, But a singular note (says Bell) and page 30.
worthy to be marked, is gathered out of the gloss upon the foresaid decree,
when it advises us, That unless we understand Berengarius words soundly, we may
fall into worse heresy. Mark these words (says Bell) for they teach us
plainly, that it is a most dangerous thing to rely upon Popish decrees, even
then when they pretend to reform the Church and condemn heresies. But better
may we say mark this note, for it discovers Bells malice, and folly, and
teaches us plainly that it is a most dangerous thing to rely upon heretics,
even when they promise to avouch no untruth of any man, as Bell did a little
before. For page 22.
what advises the gloss, against the relying upon Popes decrees, and not
only against misunderstanding them. May we not in like manner say of the
scripture, that unless we soundly understand those words, ^hon 6. except you
eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, you shall have no life
in you, but grossly as the Capharnaits did of eating it sodde or roasted, or cut
in pieces (as testify Ciprian. de caena Domini. S. Augustine. tract. 27. in Ioh.
S. Ciprian and S. Austin) we shall fall into greater heresy, then that of
Berengarius was. What now Sir Thomas? may we therefore infer that it is a most
dangerous thing to rely upon scripture?

6. Finally Bell concludes this third Bell page 30. 31. S. Augustine. tract. 59.
in Joan.
member of his article with an argument drawn out of S. Austins words: Illi
manducabant panem Dominum, illi panem Domini contra Dominum. They (the
Apostles) eat the bread our lord, he (Judas) eat the bread of our lord against
our lord. Out of which words Bell frames an argument so invincible in his
conceypt, as he promises to subscribe, and never more to write against any
part of Papists doctrine, if it be answered. Mark therefore I pray thee gentle
reader his argument, and my answer, and judge, whether he be not bound to turn
his coat the third time, if he will perform his promise. The argument he
proposes out of form, but it may be reduced to this. Judas received but Panem
Domini the bread of our lord, and not Panem Dominum the bread our lord:
therefore in the Eucharist is not Dominus our Lord. The Antecedent (says he) is
plainly avouched by S. Austin, the consequence is clear, because if in the
Eucharist wear our lord, doubtless Judas in receiving of it should have
received our lord. Before I answer this argument I must advertise the reader of
three things: first ^ow slenderly this fellow is grounded in his faith, who
promises to subscribe to the contrary, if one only argument, grounded upon
one saying of one father can be solued. Evident it is that he has neither
plain scripture, nor conuincent reason, nor the testimony of other fathers for
his religion, who for answering of one fathers word, will forsake it. Albeit
this be les marvelous in Bell, because having already twice altered his
religion, he will find les difficulty to change the third time. 2. I note the
extreme blindness of this fellow, who bids us note and mark seriously that
S. Austin Bell notes a point quite against him self.
tells us, that the bread which the Apostles eat was our lord. I would Bell
had marked this him self, for it is the very vpshot (to use his own term)
of this controversy, and vnaswerable by any Protestant. For if (as Bell notes
out of S. Austin) the bread which the Apostles eat was our lord, how can
protestants deny it, and say it was bare bread? Or if (as S. Aust. speaks)
they eat bread our lord, how can Bell say they eat not our lord, but bare
bread? Can one ^ate flesh mutton, if the flesh he eat be no mutton?

7. Thirdly, I note his notorious abusing S. Austins authority. For first in
Englishing Bells abusing of S. Austins words.
his words he adds to them, though in a parenthesis, these words (Not our
lord but) afterward he says S. Austin tells us, that which Judas received
was but the bread of untruth 38.
our lord, then, as imboldened to lie, avouches that S. Austin affirms most
constantly, untruth 39.
that Judas received barely Panem Domini bread of our lord, and lastly as cock
sure not to be tript in lying, professes that S. Austin plainly avouches that
Judas received not Panem untruth 40
Dominum bread our lord. Whereas S. Austin says no one of al these, but only,
that the Apostles received bread our lord, and Judas bread of our lord, without
but or barely, or denial of the other. Mark therefore good Bells steps of untrue
dealing.
reader his steps. First his untruth is cogged into S. Austins words with a
parenthesis, but, afterward with barely,

8. I answer directly by denying the Antecedent. for S. Austin said not, that
Judas eat but, or barely Panem Domini, bread of our lord, and much les said he
eat not Panem Dominum: but only said that the Apostles did eat Panem Dominum
bread our lord, and he Panem Domini bread of our lord. Wherefore the doubt can
be only why he altered his speech, calling that bread our lord, which the
Apostles eat, and that bread of our lord which Judas eat. The reason whereof
can not be, because he thought the Apostles and Judas received a bread of
different substance; ^or Epist. 162. he expressly S. Austin says Judas eat our
price. to. 2. S. Chrysostom. tom. 3.
writes that Judas received pretium nostrum our price which in substance is
Panis Dominus bread our lord, and S. Chrysostom. hom. de prodit. Iudae affirms,
that Christ offered to Judas the blood, which he had sold. and Theodoret. in 1.
cap. 2. Cor. that he gave to Judas his precious body and blood. The reason
therefore is that which S. Aust. Buccella Dominica ven enum fuit Iudae. See S.
Austin l* 2. cont. lit. Petil. c. 47. tom. 7. S. Augustine. tom. 6. Cortuptio,
carni hoc nomen imponit Aug. l. 2. cont. aduers. legis. Et prophet. c. 6. t0. 6.
him self insinuates in the words immediately following illi vitam, ille
paenam they eat life, he punishment, vz because the bread had a different
effect, and operation in Judas, then it had in the Apostles. For as him self
proves lib. 11. cont. Faust. cap. 7. one thing of different effects or
operations may have different names. What marvel then if he called that which
the Apostles received bread our lord, because it was both in substance and
operation food, and life to them, and that which Judas received bread of our
lord, because though in substance it was the same, yet through his malice, in
operation it was poison and death unto him And here by the way would I propound
one choice to Bell, whether he A choice for Bell*
will believe the Eucharist to be Panem Dominum with Catholics, or bate Panem
Domini with Protestants. If the first, he may eat Panem Dominum with the
Apostles, if the second, he may eat Panem Domini, but it shall be with Judas.

9. But suppose S. Austin had said (as he has not) that Judas did not eat
bread our Lord, Bell could not thereof infer that the Eucharist is not truly our
Lord, seeing he avouches that the Apostles (who undoubtedly received the
Eucharist) did eat bread our Lord: but at most, that what Judas received, was
not the Eucharist; which diverse think, and it is a far different question, S.
Hilar. can. 30. in Math.
and makes nothing to this purpose: But nether could Bell infer this, because S
Austin S. August. epist. 162 to. 2. tract. 26. and 62. in Joan. tom. 9.
other where affirms Judas to have received the Sacrament, and our price
which in substance is bread, our Lord, and because it is usual to him to deny
the name to a thing if it want the accustomed quality or operation. So lib. 11.
cont. Faust. c. 7. he says. S. Augustine. tom. 6.
In resurrection there shall be no flesh, and sermon. 5. de verb. Apost. c. 12.
There shall be not the same body, because it shall not be mortal. Which kind of
speech he uses other where, and proves it out of 1. Cor. 15. and 2. cor. 5.
The most therefore that Bell can infer (and he may well do it) is, that the bread
which Judas eat was not in operation our Lord, and life to him, but judgment,
and death: which I willingly grant, but it makes nothing for his purpose. Let
now every indifferent Reader judge whether this argument out of S. Austin be
not sufficiently answered, and Bell if he will be as good as his word, bound to
recant yet once again. And thus much of this member.

CHAP. VI. Bells imaginary contradictions in the Mass answered, and true
Contradiction in his Communion showed.
THE fourth member Bell makes of ^^l page 32.
the apparent contradictions which are (as he says) in the Mass. The first is
that Catholics say that Christ's body is the same in the Mass which was on
the cross, and yet confess it to be a figure thereof. This he proves to be a
contradiction because Bellarm. l. 1. de Euchar. c. ^.
a figure must needs be inferior to the thing figured as Bellarm: professes,
and S. Paul testifies. Answer. First I deny al figures S. Paul. Hebr. 10.
to be inferrior to things figured: some be both figures and verity, as God the
Son figure of the substance of his Father. Heb. What figures be inferior to
the things figured what not.
1. v. 3. and yet true God. And Seth, an image of Adam Genesis 5. v. 3. and yet
true man. And such figures are equal to the things figured, and such a figure
of Christ is the Eucharist; Others be bare figures, as images are of men, and
the Sacraments and Sacrifices of the old law were, whereof S. Paul and
Bellarmin spoke, and the Apostles Heb. 10. v. 1. calls shadows of goods to
come. And these I grant to be inferior to the things figured. But this makes
nothing against us.

2. Secondly I deny that to be superior Bell ignorant in logic.
and inferior, is contradiction: for, as every logician knows it is relative
opposition, which may agree to the same thing in different respect. As the same
soul as it is in the head, is locally superior to it self, as it is in the
foot; a man as he is learned, is inferior in value to him self as he is
virtuous: And a token as it is from a friend, more worth the^ it is of it
self. And hereby appears the error of Protestants inferring the Eucharist
not to be Christ, because it is a figure or remembrance One thing may figure or
represent it self.
of him. For well may one thing represent it self. As a King in a triumphant
show may represent, how he behaved him self in Battle. And Christ's body and
blood, as they are under the forms of bread and wine, which are a sunder,
represent them selves as they were a sunder in their proper forms on the
cross.

3. Thirdly I return Bells argument upon him self. Figures must needs be
inferior to things figured: Ergo the Eucharist is some nobler substance then
bread. The Antecedent is his own, the Consequence I prove, because the Paschal
lamb was a figure of the Eucharist as S. Chrisostom S. Cyprian S. S. Ghrysost.
hom. de prodit. Iudae tom. 3. S. Cyprian. l. de unit. eccles. S. Hieron in 26.
Math. S. August. l. 2. cont. literas Petilian. c. 37* to. 7. S. Leo sermon. 7. de
Passione. S. Gregot. hom. 22. in Euang. page 32. Chap. 1. parag. 12. 13. Chap.
5. parag. 2. p. 33.
Hiero. S. Austin S Leo S. Gregory and others affirm, and may be gathered out
of S. Paul saying Heb. 10. v. 1 That the law had a shadow of goods to come, and
by Christ's instituting the Eucharist immediately after the eating of the Pascal
lamb. Whereby (says S. Chrysostom) in one table both Paschals of the figure
and verity was celebrated.

4. His second, and third contradiction is of a greater body being contained in
a less, and of Christ's body broken, and not broken, which have been answered
before. His fourth is, that if Christ's body be made present in the Eucharist by
virtue of these words this is my body, either the body is there before the last
words be pronounced, or no* if before? then the last is superfluous, if not?
then either all the body is made by the last word, and so the three first stand
for ciphers, or part of his body by one word, and part by an other? and so
Christ's body is torn in Bell ignorant in logic.
pieces. O worthy challenger ignorant of the principles of logic. What show
of contradiction is there here, though we should grant any one of the three
points inferred? But this good fellow is more skilful in making contradictions,
then in knowing what contradiction is.

5. Briefly I answer, that nether Christ's whole body, nor any part thereof, is
in the Eucharist before the pronounciation of the last word, yet are not the
former words superfluous. For the last works the tra^smutation. not by his
own virtue alone, but with the virtue of them also, or rather God works al
when the last word is pronounced. For (as S. Chrisostom says) It is not man S.
Chrysostom. homil. de prodit. Iudae tom. 3.
that by the consecration of our Lords table, makes the things proposed, the
body and blood of Christ, but that Christ who was crucified for us. The words
are uttered by the Priests mouth, and consecrated by the power of God. And the
like answer must Bell make for diverse matters.

6. For in baptism one may ask whether a child be christened, before the name
of the holy Ghost be pronounced, and then it is superfluous, and may be left
out; or part by the name of the father, part by the name of the son, and
part by the name of the holy Ghost, and then is the child christened by piece
meal: or only by the name of the holy Ghost, and then the other twoe names
are ciphers. And the like argument may be propounded in diverse other matters,
but I will propound it in a matter more intelligible, and perhaps more
proportionate to Bells capacity out of his own name Thomas. When one calls
him by that name, either he is al called by Tom, and then As is superfluous: or
part by Tom, and part by As, and then is he called by piece meal: or al by
As, and then is Tom: but a cipher, and As is al Bell, and so by conversion, al
Bell is an As* Let Bell study to solue this argument, and I doubt not, but he will
find the solution of his own.

7. The fifte contradiction which this page 34.
contradictious fellow finds in the Mass is, that Durand, Caietan, and four
Catholics more, before the Council of Trent did otherwise explicate the
manner of Christ's real presence in the Eucharist, then was truth, and since the
Church has defined, and explicated in the said Council. Is not this a goodly
co^tradiction in the Mass? did Bell find al these men's opinions there, Bellarm.
l. 3. de Euchar. ^. 11. and 18.
or rather gathered them out of Bellarmin, as he has done almost al his
arguments? Or what makes it against Mass, that three or four Catholics did
in a difficult matter, before it was defyned and explicated by the Church,
dissent from the rest? Let Bell if he can show this diversity now since the
Council. As for Protestants, Saints above Lindan. Catalogo sacramentor.
Saints de Euchar. Repetit. 1. cap. vlt. 1577. ex Bellarm. lib. 1. de Euchar.
c. 8. S. August. l. 16. de ciuit. c. 6. tom. 5.
20. years ago, gathered above 80. different opinions of theirs about these
four words, This is my body. And an other since has collected twoe hundred.
This far exceeds the confusion of tongues at Babel, for there was but 72
tongues, but here be 80. yea 200. to express four words. There one man kept
one tongue, but here they alter speaking sometimes Lutherish, sometime
Zwinglianish, and otherwhyle Caluinish, and yet seeing such horrible confusion,
will not give over building of their Babilonian tower of heresy.

8. The sixth contradiction is that when page 34.
the Priest proposes the B. Sacrament to the people, they must adore it,
albeit (says untruth 4^
Bell) if the Priest have no intention to consecrate, or omit, or miscal any
word of consecration it remains but bread, and the worshipers commit
idolatry. A ioly contradiction no doubt, do we think Bell wanted not his wits
when he proposed such matter for contradictions? Catholics think in deed
that when the Priest wants both actual, and virtual intention, or omitteth
any essential word, that there is no consecration, and the Priest Si
conscientia propterea lae^i no^ potuit quia nesciuit etc Aug. lib. 2. cont.
Crescon. cap. 26. to. 7. Apoc. 22. v. 8. c. 19. v 10. S. August. q. 61. in Genesis
^^. 4. Genes. 29. v. 24.
sins therein grievously; but the people worshipping erroniously upon
invincible ignorance offend no more, then did S. Ihon when he worshipped an
Angel as God, thinking (as says S. Austin) it had been God him self, or as did
Jacob, when he lay with Lia who was not his wife, thinking verily it had been
his wife Rachel. But to say that there is no consecration when the Priest
omitteth any word at al, or miscalleth any words, so as the sense be not
altered thereby, is not Catholic doctrine, but Bells usual false dealing.

9. His last contradiction is, that when page 34.
many Priests are made together in Rome, they al pronounce the words of
consecration. This is true but what then? Papists (says he) can not tell how
many Gods, or how many times God is made in a piece of bread. O accusator
fratrum. Where did thou hear of many Gods amongst Papists? Where of making
of God? we say after S. Hierom and S. S. Hieron. e^ist. ad Hel^odor. S.
Pontian. epist. 1. Decretali.
Pontian that Priests conficiuni Corpus Christi make Christ's body, but dream
not of making God. These be the slanders maliciously objected to Catholics
against thine own knowledge and Conscience. But where is the contradiction?
Forsooth because Inocentius h^ldeth that al such Priests do consecrate, Durand
thinks that he only who first pronounces the words, and Caietan is of an
other opinion. I grant these contradict one an other. But what is this to the
Mass^? are these contradictions in it? You promised to show us Bell deceaueth
his Reader.
contradictions in ^he Mass, and twice you have told us of durand and Caietans
contradictions, and as often of other matters, which had no show of
Contradiction. Besides that the matter in which these three Authors contradict
one an other is no point of faith. For with Catholics it is no more matter of
faith, whether all the said Priests or one only consecrate, then it is with
Protestants, whither al or one should christen a child, if many at once should
dippe him into the font, and pronounce the words of Baptism. So the letter be
well sealed, it skilleth not whither one or many be thought to make the print,
when many together put their hands to the seal.

10. But if Bell when he looked upon the Mass book, had looked on his
communion book, and with the like eyes and affection, Gilby admonition to
England and Scotland. fol. 70.
he should have found other stuff in it then he did in the Mass. For beside
that it is made out of our breuiary and Missal (whereupon Gilby called King
Edward the sixth his book, an English mattins patched forth of the Popes
Portesse) more then a thousand Ministers (whom the university of Oxford
acknowledged to be Answer to the Petition.
their brethren, and fellow laborers in the Lords harvest) in their petition
exhibited Exhibited in April 1603.
to his Majesty, say that they groan under a burden of human rites and
ceremonies, find enormities in their Church discipline, A thousand ministers
censure of the communion book.
and in their Churches service, want of uniformity of doctrine, Popish opinions,
and honor prescribed to the name of Jesus with diverse abuses, which they are
able (say they) to show not to be agreeable to Scripture. Thus Sir have your
own ministers deminished the credit of your communion book. And Reynolds (an
excellent ornament says Answer to 8. reasons. Confer. p. 63. 86. page 25.
page 59.
Buckley) in the conference at Hampton court 1. proved the communion book to
contradict twice the Bible, and the Bishops were feign to amend it. 2. he
argued it to contradict the 25. Article of their faith. 3. to conteyne manifest
errors, directly repugnant to Scripture: 4. he requested it to be page 23.
fitted to more increase of piety. 5. professes that urging men to subscribe
unto it, page 58.
is a great impeachment to a learned ministry, whereof he gives diverse
reasons, as the repugnancy therein to Scripture, the corruption of Scripture,
the interrogatories, and ceremonies in baptism, and certain D. R^inolds
censure of the communion book.
words in matrimony. Thus sir the excellent ornament of your Church has
adorned your communion book, and this black verdict has he given thereof.

11. And if I should but reckon the contradictions Protestants contradictio^s
about their communion.
in Protestants doctrine about the Eucharist, I should never make an end, only I
will requite Bell with some few. 1. how Christ's body (says Willet) should be
verily 1. Willet Tetrostyl. col. 2. part. 3. p. 82.
present, and yet not really. Can there be verum and not res, or ens: vere, and
not realiter? 2. how there can be a real presence 2. Perkins Reform. Cath. p.
185. 189.
of Christ in the Sacrament (as says Perkins) and yet Christ no otherwise
present, then a thing to it name. 3 How God gives Christ 3. Perkins sup.
in this Sacrament (says the same Minister) as really and truly as any thing
can be given to man, and yet he is given by only faith 4. 4. Calvin. 4. instit.
c. 17. paragr. 10.
How (as Calvin teaches) the Eucharist is no empty sign, but has the verity
of the thing united to it, and yet Christ is only in heaven. 5. How there is
(says Calvin) 5. Calvin. sup. parag. 19. and 15.
a true and substantial communication of Christ's body, and blood in the
Eucharist, and yet Christ no more there, then he was 6. Saints de Euchar.
repetit. 6. c. 1. p. 208. Mich. Fabrit. ep. de Beza.
in the Sacraments of the Jews, which were before his body was any substance.
6. How Christ's body is truly really, and substancially in the Eucharist (as
Beza wrote in his confession exhibited to the Count Palatine and uttered
publikly in the disputation at Surius An. 1556.
Poysi) and yet withal as far from the Eucharist, as heaven from earth; Surely
such fellows as these have yea, and no, in their religion, 2. Cor. 1. v. 17. 2.
Cor. 4. v. 2.
or else walking in craftines adulterat (as the Apostle speaks) Gods word.
For if their words be understood as they signify, and purport, they include
manifest contradiction, and thus much of the second Article. Wherefore be
myndful Apotal.
(Bell) from whence thou are fallen and do penance Apoc. 2.

THE THIRD ARTICLE OF THE POPES DISPENSATIONS.
CHAP. I.
BELL begins this Article as he did Bell page 36.
the two former with untruths, and dissimulatio^s. His untruths appear in
that he charge S. Antonin, and Austin of Ancona, Antonin. 3. part. tit. 22.
c. 5. parag. 8. untruth 42. untruth 43.
with teaching the Pope to have equal power with God. Because S. Antonin
writes. That seeing the Pope is Christ's vicar, none can lawfully withdraw him
self from his obedience: And that Christ has given him most full power, as S.
Cyril (says he) teaches lib. thesaur. which proof out of S. Cyril this
honest challenger left out. Austin of Ancona affirms: Augustine. do Ancona in
summa p. 152.
that The Pope as Christ's vicar has universal jurisdiction over al Kingdoms
and Empiers. Did ever man see greater impudency, what word is here of equal
power with God? Nay express word of inequality, if vicars be unequal to
principals: deputies to Kings. Did Christ's humanity when it received most full
power. Math. 28. v. 18. and authority S. Matthew.
over al kingdoms, and bounds of the earth. psalm. 2. v. 8. receive equal power
to David.
God? And if the power of Christ as man (though never so full, and universal)
were create, and unequal to Gods power, who can imagine the power given by
Christ as man to a pure man to be equal to Gods? I omit Bells error in affirming
that Austin of Joan. 12. lived 956. August. de Ancona 1305. Onuph. in chron.
Ancona dedicated his book to Pope Ihon the twelft who was dead almost 400.
years before him. But he should have said Ihon 22. and this error can not be
laid upon the Printer seeing the number is set down not in ciphers but letters.

2. His dissimulation is evident. First because Dissimulati^ 4.
he concealeth that the opinion (That matrimony only contracted may be upon
urgent occasion dissolved) is held but of some Canonists, and of very few
deuines, who commonly hold the contrary. But impugneth Bell impugneth an opinion
of Canonists and of Protestants as a matter of faith. 5. Dissimulation. Surius
Ann. 1540. Vid. Lindan. l. de concordia Haereticor. p. 69.
it, as if it were held of al Catholics, and as a point of their faith.
Secondly he imposes the said opinion upon Catholics only, dissembling that
Protestants think not only matrimony contracted, but also consummated by carnal
copulation may be dissolved, and impugn Catholics for not admitting any
cause of dissoluing such matrimony.

3. Luther the Protestants first Father writ a book 1540. where he avouches
it to be hard, and unjust, that the innocent person may not marry an other
after separation made for adultery. Calvin calls it a Calvin. 4. instit. c.
19. paragr. 37.
most unjust law. Likewise Bucer in cap. 19. Math. Melancht. de loc. tit. de
coniugio: Kemnitius in 2. part. exami. And Willet in Willet controu. 15. q. 2.
p. 526. 527.
name of English Protestants. Al these affirm that adultery is a just cause
why even Luther. in c. 7. ad Corinth. edit. 1523.
causes as the one persuading the other to sin: much debate between them: and
Willet sup.
7. and other Protestants. And this was practiced in K. Edward 6. time, when
Sir Ralf Sadler having married one Matthew Baro his wife in his absence, though
Baro had begotten children of her, yet could not recover her, but by Parliament
she was adjudged to Sadler. Calvin adds want of Calvin. Bucer. sup.
consent of parents, if the parties be young,

4. Wherefore if the Pope by dissoluing Bell page 37.
contracted matrimony (which he does very seldom, and upon urgent occasion, and
weighty cause) challenge (as Bell says) power equal to God. Surely Protestants
by dissoluing consummated matrimony often, and upon so many causes whereof some
are very small, and not sufficient to dissolve a mere civil contract, do
challenge power above God. But let us see how he against some Catholics, and
generally al Protestants, proves that contracted matrimony can not be
dissolved, but by God alone for any cause whatsoever.

5. His reason is because Christ said Math. page 38.
c. 19. v. 6. what God has joined let not man separate, and Luc. 16. v. 18.
Every one that puts away his wife, and marieth an other commits adultery.
And S. Paul 1. Corinthians. c. 7. v. 10. Those that are joined in matrimony command
not I but our lord, that the wife depart not from the husband, but if she
depart, abide unmarried, or be reconciled to her husband. To this the Canonists
answer. That Christ and his Apostle spoke only of consummated matrimony:
because Math. 19. Christ forbids separation of such, as immediately before he
had said to be made one flesh, which is by consummation of matrimony. And
likewise Luc. 16. prohibiteth marriage after dismission of a wife carnally
known, as is gathered out of Math. 5. v. 32. where he uses the same words, and
cites the law of divorce Deuteronomy. 24. v. 1. which speaks of a woman carnally
known saying. If a man have taken a wife and had her, and she have not found
favor in his eyes for some filthiness, he shall etc. And hereby are answered the
words of S. Paul, in which he refers him self to the precept of Christ.
Besides that S. Thecla virgin was by him soluta a nuptijs losed from marriage as
writes S. Epiph. haer. 78. which S. Epiphan.
fact S. Ambros. lib. 2. de virg. commends, S. Ambros.
and it argues that the Apostle tought vnconsummated marriage might be
dissolved.

6. Against this answer Bell brings many replies in number, but none of force.
1. That if contracted matrimony were not de iure page 38.
diuino the greatest Popish Doctors would not deny the Popes dispensation
therein. Lo here when it makes for his purpose, he confesses the greatest
Catholic Doctors to think contracted matrimony to be indissoluble. Why then
does he impugn the contrary as an Article of our faith? To his argument I
answer, that though al Catholics believe the institution of contracted
matrimony to be of God, and Deuines for the most part probably think the
continuance also thereof to be iure diuino, and commanded by God: yet
nevertheless Canonists do probably teach that the continuance of it is not
absolutely, and in all cases commanded by God, but may upon great, and urgent
causes be dissolved by the Church.

7. Secondly he replyeth that Christ speaks absolutely, and makes no mention
of copulation or popish consummation. Answer. Though in that verse he spoke
absolutely, yet immediately before he made mention of copulation. And will Bell
forbid us to expound a sentence of Scripture by the antecedents, or
consequents? But I marvel much why he termed consummation, or copulation
popish. Me thinks he should rather call it Ministerish. For Papists can say
with S. Austin lib. de bono coniug. c. 13. tom. 6. We S. Austin see lib. 5.
cont. Faust. c. 9.
have many brethren and companions of the heavenly inheritance of both sexes,
who are continent, either after experience of marriage, or are free from al such
copulation, such are innumerable. But for Ministers their first father Luther
imita^ing Luther. lib. de vit. coniugali 1522. See S. Iren. lib. 1. c. 1. Raro
haereticus diligit castitatem. Hieron. in c. 7. Oseae. page 38.
the beastly Valentinians, writes that it is as necessary to have a wife as to
eat, drink, or sleep: and how well ministers practice this doctrine let al
England be judge.

8. His third reply is that Papists thinck matrimony contracted to be a
Sacrament ergo (says he) perfect before copulatio^ and indispensable by man.
For as Canus says: The holy Ghost and grace of Canus lib. 8. de locis c. 5.
Sacrament is not given by copulation. Answer, granting the Antecedent I deny
the consequence. For though it have the essence, yet has it not the perfection
of the Sacrament before copulation. Because before, it signifies only the
spiritual conjunction of Christ with a soul by grace, as S. Thomas, S. Thom.
4. d. 27. q. 1. art. 3. q. 1. Innocent. 3. c. delictum de digamis.
and Innoc. 3. teach, which as it may by man be dissolved, so also may
matrimony before consummation; but after, it signifies also the conjunction of
Christ to the Church by flesh, which as man can not dissolve, so nether can he
dissolve matrimony after consummation. And as a seal is the parfection of a
bargain making it more hard to be broken then otherwise it should be: so
copulation is as it were the seal of the covenant of wedlock made betwixt man
and woman, and makes it more indissoluble then otherwise it should be.

9. As for Canus he means of sinful copulation betwixt persons only affianced
when they (says he) after spousals company together. But as for coniugal
copulation after matrimony is contracted, if it be done in that manner and for
that end it should be, it gives grace, and is meritorius, as appears by S.
Austin l. de bon. coniug. c. 21. 22. See S. Austin l. 1. de nupt. and concup.
c. 12. 13. 14. 15. tom. 7.
tom. 6. where though he prefer the chastity of single life before the chastity
of marriage, yet he compares Abraham's merit in his holy usage of marriage with
S. Ihons merit in living single. Besides lawful copulation is a good work as I
hope Bell will not deny, but according to his own doctrine art 5. Artic. 5. p. 61.
every good work is meritorius or impetratorius of Gods favor, and reward. His
fourh reply vz, that matrimony should not be fully perfected in the Church, if
copulation do perfect it, contains no new difficulty.

10. Fifthly he argues it to be absurd. That matrimony begins to be a
Sacramant by page 39.
copulation, and was not by the Priests action. 44 untruth
But more absurd it is to utter untruths. For Catholics say not that it
begins to be See Bellar. l. 2. de Monachis. c. 38. The contrary is a
particular opinion of Canus l. 8. de loc. c. 5. Conc. Trid. sess. 24. c. 1. de
Reform. page 39.
a Sacrament by copulatio^, or by the Priests action: but that it begins by
the mutual consent of the parties, and is perfected by their copulation, though
that it be lawfully contracted, the Priests ptesence be required. His sixth
objection is that Matrimony was perfect in Paradise betwixt Adam and Eve. But
this is to assume that which he was to prove. His seventh reply is: If
contracted matrimony were not de iure diuino both parties agreeing, they might
dissolve it them selves, as they can dissolve spousals, because as the law
says every one may yield up his right. Answer. Contracted matrimony is a
Sacrament instituted by God, and therefore can not be dissolved but by such as
succeeding the Apostles are dispensers of Gods mysteries 1. Corinthians. 4. S. Paul.
v. 1. The like reason is not of spousals, nor of any other contract instituted
by man.

11. Eighthly he replyeth. That marriage between the B. virgin and Joseph was
perfect, where doubtless wanted copulation. That it was perfect he proves
because the Math. 1.
angel called her Joseph's wife. And S. Ambrose says. That not deflowring of
virginity S. Ambros. de institut. virg. ca. 6. tom. 1. S. August. l. 2. de
consens. Euang. c. 1. tom. 4. Lib. 1. de nupt. and concup. c. 11. to. 7.
but coniugal covenant makes wedlock. And S. Austin writes. That we rightly
understand Joseph to be mary's husband, by very copulation of wedlock without
commixtion of flesh. Again. God forbid that the bond of wedloock (rumpatur) be
broken betwixt them, who are content upon mutual consent, to abstein for ever
from use of carnal concupiscence. For it was not falsely said of the Angel unto
Joseph, Fear not to take thy wife mary. Answer: Al these proofs convince no
more, then that contracted matrimony is true marriage, as we willingly confess
was betwixt Joseph and our B. Lady, For the Angel calls her not Joseph's
perfect, wife, but absolutely his wife. Whereupon S. Hierom l. S. Hierom. pr. fin.
cont. Heluid. says S. Joseph was rather a keeper, then a husband, and in c.
1. Math. When thou hear an husband do not suspect marriage, but remember the
custom of Scripture that spouses are called husbands, and spousesses wises.
And S. Basil hom. de human. Chris. gener. calls S. Basil.
that dispousation wherewith S. Joseph, and our Lady were married, beginning of
Marriage As for S. Ambrose he denies not that deflowring perfecteth marriage,
but that it makes it. And S. Austin in the first place affirms that we truly
understand Joseph to be Mary's husband without copulation, but adds not that
he is so perfectly.

12. To the second place I answer that S. Austin speaks there only of
co^summated marriage, both because his intention in those Lib. 1. c. 1.
books was as he professes in the beginning to show against the Pelagians.
That though children infected with original sin do proceed from marriage, it
self is no sin, which difficulty has no place but in co^summated marriage.
As also because after he had proved in the forsaid 11. chapter that the bond of
wedlock is not broken by purpose of absteining from use (as he speaks) of
concupiscence, or exercise of marigeable acts, in the next chapter he
concludes thus. Wherefore Cap. 22.
then may not they remain man and wife, who of consent leave of companying
together, if Joseph and mary remained man, and wife, who not so much as began
to company together. By which Conclusion of his, it is evident that before he
had spoken only of consummated marriage, and only meant to prove that it is not
broken by private determination, or purpose of the parties to abstain from
exercise of copulation. Which he proved by an argument a fortiori, because
vnconsummated matrimony of our B. Lady, and Joseph was not broken by their
purpose of absteining from al carnal knowledge. But whither vnconsummated
matrimony which is not broken by such private purposes of the parties married,
may upon just and urgent cause be dissolved by the Churches authority S. Austin
there says no word at al.

13. Finally Bell concludes this Article with an egregious slander of the
Pope, and false dealing with S. Antonin. For he avouches that P. Martin 5.
dispensed with one Bell page 40.
who had contracted, and consummated matrimony with his own natural, and full
sister of the 45. untruth
same father, and mother. This he proves out of S* Antonin: saying: That P.
Martin dispen. Antonin. 3. part. tit. 1. c. 11.
sed with one who had contrasted, and consummated matrimony cum quadam eius
germana. Here Bell makes a full point and adds no more. But S. Antonin adds
quam cognouerat Fornicarie, with a sister of hers, with whom he had committed
fornication. And before the words cited by Bell he says that seeing affinity is
contracted by fornication, as by coniugal act, he that has committed
fornication with any woman can not mary cum filia eius, vel germana eius,
with her daughter, or her sister. And affirms that Paludan thinks the Pope
can not dispense in this matter, yet (says he) Martin 5. dispensed with one
who had contracted, and consummated cum quadam eius germana quam cognouer at
fornicarie, with a certain sister of hers with whom he had committed
fornication: What now more evident then that S. Antonin speaks not of a man
marying his own sister, but his harlots sister? wherein though the Pope (as he
says) made great difficulty, yet perhaps Protestants would make small, or no
scruple at al. Behold therefore gentle Reader not the excellency of holy Popery
(as Bell scornfully exclameth) but excellency of wholly ministry which has as I
say said of some made lying Isai. c. 28. v. 15.
their hope. Is this M. Bell your promise, page 22. of auouching no untruth upon
any man? Is this the sincerity you make show of page 5. and 221? Is this your
protestation made in your preface to yield if any can convince Bell bound to
recant the 3 time
you to have alleged any writer corruptly, quoted any place guilfully, or
charged any author falsely. Let now the Reader be judge by this your dealing
with S. Antonin whether you be not bound to recant the third time. Be mindful
therefore (Bell) from whence thou art Apocalip.
fallen, and do penance: Apocal. 2.

THE FOVRTH ARTICLE OF ORIGINAL CONCVPISCENCE IN THE REGENERATE.
CHAP. I. The Catholic doctrine touching concupiscence explicated and proved.
BECAUSE Bell in this Article does after his accustomed manner, proceed
confusedly, and deceitfully, before I answer his objections I will particulerly
by Conclusions set down the Catholic doctrine upon this matter, whereby the
Reader may clearly see, both what Catholics defend, and what Bell ought to
impugn. Supposing therefore a distinction of Concupiscence, which Bell him self
uses page 49. into Habitual, which is the pronesse, and inclination in the
inferior portion, or powers of our corrupt nature unto disorderly actions, and
Actual, which is the disordinate Acts them selfs.

2. The first conclusion, is: That habitual concupiscence in men not yet
regenerat See S. Tho. 2. d. 30. q. 1. art. 3. S. Thomas. Bellarmin.
is materially original sin. This teaches S. Thomas 1. 2. q. 82. ar. 3. and
Bellarmin l. 5. de amiss. great c. 5. (whose testimony I the oftener, and more
willingly use, because Bell accounts it most sufficient in all Popish affairs
Bell p. 125.
) and the Protestants deny it not, and I prove it. Because as original justice
did formally consist in the conversion of the will to God, and did materially
connotate the due subjection of the inferior powers: So original sin does
formally consist in the auersion of the will from God, and materially
connotateth the rebellion of the said powers. And because concupiscence is thus
materially original sin S. Aust. somtymes calls it original sin, and
says it is remitted in baptism, when the guilt of Adams sin annexed unto it
(which makes Cap. 2. parag. 2.
it formally sin) is taken from it, as herafter shall be showed.

3. Second conclusion: Habitual concupiscence even in the regenerate is evil:
This teach S. Thomas 3. p q. 15. ar. 2. and q. 27. S. Thomas.
ar. 3. Bellarmin l. de great. primi. hom. c. 7. and l. 5. de amiss great. c. 10.
and al Catholics. And the contrary is P^lagianisme, as is evident out of S.
Austin l. 6. cont. Julian. S. Austin.
c. 5. l. 5. c. 3. tom. 7. and l. 1. de nupt. and concupis. c. 35. And the
Conclusion is manifest, because Habitual concupiscence includes Habitual
Concupiscence both positive and privative evil.
not only prones to evil, but also difficulty to do good, and want of habitual
order in the inferior powers, and therefore is both positive, and privative
evil. Hereupon S. Paul Romans v. 7. 18. calls concupiscence S. Paul.
in him self not good. And v. 21. evil: and v. 16. he says that he hates it.
And S. Austin lib. 6. cont. Julian c. 15. said: who is so impudent, or mad, as
to grant sin to be evil, and to deny concupiscence of sin to be evil. And
because concupiscence allureth to evil, it is sometime called of the Apostle
Sin, law of sin. Romans 7. of Deuines fomes peccati: the fomet of sin, and
tyrant, of S. Austin iniquity S. Austin see him lib. 2. de nupt. and concup. c.
9. S. Ambrose tom. 3.
sermon. 12. de verb. Apost. c. 5. Vice. l. 2. cont. Julian. c. 3. to. 7.
Vicious, and culpable. l. de perfec. iustit. c. 6. S. Ambrose de apolog, David
c. 13. Root and seminary of sin. And because it causes difficulty to do
good, it is otherwhile called of S. Austin. l. 6. contr. S. Austin. tom. 7.
Julian. c. 19. 1. Retract. c. 15. sermon. 12. de verb. Apost. l. de continent.
c. 4. and others languor, sickness, defect: infirmity. As because it is in our
inferior portion it is called of the Apostle. Romans 7. v. 23. law of our
members, and of others, law of the flesh. And finally because it is inflicted
upon us for Adams sin: S. Austin. 1. Retract. c. 15. calls it punishment of
sin, and also Sin because it is the effect thereof l. 1. contr. duas epist.
S. Augustine. to. 7.
Pelag. c. 13. and l. de spirit. and lit. c. vltimo tom. 3.

4, Third conclusion: Actual concupiscence though inuoluntary, is evil. This
teach al Catholics with Bellarmin loc. cit. against the Pelagians, and it is
mani^est by S. Paul Romans 7. v. 19. The evil which I will not, that I do: by S.
Austin lib. 1. de nupt. and S. Augustine. to. 7. Tom. 8.
concup. c. 27. and 29. and l. 6. cont. Julian. c. 16. l. 5. c. 3. in psalm 118.
conc. 8 and otherwhere often, and by the reason which he gives l. 5. cont.
Julian c. 3. because it is a disordinate act contrary to the rule of reason:
Hereupon men are ashamed of it; and S. Austin lib. 2. cont. Julian. c. 5. and
lib. 6. c. 19. calls it iniquity: and lib. 1. de nupt. and concupisc. cap.
27. filthy and unlawful. Hence Bell page 53. infers inuoluntary More
required to formal sin then to evil.
concupiscence to be formal, and proper sin, but he is far deceived. For
formal sin beside evil, and unlawfulness requiteth voluntarines, as I shall
hereafter prove, and is evident in fools, and beasts, who though they have
these inuoluntary acts are no formal sinners.

5. Fourth Conclusion: whenever it is any way voluntary either in it self, or
in any needles cause thereof, it is formally sin. This is evident: because
then it has the whole essence or definition of sin: for it is a voluntary
act against Gods law, or right reason. I say needles cause, because if the
cause be necessary, or honest, it excuses the actual concupiscence following
thereof from fault.

6. Fifth Conclusion: Habitual, and actual Al Concupiscence may be called sin
and why.
Concupiscence whatsoever, even in the regenerate may be called sin. This is
manifest out of that which has been said in the 2 and ^. conclusion. For either
it is voluntary, and then it is formal sin, and properly so called: or though
it be un voluntary, it is the cause, effect, punishment, or material part of
sin: and any of these reasons suffice to make it figuratively be called
sin. therefore may as well be called sin as a dead body is called a man. And
who well remembers what is said in these five Conclusions, need no more to
answer al Bells arguments. For, as we shall see, he proves no more then they
contain.

7. Sixth Conclusion: Actual concupiscence Actual Concupiscence if inuoluntary
is no formal sin.
whenever it is inuoluntary is no formal or proper sin, or offense to God.
This is against Bell in this whole Article. But I prove it. First because some
acts of Concupiscence be but temptations to sin, and are before sin be
brought forth. Ergo such are no formal sin. The consequence is evident. For
what is but tentation to sin, and goes before sin be, is no proper sin.
The Antecedent I prove out of S. James saying Every one is tempted by his
Concupiscence, S. James c. 1. v. 14. 15. See S. Austin lib. 6. cont. Iul. cap.
15. to. 7.
behold an act, but a tempting of us to sin: afterward when concupiscence
has conceived it brings forth sin, behold also an act of Concupiscence
going before sin be brought forth. Willet says nothing to Willet
controuers. 17. q. 1. p. 558.
the first part of tentation, but to the second of bringing forth he answers.
That it follovveth not Concupiscence to be no sin, because it bringeeh forth
sin, because one viper may bring forth an other. But we infer not
Concupiscence to be no sin, because it brings forth sin: for we well know
that one sin may bring forth an other: but we gather that that act of
Concupiscence, which S. James terms conceauing of sin, is no sin,
because he affirms it to go before the bringing forth of sin, in saying
Afterward when Concupiscence has conceived it brings forth sin, and this
could not be, if it were sin, it self. Calvin answers this Calvin. lib. 3.
instit. c. 3. paragr. 13. Bellarm. l. 5. de amiss. great. and stat. peccat. c. 7.
argument otherways, whom Bellarmin confureth.

8. Secondly because whiles a man with the mind serves the law of God he can
not by sin serve the dyuel. But S. Paul even when he had inuoluntary motions
of concupiscence, served with the mind the law of God. Therefore then he sinned
not. The Proposition is evident by the saying S. Math. 6. v. 24. S. Paul.
of Christ. None can (at once) serve two masters. The assumption S. Paul
testifies Roman. 7. v. 25. saying, I my self with the mind serve the law of
God, but with the flesh the law of sin.

9. Thirdly nothing inuoluntary, or done against our will is sin, diverse acts
of Concupiscence be such. Ergo no sin. Bell Bell page 50. Perkins refor. Cath.
tit. Of original sin.
would gladly (as some of his fellows do) deny the proposition, and therefore
straight after he had propounded the argument, tells us (though falsely) that
S. Austin proves inuoluntary motions to be sin indeed, and toward the end
of this Article avouches a man to be guilty of sin in that page 57.
which he does against his vvil, and can not avoid, yet at last resolves
rather to deny the Assumption: page 51.
wherefore I prove them both: The proposition I prove out of that very place of
S. Austin, which Bell cites to the S. Augustine. to. 1.
contrary. Sin (says he 1. Retract. c. 13.) is so far forth voluntary evil, as
it is no way sin, if it be not voluntary. And this (says he lib. de vera
relig. c. 14.) is so manifest, as nether the fevvnes, of learned, no^ the
multitude of unlearned does deny it. And will Bell now deny that which in S.
Austins time nether learned, nor unlearned would deny? Now let the 46. untruth
Reader judge, with what face Bell affirmed that S. Austin in the foresaid place
1. Retract. proves inuoluntary Concupiscence to be sin, where he most
manifestly affirms nothing to be any way sin if it be not voluntary, and
thereupon laboreth to show original sin in infants to be some way voluntary.
And in an other place he S. Augustine. lib. de duab. animab. c. 1^. tom. 6. and
1. Retract. c. 23. to. 1. S. Hierom.
avouches it to be high injustice, and madness, that a man should be guilty of
sin, because he did not that which he could not do And S. Hierom. epist. ad
Damas. de exposit. fid. Accurseth their blasphemy who say that God has
commanded any impossible thing, as no doubt he has, if we sin in that which
we can not avoid: See him dialog. cont. Pelag. S. Chrisostom S. Chrysostom. tom.
4. S. Prosper. S. Augustine. tom. 10. Tom. 7.
hom. 13 ad Romans Prosper de vita contempl. c. 4. S. Austin sermon. 61. de temp.
de not. and great. c. 69. in psalm. 56. and others. By reason also it is
manifest. For if inuoluntary acts done against our will be true sins, much more
the acts of fools, and mad men, yea of beasts, which are not done against will,
but only without will, and they true malefactors, and sinners before God and
men, which I think none, but a mad man, will grant. And I doubt not but Bell
would think him self unjustly executed, if he were put to death for a thing
done against his will, and which he labored al he could to hinder.

10. The Assumption I prove, because if If Concupiscence be not some times
inuoluntary nothing is inuoluntary.
that be not inuoluntary, whereof we give no occasion, nor consent unto, yea
detest and hinder al we can, (as it happens oftentimes in the motions of
Concupiscence,) I can not see what can be inuoluntary unto us. And if they be
Papists, (as Bell terms them page 51.) who call such acts of Concupiscence S.
Paul. S Augustine. sermon. 43. de verb. Dom. See sermon. 3. 5. and 12. de verb.
Apost. Bell a Papist by his own judgment.
inuoluntary. A Papist is S. Paul saying, Romans 7. v. 19. I do the evil which I
vvil not. And S. Austin when he says. I vvil not that Concupiscence covet. we
would there were no Co^cupiscences, but will we, nil we, we have them. Yea Bell him
self no les then they, thrice in this Article page 50. 51. and 57. in plain
terms calls these motions inuoluntary.

11. But to this argument he answers. Bell page 51.
That they be voluntary in their origin, and thereto cites S. Austin affirming
original sin of S. Austin 1. retract. c. 13. tom. 1.
infants to be voluntary in their origin, and calls this the Gordion knot
which Papists can never untie, and so clear and evident a solution of the
argument, as every child may behold the weakness, falsehood, and absurdity
thereof. But Bell is ignorant What is to be voluntary in the origin.
what it is to be voluntary in the origin. For this is nothing else but to be
willed of him, from whom we took our origin, and whose will is accounted ours.
As original sin is voluntary to infants in their origin, because it was
willed of Adam in the eating of the forbidden Aple, and his will was in that
fact accounted theirs. And this meant S. Austin loc. cit. But as for actual
motions 1. Retract. c. 13. to. 1.
of concupiscence, he never said they were voluntaty to us in their origin;
nether can Why inuoluntary motions are not voluntary in their origin. S.
Gregory.
they both because Adam had no will of committing these acts, as he had of
leesing original justice in eating the Aple; as also because his will was not
accounted ours in any other act, then in his keeping, or first leesing of
original justice. Besides as S. Gregory writes l. 15. moral. c. 22. Original
sin being blotted out, children are not held by the iniquity of parents, and
therefore Adams will, can not make those acts in the regenerate to be sin,
which of their nature are none.

12. And though the forsaid motions were Inuoluntary motions though they were
voluntary in their origin could be no sin.
voluntary in their origin, yet could they be nether, original, nor actual
sin. Not original, because they are acts, and not common alike to al: Nor
actual, because they have no actual will of the doer, and as voluntary in
general is essential to sin in general, so is actual voluntary, to actual
sin. Yea for an act now done to be formal sin when it is done, suffices
not, that it was actually voluntary in the cause done long ago, if now it be
against will. For albeit when I gave cause of an unlawful effect, which I did
see would after ensue, I was guilty of the effect, when I did the cause: yet if
after the cause done I repent and be sorry before the effect follow, I do not
sin a new in the effect. As if by some thing yesterday done, I gave occasion
that disordinate motions rise to day, though I was then guilty of these motions
rising, yet if I since repented I do not sin a new when they rise now against
my will. Else I should against my will leese that grace which I got by repentance.
Wherefore well wrote S. Gregory to S. Austin our Apostle. S. Gregory epist. ad
Augustine. Cant. c. 10.
Oftentimes it is done without fault which comes of fault. And much les
should inuoluntary motions be sins in us, though they were originally
voluntary unto us only by the will of an other. Thus is this Gordion knot two
ways untied. But him self has with his tongue tied so fast a knot for proof
Bell disproueth him self.
of my conclusion, as with his teeth he will not be able to loose. For page 48.
he affirms S. Paul to have been most free, and innocent 12. Contradict.
touching actual sin, and he proves it, because he fought mightily against
his raging concupiscence, and did in no wise yield thereunto: which is both to
confess that S Paul had inuoluntary motions of the flesh, which him self
acknowledges Romans 7. v. 15 17. 19. 23. and yet to prove them to be no sin in
him, because they were inuoluntary, which is both my conclusion, and reason.

13. As for S. Austin he is so far from S. Augustine. 10. 2. See S. Austin lib.
2 cont. Iul. c. 3. and 10. l. 5. c. 3. 15.
thinking that we sin by inuoluntary motions of the flesh, as he says epist:
200. ad Asellicum: That if we consent not to them we need not say: Forgive us
our trespasses: which he repeateth again l. de spit. and lit. c. vlt. adding
Tom. 3.
that if we consented not to these act^ we should disprove that saying of S.
Ihon: If we say we have no sin we deceive our selfs, and proves it l. 1.
de ciuit. c. 15. thus. If concupiscential disobedience Tom. 5.
be without fault in the body of one sleeping, how much more in the body of
one not consenting. And l. 1. de nupt. and concupis. c. 23. explicateth how it
is called sin vz: as vvriting is called a hand, or cold sluggish which is
figuratively, and improperly. Nay he not only excuses us from sin, when we
consent not unto inuoluntary motions of the flesh, but avouches that then we
do much good, a great Merit in resisting Concupiscence according to S Austin.
Tom. 7. Tom. 10.
matter, for which we shall be crowned: lib. 1. de nupt. and concupisc. c.
29. He does much good who does that which is written. Follovv not thy lusts.
And sermon. 5. de verb. Apost. c. 6. It is a great matter for me not to be
overcome of concupiscence, and cap. 9. who consents not does much, it is a
great matter he does. And lib. 2. de Genesis cont. Manich. c. 14. Sometime reason
Tom. 1.
does manfully refrain and bridle Concupiscence even stirred up which when
it is done we fall not into sin (mark Bell) but with some striving are
crowned. Wherefore if they be Papists (as Bell Contradict. 13.
says page 46. and 49.) who say we merit when we resist Concupiscence, surely
S. Austin is one. Yea Bell himself if he account it a good deed (as I hope he
will) to resist lust: for art. 5. page 61. he grants al good deeds to be
meritorious. S. Gregory also epist. ad S. Gregory.
August. c. 11. teaches, That pollution in sleep is not at al to be feared
when it proceeds of superfluity, or weakness of nature, And lib. 21. moral.
c. 3. unclean cogitation defyleth not the mind when it beats, but when it
subdueth the mind unto it by delight. More Fathers I might add but it were
needles, because Calvin lib. 3. Calvin.
instit. c. 3. paragr. 10. confesses that all the Fathers before S. Austin are
of the same opinion with S. Austin.

14. Seventh Conclusion: habitual Concupisce^ce in the regenerate is no
proper, or formal sin. This evidently follows out of the former. For if the
acts be not formal sin, but by consent of will, much les the proanes unto
them: but it may be proved also otherways. First because if it be any sin,
it is original (for actual it can not be, being no act) but original it is not,
because by regeneration, we put of the old man. Coloss. 3. v. 9. or lay away
the old man Ephesians. 4. versic. 22. and put on the new: Coloss. 3. v. 9. and
Ephesians. 4. v. 24. And by keeping original sin we keep on the old man as by
first contracting it we put him on. But it is contradiction at the same time to
keep on, and put of or lay away the old man. Ergo in our regeneration we keep
not original sin. And this is confirmed: because by sin we bear the image
of the earthly man, by regeneration the image of the heavenly according to that
1. Corinthians. 15. v. 49. As we have borne the image of the earthly (man) let us
bear also the image of the heavenly. But these two images be opposite. For what
2. Cor. 6. v. 15.
agreement with Christ and Belial. Therefore we can not have damnable sin, as
original sin is, and be regenerate.

15. Secondly in regeneration either we remain guilty of damnable sin, or
become guiltles of al such sin. If we remain guilty, then is not our sin
forgiven: contrary to that article of our Creed. Forgiveness Symbol. Apost.
of sins. For it is impossible to be guilty of sin, and to have sin
forgiven. Then remain we also guilty of damnation the stypend Vbicunqu^
peccatum est illic se profert ira and vltio Dei. Calvin. 3. instit. c. 11.
parag. 2.
of sin, Romans 6. v. 23. For the guilt of punishment rises of the guilt of
sin, as necessarily as fatherhood rises of begetting a child. Well may God
choose whether he will punish a malefactor, or no, yet he can not make, that a
malefactor remaining a malefactor, and guilty of sin, shall not be guilty also
of punishment. But a justified o^ regenerate man can not be guilty of
damnation; because There is no damnation to S. Paul.
them who are in Christ Jesus: Romans 8. v. 1. And Bell page 45. confesses That
a man can not be Bell.
justly condemned for sin remitted. If in regeneration we become guiltles of
al damnable sin, then have we no such sin in us. For as S. Austin says, To
be not guilty of sin S. Augustine. l. 1. de nupt. and concup. c. 26. to. 7.
is to have no sin: And again: Sins remain but by their guilt. As adultery
once committed remains in the Committer, only because he is still guilty of
the adultery he did, until it be remitted.

16. Protestants answer. That by regeneration Perkins refor. C^thol. page 36.
See S. Austin lib. 6. cont. Julian. c. 6.
guilt is taken from us, but not from the sin which is in us. But this is
contradiction: for if the guilt be in the sin, and the sin still in us the
guilt is also still in us. Beside the guilt of sin (whereof we speak, and not
of the guilt of punishment) can not be in our sin, which can not be guilty of
it self, but in us only, who are guilty of sin, which we have committed. And
the remaining of sin in us consists only in the remaining of this guilt (as
says S. Austin) as the remaining of adultery S. Augustine. 1. de nupt.
consists only in this that a man is still guilty of the adulterous fact he
did. And What it is for sin to remain.
therefore if this guilt of the fact be taken from him, it is impossible for
adultery to remain in him. Beside it is manifest contradiction to say one has
sin in him, and yet is not guilty of sin, or a sinner, as it is to say the
air has darkness in it, and yet is not dark.

17. Thirdly God in regeneration takes away sins: Joan. 1. v. 29. Miche. 7.
casts S. Ihon. ^icheas v. 19. Psalm. v. 12.
them into the depth of the sea: Seperateth from us as far as the East is from
the west: psalm. 102. But concupiscence is not taken away, it is not cast into
the depth of the sea, nor separated from us as far, as the East from the west.
Ergo it is no sin. Again: By justification he makes us more white then
snow: psalm. 50. v. 9. but how can we be whiter then snow, if the blacknes of
sin still remain in us? Fourthly Adam by his sin deprived of grace, and
transfused sin into al them that are generate of him. Ergo: Christ by his
merit expelled sin, and transfused grace into al them that are regenerat of
him. The Antecede^t is evident. The consequence I prove. For else Christ's merits
had not been so potent and effectual to do good, as Adams sin was to do evil,
seeing Christ's merit can not as really, and truly take sin from us, as Adams
sin transfused it into us. Which is both contrary to Christ's honor, and to
the Apostles doctrine Romans 5. v. S. Paul. Bell disproued by him self.
17. 18 19. Fifthly how shall one be justly condemned for that which is remitted
in baptism? it can not be. Ergo after baptism there remains no damnable
sin. The Antecedent is the very words of Bell page 44. and 45. and agreeable to
S. Paul Romans 8. v. 1. There is no damnation to them, that are in Christ Jesus.
The consequence is evident for one that has damnable sin may be justly
condemned.

18. I need not cite Fathers for proof of this Conclusion because as I said
before Calvin confesses that S. Austin had faithfully, Calvin. lib. ^. instit.
c. 3. p^rag. 10.
and very diligently gathered the sentences of al holy Fathers, and yet
disagreeth from him. For S. Austin (says he) dare not call concupiscence sin,
but is content to term it infirmity. Let now any indifferent Reader judge
whither we have not reason to boast (to use Bells terms) that S. Austin is on
our side. S. Augustine. to. 7.
And no marvel. For 1. de nupt. and concupis. c. 23. he writes thus: Truly
this same Concupiscence is now no sin (mark Bell) in the regenerat when
consent is not given unto it to unlawful acts. And soon after. But in a
certain kind of speech it is called sin: and he gives there two reasons of
this figurative speech, because (says he) it was made of sin, and makes
sin if it overcome. Again: So is (Concupiscence) called sin, because it was
made by sin, vvheras now in the regenerate it self is no sin (mark again)
as speech which the tongue makes is called a tongue, and writing a hand which a
hand makes. So also it is called a sin, because it makes sin if it
overcome as cold is called sluggish, because it makes sluggards. Can any
Catholic now speak more plainly. In these few words al in one chapter, he
twice denies concupiscence in the regenerate to be sin, once affirms it to
be improperly so called, and gives two reasons, and two examples of such
figurative speech: The S. Augustine. to. 7. Bellarm. l. 5. de amiss. Great. and
stat. peccati c. 8.
same doctrine he teaches l. 1. contr. duas epist. Pelag. c. 13. and l. 2.
cont. Julian and in all his tomes as Bellarmin shows. So that whatsoever Bell
hereafter shall object out of S. Paul: S. Austin, or others calling
concupiscence S. Austin has prevented al Bells objections.
sin, I need not answer my self, but refer the Reader to these words of S.
Austin, wherein he explicateth both why, and how, S. Paul, him self, and others
mean not properly, but improperly and figuratively, when they call
concupiscence sin. Yet because Bells arguments contain diverse untruths
requisite to be taxed, I will answer them al in such order as he proposes them.

CHAP. II. Diverse untruths of Bell disproued, his arguments out of S. Paul
against the doctrine in the former chapter ansvvered.
BELL begins this Article as he did Bell page 41.
the rest with untruths 1. That S. Paul in untruth 47
the whole 7. chapter to the Romans proves original concupiscence in the
regenerate to be sin. This is not so: for he does not prove it to be any
sin at al, but supposing it to provoke to sin, calls it sin. 2. That
Papists untruth 48
can not abide the Apostles doctrine. Forsooth because we can not abide Bells
exposition. 3. That the cause of our denying Concupiscence to untruth 49
be sin is because it overthrows our holy so supposed justification (thus
blasphemously he denies Bell blaspbemeth justification.
justification to be holy) our inherent purities, condign merits, and works of
supererogation. This is untrue: for it might be such sin, as Bell would have it
(to wit venial) and destroy Bell art. 6. p. 81.
none of al these. But the true causes are Scriptures, Fathers, and reason
before alleged, and Bell confesses that the reason page 50.
which we ever have in our mouth is the inuoluntarines of concupiscence 4. That
the Master of Sentences utterly condemns us in calling untruth 50 3. sent.
d. 19.
concupiscence culpam. But he means improperly as is evident by his own
words 2. did. 32. Concupiscence after baptism (says he) is only (mark Bell)
punishment of sin, but before baptism both punishment, and fault.

2. Thus having made his way with untruths, Bell page 42.
he proves concupiscence to be sin out of S. Paul. Romans 7. v. 25. saying. I
my self with the mind serve the law of God, but with the flesh the law of
sin. And hence notes that the regenerate do serve the law of sin. But he
forgot to note that it is but with the flesh, and that with the mind (without
which Ibid.
there is no formal sin) they serve the law of God. He also notes. That the
best livers can not merit grace, and glory ex condigno: because by sin they
deserve death. Which because S. Austin (says he) at the first could not
digest, he understood S. Paul in the 7. chapter to the Romans, only 51. untruth
of the wicked, not of the godly. But remitting Bell forgets his matter.
the matter of merit, and desert of sin to their proper places art. 5. and 6.
false it is that S. Austin changed his opinion about the understanding of those
words of S. Paul Romans 7. I am a carnal man sold under sin: and the like,
because he saw that just men sinned. For as him self testifyeth 1. Retract. S.
Austin.
c. 23. (and Bell wrongly cited 22.) he reading other expositors, found that the
foresaid words might be understood of the Apostle him self, as the word carnal
may be verifyed of him in respect of his body, not yet spiritual, and the word
sin in respect of concupiscence, which is sin vz: improperly, as the same
S. Austin explicateth Lib. 1. de nupt. and concupis. c. 23. and l. 1. cont.
duas epist. Pelag. c. 13.
in the books to which he refers us, and we cited them before. Whereby we
see, that S. Austins error was in understanding the foresaid words of formal,
and proper sin (as Bell does) and corrected it by understanding them of
improper sin. And yet even when he was in that error, he was so far from
thinking (as Bell does) that the best livers in rigor deserve eternel death,
that then he would in no wise think the Apostle to speak of a man in grace,
assuring him self, that no such man is sold under sin that deserves
eternal death.

3. His second proof is out of the 23. Bell page 42.
verse of the same chapter where S. Paul writes I see a law in my members
subduing me to the law of sin. What (says Bell) can he Bell forgets what
he is to prove.
merit who is prisoner to the law of sin. But beside that, Bell for got what
he was to prove: vz. Concupiscence in the just to be sin, not their merit to
be none: S. Paul by the word (me) understands only his flesh, as he had
expounded him self before v. 18. when he said. There dwells not in me that
is in my flesh good. And S. Austin interprets 1. de nupt and concupis. c. 30.
and 31. And v. 23. says that he was prisoner to the law of sin in his
flesh, and in his mind served the law of God: what marvel then, that one
prisoner in flesh, but free in mind (from which al our merit, or sin
proceeds) may by serving Gods law, merit.

4. His third proof is out of the 19. verse Bell page 43.
where (as he cites) S. Paul says. The evil which I would not that I do.
Omitting the false False translat. 3.
translating of on thelo and Nolo: I would not: as though S. Paul had not had a
present, and absolute will not to lust, but an imperfect velleity which even the
wicked have, and in english we signify by would, and would not. I answer that
S. Paul improperly says; He does that which he will not, and therefore in the
very next verse, as it were correcting that speech says. If I do that I vvil
not, I work v. 20.
it not, wherein he both affirms and ptoueth that we do not what we will not.
And the A man rather does not then does what his vvil does not. See S. Thomas
1. 2. q. 74. art. 3. ad 3.
reason is evident. For as the commonwelth is principally the Prince, Pieres,
and Magistrates, which govern the rest: so a man is principally his will, which
commands the rest. And therefore as the commonwealth does not that, which they
do not, though some of the commonalty do it: so a man does not, what his will
does not, though some of his inferior powers do it. If therefore S. Paul did but
improperly say, he does what he will not, Bell can thereof infer but improper
sin. Besides though it were a proper speech, thereof can be inferred no proper
sin, for want of voluntarines. And here by the way Bell straweth his Bell page
43.
flowers of leasing, saying. That the cause why S. Austin epist: 105. vvrote
that God crowned 52. untruth
nothing but his own gifts, when he crovvneth our merits, is, because the
regenerate by inuoluntary asts of Concupiscence sin, and become guilty of
damnation. For nether does S. Austin speak there of inuoluntary acts, nether
any where S. August. 2. de Cenes. contr. Manich. c. 14. tom. 1.
does he say they exclude merit, or deserve damnation, yea plainly avouches
that we are crowned when we have them against our vvil. And the true cause
of his speech shall be given in the next Article of merit, and his very words
convince that our merits are no sins, and much les deserve damnation: Why
merits are no sin, out of S. Austin.
for he calls them Gods own gifts and says he crowns them: but God nether
gives nor crowns sin.

5. Fourthly Bell alleged the Apostle page 43. Cap. 1. parag. 3. 4. 6. 13. 18.
calling Concupiscence sin: Romans 7. v. 14. and 20. But this we answered
before. Bell replyeth that it will not suffice to say with Bellarmin 53. untruth
that it is called sin only because it provoke to sin, as a man's vvriting
is called his hand, because 54. untruth
it is written with his hand. Here be two untruths fathered upon Bellarmin.
For nether does he say Concupiscence is called sin only because it provoke
to sin: yea lib. 5. de amiss. great. and stat. pec. c. 8. he Bellarm.
gives an other reason out of S. Austin, because it is the effect of sin.
Nether does he say that it may be called sin, because it provoke to sin,
as writing is called a hand, because it is made by a hand; for so it is a
cause, and writing an effect; but as cold is called sluggish, because it makes
sluggards. But let us hear why S. Paul may not be understood of improper sin.
First because Bell page 43.
the Master of Sentences granted Concupiscence to be sin. This is twice sod
colworts set again before his reader for want of other meat, but rejected
before. Secondly because it makes a man to serve the law of sin, which
Sup. parag. 1.
service can never be but sin. Here the question it self is begged. For the
question it self is, Bell assumeth what he was to prove, and yet concludes
nothing.
whither the service to the law of sin done by the flesh not by the mind (as
S. Paul speaks Romans 7. verse. 23.) be proper sin, or no, and that Bell
beggeth of us to grant But he must win it, ere he get it. And though we did
grant it to him, yet could he no more infer thereof that habitual
Concupiscence, which causes it, is sin, then he can infer the power of our
will, which is a gift of God, to be sin, when it causes sin. Thirdly (says
Bell) because the evil vvherof S. Paul speaks he hates and vvil not (Bell has
would not) do it, which must needs be meant of sin. True, but of material, and
improper sin. For such also is to be hated, and not to be willed.

6. Bell having thus sillily proved his heresy Bell page 43. 44.
out of S. Paul, endeuoreth to prove it out of our doctrine thus. Al reprobataes
are reprobated both negatiuely, and positiuely for original sin. Ergo:
Concupiscence is sin even after baptism. The Antecedent (says he) is a
maine untruth 55.
point, and settled ground of Papists religion, and he willingly grants it.
The consequence he proves because some reprobates are baptized. Answer. First
I deny the Antecedent. For 1. Answer.
nether does any Catholic affirm it to be any point at al of Popish faith,
and much less a maine point, or ground thereof: nether (though some believe it
as a school opinion) is it true, because original sin being as truly forgiven
in baptism to many reprobates, as it is to predestinates, they can be no more
positiuely sent to hell for it, then predestinates. For as S. Paul says Romans
11. S. Paul.
v. 29. Gods gifts are without repentance, so that what sin he truly
forgiueth he never afterward punishes in hell. wherefore S Prosper S. Prosper in
resp. ad object. 2. Gallor.
writes that who goes from Christ, and ends this life out of grace, what
goes he but into perdition? yet he falls not again into that which is
forgiven, nor shall be damned in original sin. Only as al sins are said to
return by How reprobats may be said to be reprobated for original sin.
ingratitude, according to the parable of the ungrateful servant Math. 18.
because a sin, after others have been pardoned, becomes greater by the
ingratitude, then otherwise it were: so original sin pardoned to some
reprobats in baptism, may be said to return to them through their ingratitude
in sinning after the said pardon, and they being positiuely damned for such
sin, may in some sort be said to be positiuely damned for original sin.
Secondly though 2. Answer
the Antecedent were true, it could not follow thereof, that Concupiscence in
reprobates is formal sin, but only that original sin is not truly forgiven
in baptism to any reprobat, which though it be false, pertains not to this
question. For as for habitual Cap. 1. parag. 2. and 3.
Concupiscence, it nether before baptism, nor after is formal sin, but
before only materially sin, and after only languor, and weakness as is before
explicated. But how Bell admitting al reprobates to be reprobated positiuely for
sin, agrees with his Masters Calvin, Beza, and others Calvin, Beza Romans 9.
teaching that they are reprobated for Gods pleasure, and that he made them to
damn, and reprobate them, let his breethren in Bell contradicts his sellovv
Ministers. Bell page 45.
the lord enquire. Now to his places taken out of S. Austin, whom he promises
to show to be so plain for his doctrine, as none can stand in doubt thereof. But
who well remembers S. Austins words, and Caluins Chap. 1. parag. 13. and 18.
confession before cited, can never stand in doubt but that Bell most braggeth
where he has lest cause, and like a^prating pettyfogger cries lowdest, when he
has lest proofs.

CHAP. III. Bells arguments out of S. Austin touching Concupiscence ansvvered.
THE first place he alleges out of S. Bell page 45.
Austin is tom. 7. l. 6. contr. Julian. c. 3. where he writes. As blindness of
heart is sin, punishment of sin, and cause of sin. So concupiscence of the
flesh is sin, punishment, and cause of sin. Answer. S. Austin compares
concupiscence with blindness of heart, in the material disorder of sin. For as
sin is against the rule of reason, so disordinate lust, not in formality of
sin. Nether say I this only, but can prove it. And omitting that other where
he Lib. de Spir. and ^it. c. vlt. l. 1. de nupt. and concup. c. 23. l. 1. con.
duas epist. Pelag. c. 13.
plainly avouches it to be no formal sin, as is before showed, I prove it,
first by his reason, where with he proves it to be sin: vz because it is
disobedient to the rule of reason, which conuinceth it to be material sin,
and a disorderly and evil thing, but not to be formally sin, for want of
voluntarines, which him self necessarily requires to formal sin as is
before showed. Secondly because it sufficed to S. Austin to ^ap. 1. parag. 9.
prove concupiscence to be material sin, for to disprove Julian the Pelagian
against whom he there disputed, who taught, as S. Austin there and other where
testifyeth, Lib. de nupt. and concup. c. 34. to. 7. and l. 6. cont. Iul. ^. ^^.
that it was laudable and good, against whom he there proves by the example of
blindness of heart, that it was not only punishment and cause of sin, but also
sin; that is, naught, evil, and disorderly; because it is against the rule of
reason, which is to be sin materially, though it want the form of sin
which is voluntarines.

2. Next he brings these words. Some Bell page 46.
iniquity is in man when the inferior parts do stubbernly S. Augustine* tom. 7.
strive against the superior, albeit they be not suffered to overcome. And
quoteth for them l. 6. contr. Julian c. 8. as he found it through the Printers
error, falsely quoted in Bellarm: Bellarm. l. 3. de amiss. great. and stat. pec.
c. 9. Bells chale^g nothing but Bellarmins objections. Sup. c. 1. parag. 3. and
4.
but they are, l. 6. c. 19 which added to that, that almost al he says is
found in Bellarmin, conuinceth that he made this boasting challenge out of his
objections. As for S. Austin his meaning when he calls concupisce^ce iniquity
is sufficiently explicated before. And the very word, Some, argues that he
thinks it not to be formal sin, but in some sort vz: materially. Besides
that him self l. 2. contr. Julian c. 5. expounds the like words out of S.
Ambrose of no sinful iniquity.

3. The third place cited by Bell is l. 1. de page 46.
nupt. and concupis. c. 25. where S. Austin S. Augustine. tom. 7.
writes. If (concupiscence) can both be in the baptized parent and be no
sin, why is the self same no sin in the child? To this I answer (says
S. Austin) That concupiscence is not so forgiven in baptism, that it is no
more, but that it is no more imputed to sin. Item. There remains not any
thing which is not remitted. Whereupon Bell infers both that concupiscence is
formal sin, else it need not be forgiven, and that it is true sin, as well
after baptism, as before though it be not imputed to sin after baptism, and
bids us mark that S. Austin said not: Nothing is sin that remains, or no
sin remains: but not any thing remains which is not remitted. Answer.
The form, and What is the essence of habitual sin* Cap. ^^.
essence of habitual sin is the guilt of actual sin before done, according
to S. Austin in the same book, and next chapter, as the form of habitual sin
of adultery is the guilt of actual adultery before committed: and the form of
that habitual sin which we have by origin, is the guilt of Adams actual
eating the Aple, which guilt How Concupiscence needs for giuenes.
being annexed to Concupiscence makes it formal sin, and to require
forgiveness, but that guilt being taken away by Gods forgiving the sin (as the
same holy Doctor teaches in the same place, and lib. 6. S. Austin.
contr. Julian. c. 17. and lib. 1. Retract. c 13) Concupiscence need no more
forgiveness (as the same B. Saint writes. lib. de spirit. To. 3. and 1. and
lib. 1. contr. duas epist. Pelag. c. 13.
and lit. c. vlt. and epist. 200.) Nor remains any more true sin, more then
the body remains a man after the soul is departed. And in this very place
which Bell cites, when he asks why Concupiscence is sin in the child, if
it be in the parent baptized, and be no sin in him, evidently supposes that
it is no true sin in the baptized.

4. As for that of not imputing sin, what S. Austin meant thereby we will
rather What no^ imputing of sin is with S. Austin.
learn of himself then of Bell, he therefore in the very words which Bell cites
having asked why Concupiscence is not sin (mark Bell) in the parent baptized
as well as in the child unbaptized, answered that by baptism non imputatur
None but an infidel vvil say sin is not ta^e^ away in baptism S. August. l.
1. cont. duas epist. Pelag. c. 13. to. 7.
in peccatum it is not imputed for sin. In which answer unless he did by not
imputing for sin, mean making no sin, he had not answered the question,
why Concupiscence was no sin in the baptized parent. Therefore with him
Concupiscence not to be imputed to, or for sin, is to be made no sin. And
cap. 32. he says that Concupiscence to be imputed, is to have the guilt (vz of
Adams actual sin) which it has, with it: and consequently to be not imputed
is to have this guilt taken away, but to have no guilt is to have no sin, as
him self says c. 26. therefore with him Concupiscence to be not imputed is to
be made no sin. Nether indeed can God otherwise not impute sin but by
taking it away. For his judgment is according to truth. Romans 2. v. 2. and
therefore if there be sin S. Paul.
in us, he must needs impure it to us, and account us sinners, else he should not
account us, as we are, and according to truth. And albeit S. Austin did not in
this place say in plain terms. Nothing is sin that remains. or: No sin
remains yet he manifestly supposed the first, when he asked why concupiscence
is not sin (mark Bell) as well in parents baptized as in the child, and
affirmed them both in equivalent terms when he answered that by not imputation
concupiscence became no sin in the baptized, as is already showed. And
otherwhere plainly affirms. That al sins are forgiven (in baptism) and S.
Austin. l. 1. contr. duas epist. Pelag. c. 13. In Psalm. 72. l. 6. cont. Iul. c.
16. 17. Tract. 41. in Joan. sermon. 6. de verb. Apost. lib. 20. de ciuit. c. 26.
now are no more at al. What is this but to say no sin remains. And
nothing more usual with him then to say. That in baptism al sins are taken
away, do dye, are wholy forgiven, al iniquity blotted out: the baptized have
no sin. Infants christened have no filth. Beside in sense al is one to say.
Nothing remains which is sin: and nothing is sin that remains. For God
by remitting takes away the guilt of sin, as S. Austin says l. 1. de nupt.
and concupis. c. 26. l. 6. contr. Julian. c. 17. and l. 1. Retract. c. 13.
which guilt is the very form of sin as is before explicated out of S. Austin.

5. The fourth place is taken out of S. Bell page 47. S. Augustine. to. 7.
Austin l. 1. de nupt. and concupis. c. 29. He does much good who does that
which is written. Follow not thy lust, but perfecteth it not because he
fulfilleth not that thou shall not covet, or lust. Hence Bell infers. First
that the just can do no good, nor strive against lust so perfectly but it is
annexed to sin. This is grounded upon S. Austins words of not perfecting
good, and not fulfilling the law of not coveting. But the illation is quite
contrary to his meaning in this place and others before cited, where he says.
That as long as we consent not, we sin Epist. 200. l. de Spir. and lit. c.
vlt. l. 1. de nupt. and concupis. c. 29. lib. 2. de Genesis contr. Manich. cap.
14. Non est culpae deputandum si nondum potest esse tanta dilectio Dei quanta
plenae perfectaeque cognitioni debetur. Aug. de spir. and lit. c. vlt. tom. 3.
Aristotel. Quae participatio iustitiae cum iniquitate. 2. Cor. 6.
not, we need not ask forgiveness, yea do much good and are crowned. And though
he say we perfect not our good, yet not to perfect is not to sin, especially
when it is against our will that we perfect it not, as it is in this case. And
S. Austin is so far from saying here we sin when we perfect not this work,
as he affirms that we do much good. And Bell can as well combine good and sin
in one act, as he can annex light and darkness, heaven and hell, God and diuil.
For as the Philosopher says bonum ex integra cansa, malum ex quolibet defectu.
It is no good act unless it be good every way, and it is sin if it be evil any
way.

6. As for fulfilling the law: I answer that who consents not to
Concupiscence fulfilleth it in all things which it commands to be performed
under sin as S. Austin expressly affirms in many places: as lib. de spirit.
and lit. c. vlt. epist. 200. lib. 1. Sup. c. 1. parag. 13. and 18.
de nupt. and concupisc. c. 29. lib. 2. de Genes. contr. Manich. c. 14. whose
words we cited before: though if he have Concupiscence, he fulfill it not in a
thing which the law, though it command not under sin How to have no
Concupiscence is commanded by the law and how not.
to be performed, yet it commands as the end to which we ought, al we can to
endeavor and labor to attain unto. That to have no Concupiscence at al, is
commanded by the law, only as the end which we ought to endeavor unto, is
manifest both by S. Austins affirming that there is no sin, when See more
herafter artic. 8 chap. 2 paragr 3. and chap. 3. parag. 2.
there is no consent, as also because in the very next words to those which Bell
cites he says. To this end the law said thou shall not covet, that in this
precept we mihgt know both what in this mortality we ought to endeavor unto by
profiting, and whither we ought to attain unto in that most happy immortality.
Behold how he says in this life we ought to endeavor, and in the next we ought
to attain to have no lust. And tract. 41. in Joan he says. I can not fulfill
that which is said thou shall not covet, what S. Augustine. to. 9.
therefore is it needful to fulfill? that. Go not after thy concupiscences.
Behold he prescribes this Item 10. de Genesis cap. 12. tom. 3. Cap. 5. to. 10.
only as needful to attain unto. And in the same place, and sermon. 12. de verb.
Apost. he notes that S. Paul said not you shall have no il desires, or let not
sin be in your members, but let not sin reign. As if he said. We are not
bidden under sin to have no lust at al: and the reason says he, and S.
Gregory after S. Gregor. l. ^1. Moral. c. 2.
him, is, because it is impossible.

7. The second thing which Bell infers Bell page 48.
and bids us mark it well is, That the tenth commandment forbids
original lust Original lust made actual by Bell.
committed without consent, and habitual concupiscence. Did ever man read more
markable folly? 1. He makes original lust to be committed, which is to make
original actual, because what is committed is actual, as commission is action:
2. That habitual, and original inclination to evil is forbidden by the tenth
commandment, and calls the contrary most absurd. But nothing can be more
absurd then to say that original, and habitual inclination to evil is forbidden
by this commandment: Thou shall not covet. For S. Augustine. to. 7.
to covet is to do, ipsum agere concupiscere est. says S. Austin sermon. 5. de
verb. Apost. c. 7. and therefore to make habits and inclinations forbidden in
these words, is to make habits doings, inclinations actions. Or who Peccata
propria non habent vnde illos merito Innocents nu^cupamus. Aug. 1. cont. Iul.
c. 6. to. 7.
ever heard that newborn infants sin against the tenth commandment, surely
if that be so, we must call them no more Innocents.

8. But let us hear him prove this absurdity. For although (says he) S. Paul
were most page 48.
free, and innocent from actual sin, because he fought mightily against his
raging concupiscence, and did in no wise yield unto it, yet was he guilty by
reason of original concupiscence. Behold Bell proving idem per idem, and withal
overthrowing Bell proves idem per idem.
whatsoever he manteineth in this article. For the doubt is, whether original
Concupiscence be sin, and this he proves because S. Paul was guilty by
reason of it. what is this but to prove original Concupiscence to be sin,
because it is sin. And he affirms S. Paul to have been Contradict. 14.
most free, and innocent from actual sin, and proves it because he fought
mightily Bell overthrows at once what he intended to prove in all this
Article. Babylon is vvonne, Bell is confounded. Hiere. 50. v. 2.
against his raging Concupiscence, and in no wise consented unto it. which is
in plain terms to confess that inuoluntary motions of the flesh are no
sin, because they are not voluntary. O force of truth which breakest out of
thy professed adversaries mouth. Surely Protestants may have great joy of such
a challenger. And no marvel if he be desirous of an adversary to fight withal,
who for want of one falls thus to fight with him self, and makes his
adversaries sport to laugh, and moves his friends to compassion and shame. But
let us see more of his pastime.

9. S. Paul had not known lust to be sin except Bell page 49. Romans 7. v. 7.
the law had said. Thou shall not lust. But he could not be ignorant that
Concupiscence with consent was sin, seeing the very heathens did know, and
confess it. Again. voluntary lust is forbidden Math. 5. v. 22.
in the sixth, seventh, and eighth commandment as Christ him self expounds
them. Therefore the tenth forbids the very habitual desire, and inclination
and fruits thereof though not consented unto: Answer. S. Paul was so far from
knowing by the law that natural inclination to sin is formal sin, as nether
he, nor any man of judgment could imagine it til Bell See S. Austin sermon. 4. de
verb. Apost. c. 4. and 5. to. 10.
with a new kind of philosophy taught us that habits are acts, and
inclinations actions. But to the argument I deny the assumption. For he might
be ignorant that lust which Concupiscence indirectly voluntary known of S
Paul by the law to be sin.
is only indirectly voluntary, and in the cause, because it is not prevented,
is sin, and this he might know by the law: nether can Bell show that ever any
heathen knew this. Yea he might be ignorant, that Concupiscence directly
voluntary, when it is not put in execution, is true sin and learn this by
the law. For if Josephus, and Kimhi Josephus l. 12. Antiquit. c. 12. Kimhi in
psalm. 66.
though they had the law, and were great Rabbis in it, yet thought such
concupiscence no sin: and Josephus reprehended Polybius for condemning it as
a sin; why might not the Apostle have been ignorant of this, if the law had
not taught it him. Neither does Bells reason convince the contrary. For though
some Heathen by great study in moral philosophy came to know this truth, yet
perhaps S. Paul could not or rather as he says did not. And Bell as we shall
see hereafter cites a place out of S. Ambros where he writes, that the
Apostle S. Ambros. in cap. 7. ad Romans
thought Concupiscence no sin because it delighted, and seemed a harmles
thing to covet. yet better it is to say: (as I have already) that S. Paul
means, that by the law he came to know al voluntary concupiscence, though it
be but indirectly voluntary, to be sin, and this nether he nor any Heathen
could have known, but by the law, or by Gods revelation.

10. Bells second reason makes against him self. For if inuoluntary motions be
as true sins as voluntary, why are not they forbidden as well in the sixth,
seventh, and eighth commandment as these? And albeit voluntary motions were
implicitly forbidden, when the external acts were prohibited, yet it was
necessary to forbid them expressly in the last commandment for to inculcat it
into the hard hearts of the Jews: nether yet with this express forbiddance
would some of them believe voluntary concupiscence without the fact to be sin,
as appears by the example of Josephus Kimhi, and diverse Jews, Math. 5. v.
29. After this Bell alleges a place of S. Austin where he calls desires of
Concupiscence il, filthy, and not lawful, which have been explicated before,
and are verifyed of Chapt. 1. parag. 2. and 3.
inuoluntary Concupiscence, because it is materially sin, wanting nothing to
be Chapt. 1. parag. 2. and 3.
formally so but voluntarines, which Bell here goes about to prove that they
want Chapt. 1. parag. 11.
not, but his proof has been refuted before.

11. After the said ptoofe he avouches Bell page 51.
Bellarmin to confess that S. Austin acknowledges Bellarm. lib. 5. de amiss.
great. and stat. pec. c. 10. untruth
even inuoluntary motions to be properly sin, and flatly condemned by the
tenth Commandment, and in the margent bids us see S. Austin lib. de spirit.
and lit. c. vlt. because Bellarm in writes that S. Austin teaches al kind of
motions of Concupiscence to be aliquo modo in some sort prohibited by that
law. Thou shall not covet. Whereas Bellarmin professes. That S. Austin not
only Bellar. sup. c. 8.
no where in plain words says al Concupiscence is properly sin, but also
affirms the contrary in all the tomes of his works, and in the words cited by
Bell is so far from saying, that S. Austin thinks al motions to be flatly
condemned, as he would not absolutely say they were condemned but only with this
limitation in some sort, vz as far, as they lie in our power, which limitation
though Bell without proof call deceitful, and contrary to S. Austins meaning,
yet have we before showed Sup. parag. 6.
it out of S. Austin to be his true meaning. And I would Bell had seen that
place of S. Austin to which he sends us: for there should he have heard S.
Austin teaching him that inuoluntary Concupiscence is so far from sin, as if
we consent not to it we need not say in our lords prayer. Forgive us our
trespasses. And thus much of his proofs out of S. Austin.

CHAP. IIII. Bells arguments out of S. Ambros, S. Bid, S. Thomas touching
Concupiscence ansvvered.
AFTER his proofs out of S. Austin Bell page 52.
Bell very methodically (forsooth) returns to Scripture citing a sentence of
S. Ihon in greek, pas ho poion hamartian cai ten ano mian poiei, cai he
hamartia estin anomia: and translateth it thus. Every one that sins
transgresses the law; and sin is the transgression of the law. This place
he cites again art. 6. to prove al sin of it self to be mortal, and for
that purpose it has some show of Be^ forgets his matter.
proof: but how it proves al kind of Concupiscence to be proper sin,
passes my intelligence. For suppose that al sin were transgression of the
law, (which he laboreth much to prove, and will never perform) what is this to
prove. That al Concupiscence is sin? And lest of al it concerns habitual
concupiscence. For S. Ihon speaks only of actual sin, as appears by those
words poiei amartian poiei anomian, commits sin commits iniquity. And
yet spends he four leaves in nothing but in proving anomia to signify
transgression of the law, and every sin to be transgression of the law, and
says that Papists are put to a non plus. about the page 58.
doctrine of concupiscence in the regenerate: for both anomia and adicia is
truly, and fitly termed iniquity: But what shall a man say to such vanity? Be
anomia, or adicia what you will, be al sin transgression of the law: prove you
that al concupiscence is formal sin? The question is now, not what anomia or
adicia, or sin is, but what concupiscence is, from which Bell flying into an
other question, shows him self to be at a non plus. Wherefore remitting this
place of S. Ihon with all which he brings to prove that every sin is
transgression, to the 6. article, to which it belongs and nothing concerns
this: I will answer only four authorities, which he abuses to prove
inuoluntary concupiscence to be sin.

2. The first is of S. Ambrose in. c. 7. Bell page 56. S. Ambros.
Romans where he says that a man is not free from crime, because he sins
inuitus unwillingly or against his will. Where Bell notes that he calls
concupiscence crime, or mortal sin. And, That a man sins in that which he
does against his will. But besides that the Author of those commentaries is not
S. Ambrose: he means not of concupiscence but of custom of sinning, which
begun in the sinner (says he) by his own fault, and sloth, and whereby he is
laded and sooner yields to sin then to the law, and though he would do good,
yet is he oppressed by custom. And therefore when he says that such a one is
not free from crime in sinning against his will, he means not of absolute, and
resolute will to the contrary (for custom can not make a man to do a thing
against his absolute will, but of an imperfect will which diverse call velleity,
which most sinners, though never so accustomed to sin, have to do good, and
against which kind of will they sin: but are not therefore (as that Author
says truly free from crime, because (notwithstanding this imperfect will of
doing well) they have an absolute and perfect will to sin. And so this place
concerns nothing acts of concupiscence altogether inuoluntary and against
both perfect, and imperfect will.

3. An other testimony he cites out of S. Ambrose in the same place where he
says. That S. Paul separated not this concupiscence from sin, but mingled
it. But he means only of voluntary acts, as is evident by the reason,
wherewith he proves that this concupiscence seemed no sin, because (says he)
it delighted, and seemed simplex causa, a harmles matter to covet a thing of
our neighbor.

4. The third authority is of S. Bid, Bell page 57. S. Beda 1. 10. 3.
whom he confesses to have been renowned through out the christian world for
learning, and virtue. And if he think as he writes he thinks Papistry to be
true piety. For S. Bid was a notorious Papist approving Mass, honoring of
relics, images, prayer for the dead, purgatory, and other such points of
Papistry as is evident out of his Ecclesiastical history. Bell alleges him
because he says. They sin who of frailty (lat: infirmitas) corrupt
innocence. What is here to the purpose? who deny that sin may be done as well
of frailty, as of malice? For seeing none is so frail, but he is assisted by
Gods grace in which he may do al: Philip. 4. v. 13. and is not suffered to be
tempted S. Paul.
above his power. 1. Corinthians. 10. v. 13. if he sin of frailty he sins
voluntarily.

5. His fourth authority is out of S. Thomas Bell page 59. S. Thom. 12. q. 74.
art. 3.
saying. That what a man does without deliberation of reason he does it not
perfectly, because the principal thing in man does it not, and therefore it is
not perfectly a human act, and so perfectly nether virtue, nor sin, but
imperfectly. Wherefore such a motion of sensuality, preventing reason is a
venial, and imperfect sin Out of these words Bell notes these important
observations as he calls them 1. That S. Thomas is a Popish Saint. 2. That
for his great learning (and Bell to page 132.
his confusion confesses him to have been a great Cleark indeed) he was
surnamed the Angelical Doctor. 3. That P. Urban 4. and Innocent 5. confirmed
his doctrine for authentical and gave it the first place after Cononical
Scripture. How well these three notes are gathered out of S. Thomas his foresaid
words let every one be judge. But Bell can gather quodlibet ex quolibet, water
out of a flint stone.

6. But I must note out of Bells important observations diverse important
untruths. 1. untruth 57.
That P. Vtban 4. and P. Innocent 5. confirmed untruth. 58
S. Thomas his doctrine for authentical. 2. That P. Urban 4. gave it the first
Urban. in Confirmat. doctrinae S. Thomae.
place after Canonical Scripture. Indeed P. Urban 4. highly admired his
doctrine, as if it were sent from heaven, and P. Innocent in a Innocent. in
sermo. Ecceplusquam Solomon hic.
sermon as a preacher by way of exaggeratio^n gave it the first place after
Scripture, but neither did they confirm it as authentical, nether did both of
them give it the next place after Scripture. The 3. untruth (which untruth 59.
he repeateth twice in this page, and very often in his book) is. That we are
bound to defend, and believe S. Thomas his doctrine, and may not in any case
refuse or deny it. This is a manifest untruth. For albeit S. Thomas be, and
that worthily of the greatest authority amongst schoolmen, yet his doctrine may
and is often denied in schools (as Bell has heard many times) where it
concerns no matter of faith, yea Bell him self art. 7. page 133. affirms
Contradict. 15.
him to be commonly denied about the conception of our Lady. And P. Urban 4.
commanded only the university of Toulouse to teach, and follow, especially
(says he) his doctrine. Whereby we see he commanded them not to follow his
doctrine only, and none others, but chiefly his, nor as an infallible truth, but
as most probable. Other universities, and Catholics are left to their liberty
to follow (excepting matter of faith wherein al agree, or only err of
ignorance) what schoolmen they please.

7. And this is so notorious as when we object to Protestants their dissension
in matters The disagreement of Schoolmen far different from that of
Protestants. S. Austin.
of faith, they return upon us the disagreement of schoolmen. But there is a
great difference. For the disagreement of schoolmen is in things wherein S.
Austin l. 1. contr. Julian. c. 6. The learnedest, and best defenders of
Catholic verity, may salua fidei compage, disagree, and one say better and
truer then an other. And if of ignorance any of them err it is always with
readiness to submit them selves to the judgment of the Catholic Church. Whereas
Protestants disagree about matters, which belong (as S. Austin speaks) ad
ipsa fidei fundamenta. Sup.
And omitting those notorious dissentions amongst them, about the real
presence, the number of Canonical books, Christ's suffering the pains of hell,
his descent into hell, and the like I will propose a few other points Dissentions
of Protestants touched in their late Conference.
of dissension amongst them, gathered out of the conference at Hampton court.
as 1: whether baptism by women be allowable: page 8. 14. 15. 17. 18. 2.
whether confirmation be lawful page 10. 3. whether baptism be necessary page
16. 4. whether after receiving the holy Ghost we may totally depart from
grace. page 28. 5. whether the communion book contradict the 15. article of
their faith. page 25. 6. whether there ought to be any Bishops. page 36. 7.
whether the intention of the Minister be essential to the Sacrament. page 38.
8. whether a man once justified remain truly just before God, whatsoever
sin he commit. page 41. and 14. 9. whether a justified man falling into
grievous sins shall be saved without repentance for them 16. 10. whether the
English Bible be truly translated. page 45. 46. 11. whether the communion
book corrupt the Bible in two places. page 63. 12. whether the Cross be to
be used in baptism. Whether the Church can institute, an external significant
sign. page 67. 14. whether the Churches institution can bind in conscience.
page 70. 15. Whether the communion book contain errors repugnant to
Scripture. page 59.

8. Moreover more then a thousand Ministers In their Supplication exhibited in
April 1603. Answer to the Supplication.
whom the whole university of Oxford calls their brethren and fellovv
laborers in the Lords harvest in the supplication to his Majesty exhibited in
April. 1603* profess. That there is not in their Church an uniformity of
doctrine. This the Oxonians deny against their own knowledge, and the knowledge
of al England. For what uniformity is there, where a thousand Ministers their
fellow laborers profess them selves to disagree in points of religion from the
rest, yea his Majesty witnesses him self to have received Conference p. 5.
22.
many complaints through the dissentions in the Church, and purposes (as he
says) to setle an uniform order through the whole Church, and to plant unity
Will now the Oxonians say there are no dissentions? will they make his Majesty
actum agere in settling uniformity, and planting unity where none wants. And
in like sort of the Scottish Church he testifyeth. That there is such
dissension even in Conference p. 44.
the Catachisme doctrine, as what was Catachisme dostrin in one congregation
was scarsly accepted as sound and orthodox in an other. And this dissension
amongst Protestants about matters of religion is with such obstinacy, as
notwithstanding proclamations, disputations, conferences, and decrees, or
Canons of their Church it remains still amongst them, and will as long as
heresy remains in them, which teaches them to expound Scriptures according
to their private spirits and to recant nothing, because (as his Majesty
Conference p 102.
says of the Scottish Ministers) it stands not with their credits.

9. The fourth note, which Bell gathers out of S. Thomas his words, is more to
the purpose vz. That motions of concupiscence preventing reason are venial
sins. But if Bell had amongst his important observations observed also that S.
Thomas spoke immediately before of deliberate reason, he might have noted that
he meant only of such motions as prevent perfect but not imperfect
deliberation, and therefore are (as he says) imperfect or venial sins:
Wherefore be myndful (Bell) from whence thou art fallen and do penance.
Apocalip. 2.

THE FIFTH ARTICLE OF THE MERIT OF GOOD WORKS.
CHAP. I. Of the Protestants enmity to good works and friendship with evil.
BELL begins this Article Bell page 60.
with a grievous complaint against Papists who (says he) most unchristianly
slander the professors of Christ's Ghospel, as though they were enemies to good
works, of which they think, speak, teach, and write more christianly, and
more religiously then Papists do. Both these points he proves no otherwise
then with an (I say) I say (says he) that good works though they can not go
before, yet do ever follovv justification, are necessary to salvation, and true
effects of predestination. As if Bell were all the new Ghospellers, or they al
agreed with him concerning good works: We allege their words, produce their
deeds, show the fruits, and effects of their enmity to good works, and Bell
thinks to answer all this with an (I say) Surely he presumes of beneuolous,
and partial judges, or he would never answer thus. He with an (I say) may
sla^der Popes, Princes and Papists whatsoever, and an I say, yea manifest
proof to the contrary, will not suffice him. Such force his I says have: Dixit
and facta sunt: But Sir I both say, and will prove by words, and deeds that both
you, and your Ghospellers are not only enemies to good works, but great friends
to evil works. And as for enmity to good works.

2. First they bid us beware of good works. Let us bevvare (says Luther) of
sin, Luther. sermon. de nouo testame^to seu de Missa. Colloquiu^ Attenburg.
but much more of laws, and good works. And some of his scholars in the
conference of Altenburg teach us to pray that we persevere unto the end in faith
without good works: 2. they teach good works to be harmful: Good works (said
the forsaid Lutherans) are pernicious to salvation. Again. Christians with
good works belong to Satan: And as Surius, Surius comment. Ann. 1564.
Staphil. in Apolog.
Staphilus and others report a Minister was not allowed in Saxony because he
believed not this: 3. because they say al good works are sin, and vnciean so
Luther art. 23. Calvin 3. instit. c. 14. parag. 9. and 11. c. 15. parag. 3. and
4. whitaker contr. Durae. l. 1. p. 49. Bucley answer to 8. reasons p. 111. and
109. Perkins tit of merit. and Bell art. 4. page 48. teaches that sin is
always annexed to Epicur^ would seem to love virtue though he made pleasure
his end.
good works: 4. They teach that good works of their nature deserve damnation:
There was never (says Calvin lib. 3. instit. c. 14. parag. 11.) any work of a
godly man which if it were examined by Gods severe judgment were not damnable.
How can Protestants Habentes speciem pietatis virtutem autem eius abnegantes.
2. Timoth. 4. v. 5.
now be friends to good works which they bid beware of, account hurtful,
sin, and damnable? Surely their friendship can be no better then Ioabs was to
Amasa when he kissed him, but withal thrust his dagger into his body. 2. Reg.
20.

3. And on the contrary side their friendship Friendship of Protestants to evil
works.
to evil works is manifest. 1. because they teach that evil works make not an
evil man, nor any can damn a man but incredulity: this Luther teaches in
plain Luther.
terms: lib. de libert. Christian. and lib. de capt. Babil. c. de baptis. 2.
because they make God author of sin: Zuinglius says. Zvvinglius sermon. de
Prouidentia ad Principem Cattorum 1530. c. 5. Calvin in plain terms makes
God author of sin.
Numen ipsum author est eius quod in nobis est iniustitia: God him self is
author of that which in us is injustice. And Calvin lib. 1. instit. c. 18.
parag. 3. After he had brought diverse proofs hereof concludes thus: Iam satis
aperte ostendi Deum vocari eorum omnium authorem quae isti Censores volunt
otiose tantum eius permissu contingere. Now have I plainly enough showed that
God is called the Author (hear Bell, and Blush) of al these things which these
Censurers will have to fall out only through his idle permission. And Melanchton
wrote, That the adultery of David, Melanchton in cap. 8. ad Romans
and treason of Judas was the work of God like as the vocation of S. Paul. 3.
Beza teaches that our spirit must wrestle against sin, but so Beza Romans 6.
v. 12.
as it overcome not: Are not these (Bell) particular favors to evil works to say
they make no man evil, that none but one of them damn men, that God is their
author, that we must let them overcome, or were not these whom I named
professors of your Ghospel.

4. But if we look into their deeds, and fruits, therein we shall clearly see how
mortal foes they are to good, and great friends to evil works. For there is
nether man nor nation, which of a Catholic becomes a Fox Considerat. 3.
says English Protestants are so il as he thinks they could not be wor se
if they would. Read considerat. 4. before his Martyral.
Protestant, but he does fewer goodworks, les fast, and pray, seldomer give
alms, do fewer works of charity then before, and more evil then before, as in
riot pride avarice, injustice, and the like. For proof hereof I propose only
England for example, whither there be not now les fasting, praying, alms
giving, building of Churches, Hospitals, Colleges, Schools, then there was in
Catholic time. And on the contrary side whither prisons be not fuller of
malefactors, more endited of thefts, murders, rapes, and other villainies, and
far more executed then in former times. And whether it be not grown almost
into a common proverb that a man's obligation now, is not so good as his word
was in former times. And in these 46. years of Protestantisme, when more then
so many thousands of Protestants have been executed for murders, theft,
robberies, rapes, coining, pursecutting, and like villainies; let Bell name how
many Catholics have been so much as called in question for such offenses: yea
this increase of sin, and evil works by Protestantisme is so notorious as
Protestants confess it. Luther said his followers Luther. apud Sur. 1566.
Bullinger. in Coron. Apolog. cont. Brent.
were become ten times worse then Sodomits: a Bullinger testifyeth that in his
church every where increases haughtines, pride, avarice, usury, blasphemy,
slander, ribauldry, drunkenes, gluttony ryotousnes, lechery, incest, wrath,
murder, contention, and envy. Wigand confesses that youth VVigand de malis
Germaniae. See Sur. 1566.
grow worse, and les tractable, and dare commit those vices to which men of
ripe years in times past were not subject. Erasmus writes of Protestants that
he has seen many of them become worse but none better. Let these different
fruits show Ex fructibus eorum cognoscetis cos. Math. 7. v. 16.
the difference of these trees, let the effects testify, whither Protestants or
Catholics think more religiously of good works, whether ministers or Priests
teach the people more to eschew evil, and do good. Now let Psalm. 36.
us come to Bells positions of good works, whereby he hops to wipe away this
deserved name which Protestants have of being enemies to good works.

CHAP. II. Of Bells positions touching good works.
BELLS first position contains two parts the first is that good works nether
do, Bell page 60.
nor can go before justification. Behold Bell even where he would prove him self
to be a friend to good works, showing him self to be an enemy, and excluding
them from any going before, or any way concurring to justification, to which
they so concurred in S. Mary Magdalen as our Savior said many sins Luc. 7. v.
47.
are forgiven her, because she loved much, making her love a kind of cause, vz
disponent of her justification. But because Bell proves his position not at al,
I will stand no longer to disprove it. The second part of his position is: That
good works ever follow (as fruits the tree) the persons that are freely
justified. This is most manifestly false in infants whereof many justified in
baptism, dye before they do any goodworke. And if his comparison of the tree
be good, some justified, never do good work, and al want them long time, some
give over doing good, as some trees are barren, some cease to bear fruit, and
none bear always. And I would know of Bell, whither David were justified when
he committed adultery, and murder. If then he were not just? then lost he his
fruits, if just? I would know of Bell what good work he did in time of his
adultery, and murder. Likewise whither Protestants be ever doing good works, or
some times be not just, and become infidels.

2. His second positio^ is: That good works Bell page 60 72.
go so necessarily before salvation, that no man without them can attain
eternal life, when possibility is granted to do them, and afterward calls
them the usual ordinary means by which God brings men to salvation. This is
true doctrine, Sup. c. 1. parag. 2.
if it be meant of good works commanded, but how it agrees with Protestants
doctrine before cited, passes my capacity, yea how it agrees with his own
doctrine that there is no good work which wants page 48.
sin; is think we sin necessary to salvation, or an usual, and undoubted
mean to come to heaven? moreover if Protestants think their works to be the
mean to salvation, they will no more charge Papists with trusting to be saved
by their works.

3. His third position is: That good works Bell page 61.
are the true effects of Predestination. This if it be so meant, that al, and
only predestinate do good works, is most false: for many infants are
predestinat, and yet dye before they do good works, and many reprobate men do
good works, as appears by Simon Magus who believed, and cleued to S. Philip
act. 8. v. 13. But most absurd it is which he Act.
adds that the children of God by good works make their salvation sure unto
them selfs, and manifest to the world, if he mean as Protestants do of such
security, as is void of al doubt, or fear of the contrary. Because none can be
so assured of Gods will touching their salvation, but by manifest revelation
from God him self; but good works are no such revelation either to our selfs, or
to others. Ergo by them nether we, nor othets can be assured of our salvation.
The proposition is manifest. The assumption I prove: 1. because reprobats may
somtymes do good works, as did Simon Magus. Ergo: good works are no revelation
of salvation, 2. because In omnibus actionibus in quibus tibi es been conscia
nu^quam aude^s esse securus. Ambros. epist. 84. Job v. 21.
even the worker is not assured that his work is good, wanting no condition
requisite to goodness: for as Job says c. 9. although I be simple, this same my
soul shall not know, and much les others can be assured of the goodness of the
work: for they not knowing the purpose and intention for which the work is
done (according to that of Jeremy. Man's heart is inscrutable, who Hierem. 17.
v. 9. 1. Corinthians. 2. v. 11.
shall know it? and that of S. Paul what man knovveth the things of man, but
the spirit of man that is in him) can never be assured that the work is fully
good. 3. though I and others were assured that I do good works this day, yet
nether I nor others can be assured, that hereafter I shall do good works,
whenever I shall have possibility, or time, and yet Bell page 61. 72.
avouches that unless we do good works when we have time, or possibility thereto
we can not be saved. Ergo: good works make no undoubted assurance of salvation.
4. good works are sinful and offensive to God (as Protestants affirm) Ergo:
according to their doctrine, they can be no evident sign of Gods favor, and of
our salvation: but rather of his wrath, and our damnation. And if Bell be so well
skilled in men's fortunes, as by their works he can evidently foretell their
salvation, let him play the Aegiptian and tell Protestants whether they shall be
saved, or damned. For if he can assure them of their salvation he will get more
in one day then his fifty pound pension, wherewith he is hired to preach and
write against Catholics: and I can send him to one Protestant noble man, who
would give him ten thousand pownd to be assured of his salvation. Finally this
doctrine of his is not only against Catholics, but also against his Master
Calvin who says labascit Calvin. 3. instit. c. 11. parag. 11.
fides etc. faith quaileth if it respect good works: for none of the holiest
men shall find there whereon to trust: And good reason for if good works be
sin (as Calvin and Protestants teach) what assurance or confidence can sin
give us of salvation.

4. His fourth position is: That good works Bell page 61.
are nether cause of predestination, nor of justification, nether do, nor can
merit ex condigno eternal life. Touching the first point of predestination,
there is no controversy. For all Catholics do with S. Austin against the
August. l. de bono perseueran. epist. 105. and alibi.
Pelagians deny predestination to grace, to proceed of our merits, and the same
do Deuines commonly affirm of predestination to glory, though this be no
matter of faith. See Bellar. l. 2. de Great. and lib. arb. c. 15.
Nether is there any difficulty about the second point concerning
justification. For Conc. Trid. sess. 6. c. 8.
though faith and repentance dispose to justification: yet Catholics think
them not to be proper cause and merit thereof. as Calvin, Calvin. 3. instit. c.
14. parag. 11. Perkins refor. Cathol. p. 64. Willet contract. 17. q. 3. part.
^. p. 588.
Perkins, and Willet confess. But the third point of meriting de condigno is
that about which I (says Bell) contend with the Papists at this present, and
namely with the Council of Trent. But because he proceeds in this article
confusedly enough confounding Bell impugneth a Schole point for a point of
faith.
many questions together, and in stead of a point of Catholic faith impugneth
a school point, I will particulerly by Conclusions set down the Catholics
opinions concerning this matter.

CHAP. III. The Catholics doctrine touching merit particulerly set down and
proved.
AS about any matter, the first kind of question is about the existence,
whether it be or no? the second about the nature, or quality, what a one it is?
and the last about the causes thereof, why it is such or such? So about merit
of eternal life the first kind of question is, whether there be any, or none.
The second about the nature of this merit, whether it be ex condigno, and
worthily deserve the reward, or de congruo, and only have a certain co^gruity,
and agreeablenes thereto. And if it be de condigno: whether it be absolute, and
suppose or require no condition of Gods promise to reward it: or conditional,
supposing the said promise: Likewise whether it be perfect having just, and
arithemetical equality to the reward, as a penny has to a penny worth; or
imperfect having only due proportion, and vertual equality to the reward, as
accidents be a proportionat disposition to substance, and great labors for Gods
Church a proportionat desert of a Bishoprik, and seed vertually equal to the
tree: The third kind of question is about the causes of this nature of merit,
to wit, whether this condignity of merit rise, partly of any proportion or
sufficiency which is in the merit unto the the reward, or wholly and entirely of
Gods free acceptance, who seeing us do the best we can to deserve heaven,
accepts it as a condign, and sufficient merit thereof, though of it self it
be not. And to these questions I will answer by the Conclusions ensuing.

2. First Conclusion: There is merit of eternal life, and our supernatural
works done by Gods grace (whereof only we speak in this matter) are meritorious
of eternal life, and glory. This is a point of faith with Catholics, defyned
in the Council of Trent. sess. 6. can 32. and denied Council. Trident. Bell page
75.
by no Catholic though Bell falsely affirm the contrary of some, and taught of
holy Fathers, and ancient writers, as Bell page 61.
confesses, and therefore granted by him self in words, though he expound
merit by Impetration. This he calls a godly sense, which is indeed his usual
ungodly shift used of him hereafter art 6. and 8. and of Protestants commonly,
when they dare not deny an Authors words, to deny his meaning For who sees not
that merit is a quite Merit quite different from impetration.
different thing from Impetration; for to merit is to deserve, to impetrate is
to obtain by request, beggars may be said to impetrat

3. And evident it is that Fathers by merit understand not impetration. For S.
Austin S. Augustine. tom. 2. Deus proposuit regnum caelorum vaenale in ep. 93.
S. Ireney. S. Basil. prope fin. S. Greg. Naz. orat. 3. in bapt. S. Hierom. S.
Chrysostom. to. 4.
epist. 105. writes that. As death is rendered as a stipend to the merit of
sin, so is everlasting life as a stipend to the merit of justice. S. Ireney
l. 4. c. 72. says. By good works we conquer heaven: S. Basil. orat. in init
proverb: By good works we buy heaven S. Gregory Nazian: For good works we may
exact reward, not as grace but as plain debt. S. Hierom epist. ad Celant. God
has cause to reward us. S. Chrisostom hom. 7. in epist. Romans calls us. Gods
creditors, and usurers and him our debtor. and hom. 3. Tom. 2.
de Lazaro: that by good works we deserve heaven, as by evil hell. Yea Bell him
self admits Bell page 77.
more then impetration, when hereafter he confesses heaven to be due to good
works; for where duty is there is not mere Contradict. 16.
impetration, and that works are to heaven as the loan of a cloak in a shower
of rain upon promise of an hundred pownds, for here is some justice. And
professes to defend page 79. Durand. 2. d. 27. quaest. 2. expressly admits
condign merit. Cap. 1. parag. 2.
Durands opinion who undoubtedly admits more then simple impetration. But if
Bell had remembered his own, and the common doctrine of Protestants before
rehearsed that al good works whatsoever are sin, he would never have granted
that they are impetratorious of Gods favor, and reward. For how ca^ sin
impetrate favor, or reward, and not rather offense, and punishment? Whereupon
Perkins in plain Perkins refor. Cathol. Of merits. p. 112. 104. Calvin. 3.
instit. c. 15. parag. 4. and 2.
terms affirms that our righteousness is not capable of merit, and utterly
renounceth al merit of man. And Calvin not only abhors the name of merit,
affirming it to be proud, and to obscure Gods grace, and to make men proud,
but professes that our good works are ever sprinkled with many filthinesses
for which God may be justly offended, and angry with us: so far (says he)
are they from purchasing his favor, or procuring his liberality toward us.
Thus we see how conformably Bell speaks to his own, and his fellow Bell
against his fellovv Ministers.
Ministers doctrine.

4. Second Conclusion. Good works done in Gods grace are condignely
meritorious of eternal life. This is that which Bell impugneth in this Article
as a point of our faith and avouches it to be defyned by the Council of Trent
but falsely. For the Council has no word of condign merit but only of true
merit which in plain terms Bell him self dare not impugn or deny. If any shall
say (says the Council) that a justified Ttident. sess. 6. can. 32.
man by good works which he does by the grace of God and merit of Jesus Christ,
whose lively member he is, does not truly deserve increase of grace, eternal
life, and consecution thereof, if he depart in grace, and also increase of
glory, be he accursed. Here are good works defyned to be true merit of glory,
without determining whither they be co^digne merit thereof or no. Whereupon vega
who was one of the Vega.
Deuines of the counsel writes de fid. and open. q. 4. That some noble school
divines being moved (says he) with no light arguments and using a certain
sober and prudent moderation, have denied that there is any condign merit of
eternal happiness. And again. It is certain (says he) that there is merit in
our works and some of them be meritorious, but of what reward and how they are
meritorious, it is in controversy, and there are diverse opinions amongst the
school divines. And q. 5. he affirms Gregory, Gregor. 1. d. 17. q. 1.
Durand. q. 2. Marsil. in 2. Walden. de sacra. c. 7. Burgens. in psalm. 35.
Eckins in centur. de predest.
Durand, Marsil, Walden, Burgensis and Eckins to deny condign merit. Satus
also an other divine of the said Council l. 3. de Not. and Great. c. 7. says
that there is some difference amongst Catholics about condign merit, and c.
8. after he had proved condign merit out of the Council and otherways, yet
concludes not that it is a point of faith but only calls it conclusionem
probatissimam a most approved Conclusion. And Bellarmin whom Bell terms the
mouth of Papists, lib. 5. de iustific. cap. 16. after he had rehearsed twoe
opinions of Catholics, whereof the one seems plainly to deny condign merit,
the other admits it only in a large sense, proposes and defends the third
opinion which defends condign merit absolutely, only as verissimam and
communem sententiam Theologorum, most true and the common opinion of Divines as
indeed it is and we shall prove it anon against Bell. Hereby appears Bells
shameful proceeding in this Article, in impugning condign merit as a point of
faith defyned by the Council of Trent, which has no word of condign merit,
and omitting the question of true merit which the Council defyned and
Catholics defend as a point of their faith against Protestants.

5. The third Conclusion is: that This This seems defyned. Conc. Trid. sess.
6. c. vlt. and in Bulla Pij 5. and Gregor. 13.
condign merit is not absolute, but supposes the condition of Gods promise
made to reward it. This is held of the best Divines and proved at large by
Bellarmin. l. 5 de iustifi. c. 14. The fourth Conclusion is that This condign
merit in our works, is not perfect, having actual, and perfect arithmetical
equality before explicated: This manifestly S. August. in psalm. 93. to. 8. S.
Chrysostom. 2. Cor. 9. S. Bernard. sermon 1. de Annuntiat.
the Fathers teach with all Catholics, and Bells arguments hereafter brought
convince it, and no more. The fifte Conclusion is that the imperfect co^digne
merit which is in our works to heaven, rises not merely of Gods acceptance,
but partly of the due proportion, and sufficiency before explicated, in them to
the reward. This likewise is no matter of faith, yet truth taught by S. Thomas
1. 2. 4. 114. ar. 1. and 3. Bonauent. S. Thomas. S. Bonauent.
2. d. 17. and Deuines in that place commonly: Bellar: l. 5. de Iustif. c. 17.
though Scot. 1. Bellarm. Scotus.
d. 17. and some others deny it with whom Bell also falls in league toward
the end Bell page 7^.
of this Article. The sixth Conclusion is: that the said condignity rises not
of any due proportion, which is in the substance of our work if it be
considered in it self, but as it is the fruit of the holy Ghost moving us to
do it, and the effect of Gods grace helping us in doing it: which grace making
us partakers (as S. Peter speaks) of divine nature, 1. Pet. 1. v. 4. Coloss.
1. v. 10. 2. Thessal. 1. v. 5.
so dignifyeth our works, as (according to S. Paul) we walk vvorthely of God,
and become worthy of Gods kingdom. And because Bell denies none of these
Conclusions but the second and fieft, them only will I prove.

6. That good works are a condign, or worthy merit of heaven in the sense
before explicated, follows of that they are a true merit thereof, because as I
think only condign merit is true merit. For congrual merit has no justice in
it (as appears in good works disposing to justification, which some call
congrual merits) and therefore no true merit, which can not be without some
title of justice. But I prove it other ways: First because the Thessalonians
suffered to S. Paul. ^is to cataZiothenai humas.
be made or accounted worthy of Gods kingdom 2 Thessalonians. 1. v. 5. Ergo:
sufferances make men worthy or (which comes to one purpose) to be truly
accounted worthy of Gods kingdom. Secondly. Apocalip. 3. v. 4: They have not
defiled their garments, and Apocal.
they shall walk with me in white, because they be worthy Ergo: Saints are
worthy to walk with God in glory. These places make Protestants confess that
Saints are worthy of heaven, but have a shift of saying They are worthy for
Christ's merits, not for their own. But Perkins refor. Cathol. Of merits. p.
113.
as plainly as S. Paul affirms the Thessalonians to be worthy of Gods
kingdom, so plainly he affirms their worthiness to come of their own
sufferances. And likewise S. Ihon ascribes the worthiness of Saints, to their
not defyling their garments, which is their own merit. Moreover Christ
speaking of man's labors, says. The worker is worthy of his hyer Luc. 10. v.
7. S. Luk^. S. Paul. S. Austin.
And we work our salvation. Philip. 2. v. 12. And S. Austin epist. 105. says
that Eternal life is given to the merit of our justice, as death is to the debt
of our sin, and that God crowns our merits. And in psalm. 93. that we buy
heaven with labor. Therefore the worthiness of Saints proceeds from their own
merits, though it proceed also from the merits of Christ. For we are branches,
he Joan. 15. v. 5.
the vine, and therefore as grapes, which spring out of the branches, proceed
from the vine, which gives them their virtue: so al worthiness, which
proceeds from Saints, rises from Christ as the root and fountain thereof.

7. Thirdly: condign merit requires not perfect, and arithemetical equality
in the work to the reward, but only proportion: but good works have
proportion to glory. Therefore they are condign merits thereof: The Proposition
Bell him self page 77. alleges, and approves out of Ihon de Combis, and it
is evident in men's deserts of a Bishopric, which being a spiritual dignity
passes al price, and yet may be worthily deserved of men: The assumption Infra
parag. 9.
shall be proved a none. Nether is our condign meriting of heaven either
blasphemous against Gods free mercy, or injurious to Christ's merits, as Bell
bableth, but rather Bell page 62. Romans 6. v. 23. Math. 5. v. 12. Math. 11. v. 12.
Joan. 1. v. 16. S. Austin. epist. 105. Philip. 3. v. 14. 2. Timoth. 4. v. 8. S.
Austin ep. 105. S. Ambros. in c. 6. Romans S. Chrysostom. hom. 7. Romans S. Gregor.
Nazianz. orat. 3. in S. lauacrum. Our merits honorable to Christ.
honorable. For though eternal life, as it is given to good works, be mercy,
or grace, (as S. Paul calls it) yet never shall Bell prove, that it is mere
mercy, or grace. Our Savior calls it a reward, and says we get it by
violence. S. Ihon according to S. Austins exposition calls it grace for
grace, that is, grace of glory not absolutely, but for grace of merits, or grace
mixed with justice. S. Paul calls it a goal, a crown of justice. The Fathers
call it a stipend, a debt. And by whose authority then does Bell call it a mere
grace, or mercy. Harken to S. Paul. 1. Timoth. 6. Bell, and leave these same
novelties of words.

8. Likewise it is not injurious to Christ's merits but rather honorable to
them. For as it is not injurious to Gods doing good, that we by his grace do
good for our selfs, but rather honorable according to our Saviors saying. In
hoc clarificatus est pater Joan. 15. v. 8.
etc. In this my father is glorified: Nor to Christ's prayer, or impetration,
that we also through him pray and impetrate for our Our merits no more
injurious to Christ's merits then our prayer to his prayer.
selfs: So likewise it is not injurious to Christ's meriting, but rather
honorable thereto, that we also through him, and as his lively members do in
some sort merit for our selfs. What injury is it to the tree that the branch
thereof brings forth fruit: nether are we therefore more partners with Christ
in merit, then we are by prayers partners with him in impetration.

9. That our merits have proportion, Merits have proportion to glory.
and vertual equality to their reward follows also out of the former. For
condign merit requires at lest due proportion to the reward, but especially I
prove it. First because the reward consists in the clear sight of God face
to face, and in perfect love of him, and our merit consists principally in
faith which is a sight, or knowledge of God in a glass, and in loving him
above al things. But there is due proportion between the sight of a thing in a
glass, and the clear sight thereof, and betwixt perfect love, and the love
above al things: Ergo: Secondly good works are fruits of the holy Ghost.
Galat. 5. v. 22. and of Christ's passion: for by it we do these good works.
Ergo it is injury to the holy Ghost, and to Christ to say that their
supernatural fruits have no proportion to a supernatural reward. Thirdly glory
is grace: Romans 6. Joan. 1. and our merits are grace, but there is proportion
between two graces: 4. Grace is the seed of glory according to that 1. Joan. 3.
The seed of God remains in him, therefore in virtue it contains glory as the
seed does the tree: 5. Glory is a floode making glad the city of God psalm. 45.
and grace is a fountain of water leaping into eternal life. Joan. 4. but there
is proportion between a floode and a fountain which springs into the place
of the floode. Now let us come to Bells arguments, which beside that they
impugn no matter of faith as is before said, they disprove no such condignity
of merit as Catholics teach, and is already explicated, but such as is both
absolute, and perfectly equal to the reward. And at last after he had run
him self out of breath, confesses that he can not impugn condign merit as
it is defended by Bellarmin, who in truth teaches no other herein then is the
common doctrine of the Church.

CHAP. IIII. Bells arguments out of Scripture against condign merit ansvvered.
HIs first argument is taken out of S. Bell page 62.
Paul Romans 6. v. 23. To de Charisma tou theou Zoe aionios en Christo Iesou to
curio hemon: which he cites in greek perhaps to make the Reader believe he
has great skill in that tongue though the words be in his book neither
accented nor printed right; but remitting this fault to the printer, the text
he englisheth thus: But the gift of God is life everlasting in Christ Jesus our
lord and then argues in this manner. Eternal life is the free gift of God,
therefore it can be no way due to the merit of man's works.

2. Answer: First the consequent seems opposite to this other proposition of
his: page 77. Eternal life is due to the works of Gods elect. Secondly the
Antecedent is false, Four reasons why eternal life is grace.
and neither here, nor any where else taught by S. Paul. He calls here eternal
life grace, as it may be called for diverse causes: 1. because God graciously
couenanted with S. Thomas.
1. 2. q. 114. art. 2. 2. because the works 5. Austin.
3. because the works have no perfect actual Theodoret.
says that temporal pains, and eternal joys in aequilibrio non respondent,
and Bell falsely translateth, Bell page 63. Falls translation. 4.
are nothing answerable. 4. because as works are rewarded even above their
virtual vltra condignum. No marvel if S. Paul called eternal life rather grace,
or gift, then a stipend, seeing it has much more of grace then it has of
justice: yet notwithstanding he no where called it mere grace, yea in 1. Cor.
3. Philip 3. v. 14. 2. Timoth. 4. v. 8. S. Paul might have called glory a
stipend. S. Austin.
calling it a reward, a goal, and crown of justice he clearly declares that
it is no mere grace, nor free gift: beside that as S. Austin writes epist.
105. he might have called it a stipende as he calls death in respect of
sin, but forbore lest we should think it were so justly deserved by good
works, as death is by evil. And perhaps he called it so in the next verse
before, where he calls eternal life in greek telos, which as Beza Beza Romans
6.
confesses may there signify vectigal or mercedem, and is equivalent to
stipend.

3. Notwithstanding this, Bell exclaimeth page 62.
against the Rhemists that they translated Charisma grace in steed of gift, for
to extenuate the clearnes of this text: wherein he shows his malice, and
folly. For malice it is to accuse men to corrupt Scriptures of set purpose, and
to bring no proof thereof, yea to confess (as he does) that they follow the
ancient vulgar edition, of which S. Hierom was either Author, or amender. And
folly it is, to condemn that translation as done for to extenuate the clearnes
of Scripture, and withal to confess (as he does) that it is according to the
old vulgar edition, and that it may be here admitted, and to approve an other
translation of Donation or Gift (which makes no more for his purpose then
Grace, which him self in the next page englisheth Free grace,) and finally to
allege in his own behalf Theodoret. S. Chrisostom, Origin, Ambros,
Theophilact In cap. 6. ad Romans
and Paul of Burges, who al in the very places which he cites for him self,
read as the Rhemists translate grace, though some of them explicate it by Gift,
as it is indeed, though no free gift.

4. But let us hear why the Rhemists did not well translate the word Charisma
by Bell sup. Perkins refor Cathol. p. 107.
Grace. Because (says he) it signifies a gift freely bestowed. If so Sir, why
did not you, your mates, and your Bibles so translate it, but Bibles printed by
Barker. 1584.
absolutely by gift. So you condemn other, and commit your self the like
fault. Remember what S. Paul says to such Romans 2. But how proves he Charisma
to signify a Gift freely given. Forsooth autos ephe This Lexicon Grynaei
Basileae. 1539. who cites Budaeus. Lexicon Gesneri auctu^ per Arlemium,
Iunium, Hartengum, Basileae.
great Grecian has said it contrary to the Lexicons made and printed by
Protestants, who make Charisma al one with Charis, and to signify Grace, or
gift without mention of Free gift; contrary to the old vulgar translation,
contrary to the uniform reading of Fathers, contrary to his own, and his
fellows translations. Are these your clear and evident demonstracions, which
shall be able to put al Papists (as you promise) to silence for ever in this
behalf? page 62.


5. Now (says he) let us vievve the judgment of holy Fathers upon this text.
With a good will Sir; But mark good Readers how the Fathers are holy, their
words are golden, See Bell p. 62. 64. 65. 71. 75. 67. 59. 104. 132.
their mouths golden, and them selfs glistering beams and strong pillars of
Gods Church, when they seem to make for Bell, who otherwise amongst Protestants
are but plain Austin, and Hierom, and their doctrine stubble, errors, spots,
and blemishes: Likewise when Popish writers seem to favor Bell, they are with
him famous, renowned, zealous, great school doctors, great Clerks indeed, who
other whiles are but parasites, and dunces.

6. First he produces out of Theodoret page 62. Theodoret.
in c. 6. Romans that S. Paul did not call here eternal life a reward, but
grace, because it is the gift of God, and al our labors are not of equal poise
unto it. This is nothing against us who neither say that S. Paul did in this
verse call eternal life a reward, nor deny that it is the gift of God, nor
affirm, that our labors are of equal poise unto it. Next he produces S.
Chrisostom in c. 6. Romans writing, S. Chrysostom. p. 63.
that The Apostle called not eternal life a reward, but grace (as Brixius
translateth) or gift, (as Bell has) to show that they were delivered not by
their own strength, nor that there is debt, reward, or retribution of
labor, but that al those things came by Gods grace, or (as Bell has) they
received them freely by Gods gift. Here S. Chrisostom at the first sight
seems to deny Genes. v 1. Proverb. v. 18. 2. Paralip. v. 7. Sap. v. 16. Eccl.
v. 22. Isai. v. 10. Math. v. 12. 1. Corinthians. v. 8. S. Chrysostom.
eternal life to be a reward or retribution of good works, which is not only
contrary to Scripture Genesis 15. 2. paralip 15. proverb. 11. psalm. 118. Sapient
5. Eccles. 18. Isai. 40. Math. 5. 1. Corinthians. 3. Apoca. vlt. v. 12. but even to
him self hom. 43. in 1. Corinthians. saying, that We shall have perfect reward,
and most full retribution not only for the good we do, but also for the evil
we suffer. And hom. 1. de Resur. tom 3. What care (says he) vvil he have of
virtue, who expects no retribution of labors: And hom. 15. in Math. that we
have God our debtor, when we do any good, and may exact usury of him. And the
like speeches he has hom. 3. and 36. in Math. and 42. in Genesis and in Philog.
and other where, which alone might assure us, that he means not to deny
eternal life to be a true reward of our supernatural labors. But either by
labors he understands natural labors done (as he speaks there) by our own
strength, of which labors doubtless eternal life is is no reward, debt, or
retribution. Or rather, by eternal life he there understood not heavenly glory,
but only justification, which he may call eternal life, because it causes
eternal life, as our Savior for the same cause calls faith so, John 17. v.
3. and for S. Ihon.
the contrary sin is called death, and this doubtless is no reward, debt, or
retribution of any labor at al of ours. That this is his meaning I prove it: I
because he says eternal life was called grace to show that they were not
delivered etc. Therefore by eternal life he understands some thing, which had
delivered the Romans already from some thing vz. from sin 2. because he says
that they, to whom S. Paul wrote had received that eternal life, whereof he
speaks but they being yet alive had not received eternal glory, but only
justification. And S. Chrisostom being thus expounded speaks not against him
self other where, nor against Scripture, and truth.

7. Thirdly he cyteth Origin saying. Bell page 63. Origin. in c. 6. ad Romans
Deum vero non erat dignum militibus suis stipendium quasi debitum aliquod
dare, sed donum, and gratiam, quae est vita aeterna: which Bell thus englisheth.
But it was not a thing worthy beseeming God to give stipends to his soldiers,
as a due debt or wage, but to bestow on them a gift, or free grace, which is
eternal life. Here Bell translateth donum a gift, and False translat. A. 5.
gratiam free grace, albeit before he preferred the word donatio which is al
one in this matter with donum, before gratia, because it better insinuates the
freenes of the gift. But if you ask him wherefore he translateth gratia, free
grace, he can give no better reason then his Grandsier Luther did when he
translated fides iustificat, faith alone iustifyeth vz: Sic volo, sic iubeo,
stat pro ratione Surius Ann. ^530.
voluntas. As for Origin he means nothing else, but that it beseemed not God
to give a stipend so due to good works, as (says he) the king of sin pays
stipends due to them, that obey his tyranny, which is most true. For although
S. Austin ep. 105. to. 2. S. Anselm. Romans 6.
the just by good works deserve life, yet not so justly, as the wicked by sin
deserve death, nether is life so due to them, as death to these, as is evident
by what has been said before, and Willet in affirming us Willet controu. 17.
q. 3. art. 3. p. 587.
to teach the contrary shows a trick of his Ministry.

8. S. Ambrose he also alleges, but page 63. S. Ambros. Romans 6.
his words are rather against him, for he says. As the followers of sin get
death, so the followers of Gods grace, that is the faith of Christ, which
forgiueth sins shall have eternal life. What is here for Bell, or rather not
against him. But most clearly does S. Ambrose S. Ambros.
confound Bell immediately before the words cyted. Who from hence forth (says
he) abstain from sin receive a stipend eternal life. And sermon. 7. in psalm.
118. affirms that David could say to God I am a soldier, I exact a stipend
of my captain.

9. He cites also Theophilact because Theophilact. Romans 6.
he says S. Paul called erernal life grace, and not a revvard, as if he should
say, for ye receive not rewards of labors, but al these things are done by
grace in Christ Jesus, who works, and does them. But this is nothing against
us, who willingly acknowledge eternal life to be grace, and not to proceed of
our own labors done by our selfs, but done and wrought also by the grace of
Christ: After this he cites Anselme, and Photius but alleges not their
words; yet confesses that in effect they are the same with others, and
therefore seeing S. Anselme upon this place S. Anselme.
of S. Paul teaches plainly that eternal life is a stipend of justice, and
that S. Paul might have called it so, we may be assured that in effect other
Fathers do call it so, as he after S. Ambros and S. Austin does in express S.
Austin ep. 105. S. Ambros. Romans 6. Bell page 64. untruth 60
words. Wherefore vainly does Bell boast that it is manifest by the foresaid
testimonies of holy Fathers that eternal life is the free gift of God, for
rather the quite contrary is manifest, because none of them say it is a free
gift, or any thing whereof it may be justly inferred, and some of them expressly
say it is a Vt Retributionem non vt gratiam sed plane debitum occupas. S. Greg.
Nazianz. orat. ^. in sanctum lauacrum. Burgens. addit. 2. in c. 6. Romans
stipend, and such a one as a soldier may exact of his captain, such as death
is to sin, which are evidently no free gifts. Wherefore to help up this
matter he adds these words of Paulus Burgens. He would not therefore say
eternal life is the stipend of justice, because the same merits, to which it is
rendered are not of our selfs, but wrought in us by God through grace. These
words, make not any thing for him, but rather against him. For in that he
says, eternal life is rendered to merits, he insinuates it to be no free
grace, and in saying S. Paul chose rather to call it grace, then stipend,
insinuates that he might have called it a stipend, and in saying it is grace,
because it is repaid to merits, which we do by grace, he affirms it to be
partly grace, which no Catholic denies.

10. The second text of Scripture Bell brings out of Romans 8. v. 18. and
translateth ^hus: I account that the afflictions of this False translat. 6.
present time are not worthy of the future glory: Answer: Here is evil
translation: for where the Apostle says afflictions, are Non condignae ad
futuram gloriam ou^ axia pros ten mellousan doxan, are not condign to the
future glory Bell translateth: are not worthy of the future glory. And the
Apostles meaning is not to tell there whether sufferances of this life be
condignely meritorious, of future glory or no, but intends to say that they
are not comparable to future glory either in greatness, or in continuance which
hinders not their condign merit, as is evident in Christ's sufferances. For
having v. 17.
immediately before said, that we shall be coheirs with Christ, if we suffer with
him, lest we should be unwilling to attain to such glory by sufferance he
adds in the verse cited, that sufferances are not condign, (that is, not
comparable in greatness, or continuance) to future glory. which meaning of his
he utters in plainer terms: 2. Corinthians. 4. v. 17. saying our tribulation
which presently S. Paul.
is momentary, and light, works above measure exceedingly an eternal weight
of glory in us. Where he says our tribulations are momentary, and light, and
the glory is eternal, and weighty, which he meant when he said here, they are
not condign to future glory. And hereby are explicated the words both of
Theodoret, and S. Anselme upon this place. For Theodoret saying the Crowns
exceed the conflicts, and the labor is not comparable to the revvard compares
them not in the respect of desert, and reward, but in greatness of pain, and
pleasure: for (says he) the labor is little, and the gain great. And the same
comparison in bitterness of pain and greatness of pleasure made S. Anselm when
he S. Ansolm. Romans 8.
said. All the bitternesses of all the pains of this life should not be a digne
merit to future glory: For doubtless the bitterness of all the pains of this life
is not so great, as the pleasure of heavenly joys. But this worthy Champion
who challenges al Papists to combat, shows him self ignorant in translating
Theodorets words. Superant certamina coronae: thus: Bell wants latin.
The conflicts of the crown remain; taking the nominative case for the
accusative, and the genitive for the nominative, and perhaps superant, for
supersunt both contrary to the latin, and to sense. For who heard of conflicts
of a crown, or that conflicts remain in heaven. Surely this challenger should
rather be set to school to learn latin then to challenge Deuines to
disputation, rather taught to construe the Fathers, then to dispute out of
them. But as S. Hierome wrote S. Hieron.
epist. ad Euagr. Imperitia confidentiam parit. None so bold as blind Bayard.

11. The third text he cyteth is out of S. Bell page 65.
Paul Tit. 3. v. 5. Not by works of justice, which we have done, but according
to his mercy he has saved us by the lauer of regeneration, and renouation of
the holy Ghost. By which words (says Bell) it is most clear that we are not
only justified, but also saved by mere mercy, and consequently eternal life
has no merit upon the behalf of man. Omitting that before our good works were
merit in a godly sense, and now there is no merit on man's behalf: I answer,
that the Apostle means only of saving from sin. vz justification. First
because speaking of him self, and others then alive he says God has saved
us: Secondly because having said in the third verse. We were somtymes unwise
incredulous etc. he adds v. 5. and God according to his mercy has saved us,
vz. from the foresaid sins. Thirdly because explicating by what means God had
saved them, he says it was by the lauer of regeneration, and renouation of the
holy Ghost, which most plainly expresses justification. And no doubt but
salvation from sin proceeds of Gods mere mercy but this is not to the
purpose. And of this salvation speaks S. Anselme upon this place, whose words
Bell curtailed leaving out these words, By the lauer of regeneration, and
renouation of the holy Ghost, that is, by baptism, because they clearly show
of what salvation this holy Saint did mean. And of the same meant Dionis.
Carthus. upon rhis Carthus.
place as is plain by his explicating what the salvation was, vz. from power
of the Dyuel, and guilt of eternal torment. And thus much of Bells first reason
out of Scripture now to his arguments out of Fathers.

CHAP. V. Bells arguments out of holy Fathers against condign merit ansvvered.
S. Austin he alleges epist. 29. ad Hieron, Bell page 66.
whose words I will set down at S. Augustine. tom. 2.
large that the Reader thereby may see how falsely Bell avouches him to confirm
his doctrine. Charity (says he) is a virtue, with which we love that, which is
to be loved. This is great in some, in others les, in others none at al, but
mostful charity, which can be no more increased, is in none, whiles a man
lives here, but whiles it may be increased surely that which is les then it
should be, is ex vitio, of vice. (Bell translateth sin) by reason of which
vice thereis no just on earth, which does good, and sins not: by reason of
which vice no living man shall be justified in Gods sight. For which vice if
we say we have no sin we sedute our selfs, and there is no truth in us. For
which also though we have profited never so much, we must of necessity say
Forgive us our trespasses, even when our words, deeds, and thoughts are
already forgiven in baptism.

2. Hence Bell gathers 1. That S. Austin page 67. untruth 61
says that no man can have charity in that perfect degree which the law
requires. This is untrue: for he only says, that no man has in this life
that most full charity, which can not be increased. 2. That the want thereof
proceeds of vice. This is true, but of what kind of vice he meant, him self
had explicated a little before in the same place: saying: Who therefore is
without some vice, that is without some fomite, or as a root of sin.
Wherefore he meant not that the want of most full charity proceeds of formal
sin, but of that which is cause, and root of sin, to wit, concupiscence.
And by this are answered all the rest of Bells notes out of this place. As that
by reason of this vice every man is a sinner, none justified before God, if we
say we have no sin we be liars, we have need to ask God forgiveness even
after baptism. For all these things are verifyed of Concupiscence, not formally
but effectiuely, that is, Concupiscence (which S. Austin calls vice, because
it is the root, and cause of formal vice) causes sin in us, which sin
makes us formally sinners, not justified before God, and to need forgiveness
even after baptism. And hereby are explicated Bell page 68.
the like words of S. Ambrose which S. Ambros. epist. 84. to. 4. prope finem
hereafter he cites: That by reason of the rebellion of the flesh that is
understood of every one, which S. Ihon says. If we say we have no sin we
seduce our selfs.

3. But suppose that S. Austin had said al Bell forgets his matter.
that Bell infers, though it would prove Concupiscence to be formal sin,
yet would it not prove that our works are no condign merit, which is the
question now in hand. For though Concupiscence were as Bell rhinketh venial
sin, which he art. 9. calls sin not regnant, yet might other supernatural
works of ours, as faith, hope, and charity be condign merit. But Bell cares
not how he speaks to the purpose so he say somewhat: Even so in the former
Article when he should prove Concupiscence to be sin, he proved our merits to
be none, and now when he should prove our merit to be none he proves
Concupiscence page 67.
to be sin: After this he cites S. Austin saying tract. 4. in 1. Joan. that
Our S. Augustine. to. 9.
justice of faith is imperfect. Ergo says Bell there is no condign merit.
whereas he should have inferred the quite contrary. For if in us there be
imperfect justice, there is justice, and if there be justice, there is condign
merit to that whereto we have justice. And the most that Bell could infer for
him self, is that there is no perfect condign merit, which I willingly
grant: Albeit indeed S. Austin in that place calls not our justice
imperfect, because there is any thing wanting to it self, which is requisite to
justice, for epist. 105. he calls it true justice, but because we, who have
it, delight S. Augustine. to. 2.
in other things, and have rebellion, which things being separated from it, our
justice (says he) Tract. 4. cit.
shall be perfected vz. not by any addition but by seperating our injustice from
the company of it.

4. He cites also S. Chrisostom affirming Bell page 68. S. Chrysostom. l 2. de
compunction. cordis.
that Though we dye a thousand times, and accomplish al virtues of the mind,
yet do we nothing worthy to those things, which ipsi percepimus, we have
received of God: But besides that S. Chrysostom speaks not of eternal glory,
but of benefits of this life, which we (says he) have received, and Bell falsely
englished, False translat. 7.
we receive. He is to be understood of perfect equality, or of works considered
in their own nature not as they proceed of grace, and are fruit of the holy
Ghost. Next page 69.
he alleges Theophilacts words in c. 3. Tit. He has saved us for ever, not
of works which The ophilact.
we did, that is, nether did we works of justice, nether by them are we saved,
but al our salvation his goodness, and clemency has wrought. But besides that
these words I found not in that place, they may be understood of salvation from
sin, vz. of justification: as appears because the text which they expound,
does so mean, as is before proved, as also speaking Cap. 4. parag. 11.
of men alive he says we are saved, which he calls salvation for ever,
because justification is such in hope, according to that Romans 8. v. 24. Spe
salui facti sumus.

5. Bell finding so few Fathers to speak Bell page 69. 70.
any thing, to his purpose, thought best to supply the rest of this chapter
with the words, of S. Bernard, and Angles, whom Calvin lib. 4. instit. cap. 7.
parag 22. Perkins refor. Cathol. Of merits. p. 109. page 70. Bell promise^ij to
yaeld if he have charged any Author falsely. Preface of his challe^g. Angles ^.
sent. p. 103.
he confesses to be Papists, though his Master Calvin accounted S. Bernard a
holy man, and his brother Perkins cites him as a Father of the ancient Church
such rara est concordia fratrum Protestanticorum. Angles he terms a famous,
and one of our best Doctors, though he be a very late, and mean writer, and of
purpose impugned the Protestants: But let his handling of Angles be to the
Reader an example and taste of his foul usage of Fathers, and other writers.

6. Al other holy Doctors also (says Angles according to Bells translation)
considering after the same manner, the natural value only of good works, and
perceauing that it is exceeding far distant from the value, and just estimation
of eternal life said wisely. That our works, are not meritorious of eternal
life. Yet for the covenant and promise made unto us, the good works of man with
the help of Gods grace are worthy of eternal life, and equal with it, which
for all that, that promise of God (which is frequent in the Scripture) set
aside, were altogether unworthy of so great revvard. Hereupon Bell avouches
Angles to page 70.
grant that al holy Fathers with one assent affirm (a testimony (says he)
almost incredible to untruth 62
proceed from the mouth of a Papist so dear to the Pope) That good works
nether are meritorious, nor worthy of eternal life. And in the margent adds
this note: Lo this friar grants that al holy Fathers are against Papists.

7. But better may I say this is a slander almost A taste of Bells false
changing Authors.
incredible to proceed from the mouth of a Minister, if his ministry were not
in lying. Angles said that al holy Fathers affirm our good works not to be
meritorious of eternal life, according to their natural value, and the same al
Catholics now affirm. Is (...), absolutely to say, that al holy Fathers
affirm good works are not meritorious? So the^, because one may say, that Bell
according to his natural value is no better then an infidel, an other may
absolutely say, he is no better then an infidel, or rather worse, because qui
fidem negauit est infideli deterior: This slander is so 1. Timoth. 5. v. 8.
evident, as him self soon after is feign to confess that Angles says The
Fathers speak of Contradict. 17.
good works only in respect of their natural value. So il has he learnt that
first lesson of his occupation mendace^ oportet esse memorem. His second page
70.
note out of Angles is: that he grau^teth good works considered in their own
nature to be unworthy of eternal life. This is true, and taught by us before,
and confirmed by S. Austin epist. 105. saying. Nothing but grace makes S.
Augustine. to. 2.
al our good works. Thirdly he notes in Angles that he grants good works
even as they proceed of grace are utterly unworthy of eternal life if Gods free
promise, and acceptance be set a part. True it is, that Angles, as a follower
of Scotus, seems to think that the condignity of good works to eternal life,
rises not of any equality which is in them unto glory: but of Gods promise to
reward them, which is a far different question from this, Haereticorum frons
no^ est frons si non membrum quod fecit Deus sed pudorem intelligas. Aug. 4.
cont. Iul. c. 3. to. 7. untruth 63.
as is before explicated: yet withal in the very words cited he professes them
to be, (supposing the said promise, which is every where found in Scripture)
worthy of eternal life and equal unto it. Let now any indifferent Reader judge
what face Bell had when upon these words of Angles he wrote that Papists grant
as much as we (Protestants) desire. untruth 64
and that we (Protestants) defend nothing herein, but even that which their
own best Doctors in their printed books do teach.

8. Out of S Bernard he alleges these Bell page 71. and Bernard.
words sermon. 1. de annunt. The suffering of this time are not condign to
future glory, no, not if one suffer al; For the merits of men are not such as
eternal life is due to them ex iure, (of justice) that God should do any injury
if he gave it not. Hereupon Bell infers diverse things, but al depend of his
false understanding the words justice, and injury. For S. Bernards meaning is
only to deny, that all the sufferings of this life can be absolute, and perfect
equal merit of glory, depending of no grace, or promise of God to reward them:
but that God of his mere justice, without al respect of mercy should be bound
to repay them with eternal life, and otherwise should do absolute injury. And
means not to deny that supposing Gods gracious promise of rewarding works,
and assistance in doing them, heaven is due to them of some justice, and that
he should do some injury if he did not give heaven. For as S. Austin says S.
Augustine. to. 7.
l. 4. con. Julian. c. 3. God him self shall be unjust if the true just be not
admitted to his kingdom. And the same insinuates S. Paul, when S. Paul. Heb.
^. v. 10.
writing to the Hebrews he says God is not unjust to forget their work, as if
he should do some injustice, if he should forget it.

9. Next he cites his words sermon. 67. in page 71.
Canti: It wants to grace whatsoever thou ascribest to merits. I will no merit
which excludes grace. I abhor whatsoever is of mine, unless perhaps that is
more mine which makes me mine own, Grace restores me to my self freely
justified, and so delivered from slavery of sin. Here Bell notes diverse
things against al merit and page 72. untruth 65.
avouches most falsely S. Bernard to renounce al merit of man whatsoever.
Whereas the B. Saint speaks only against mere human merit, done by our own
power without assistance of grace, such says he excludes grace, and is of our
own. And such indeed he and al Catholics renounce, and leave to the
Pelagians, but willingly he accepts such merit as proceeds from grace, and
(as he speaks) makes me mine own.

10. Lastly he alleges his words sermon. page 71.
68. in Cant. So there is no cause, why thou should now ask by what
merits we hope for goods, especially seeing thou hear the Prophet saying.
Not for you, but for me I vvil do it says our Lord. It suffices to merit, to
know that merits suffice not. But as it suffices to merit not to presume of
merits, so to want merits is enough to judgment. Bell infers page 72.
that the most sufficient merit in man is to untruth 66.
know and confess, that our merits are no merits indeed. Did ever honest man
deal thus. S. Bernard speaks not of the most sufficient merit, but only
tells what suffices to a merit: vz. not to presume of merits which no doubt
is an act of humility, and a meritorious act. And lest of al dreamed that our
merits are no merits (yea plainly affirms that to want merits suffices to be
damned) but only tells us that our merits suffice not vz: without Gods mercy
of pardoning our sins, and gracious promise of rewarding them, which is only
to deny absolute, and perfect equal merit, which we also with him deny. But
mark good Reader how Bell, who before admitted our merits in a page 61.
godly sense, now plainly avouches them to be no merits, which plainly
discryeth his godly sense of expounding merit by Impetration, to be an ungodly
shift of his for to delude the authorities of Fathers, expressly auouching
merit. And thus much of his proofs out of Fathers. Now let us view his proofs
out of Popish writers.

CHAP. VI. Bells arguments out of late Catholic vvriters against condign
merit ansvvered.
THE first Papist which Bell cites is S. page 72. S. Thomas.
Thomas 1. 2. 4. 114. at. 1. It is manifest that betvveene God, and man, there
is most great inequality, for there is infinite distance betvveene them, all the
good which is man's is from God. Wherefore man's justice received of God can not
be according to absolute equality, but according to a certain proportion, to
wit, in as much as either works according to his manner. But the manner, and
measure of human power in man is from God, and therefore man's merit before
God can not be but according to the supposal of Gods ordinance, to wit, so
that man obtain of God by his work that as a revvard, to which God has
designed him power to work. Hence Bell infers page 73.
diverse things. 1. That S. Thomas tells us that where there is not perfect
equality, there is no untruth 67
merit properly. This is an untruth properly, for Aquinas denies only merit or
justice according to absolute equality, yea affirms that proportionate merit
may be betwixt them that infinitely differ. 2. That there is infinite inequality
betwixt God and man: This is a needles note made only to fill room, and make
number. 3. That man's justice is not absolute, but imperfect. This is true, and
we teach the same. But mark how he notes this to be the doctrine of Aquinas,
which a none he will say is Protestantisme.

2. That Aquinas grants willingly that untruth 68
man does merit nothing in Gods sight save only by way of his free
acceptance. This is an untruth willingly told. For Aquinas only says. That
man can not merit any thing of God, but only according to the presupposal of
his ordinance, that is, unless God had promised, and ordained to reward our
merit, and grants (as is said) that we have proportionate merit, and
therefore only denies absolute merit: 5. That Aquinas confesses that eternal
untruth 69
life is not properly hyre. This is untrue: For he only says that it is quasi
merces as a hyre, or reward, unless Bell will make S. Ihou to have Joan. 1. v. 14.
denied Christ to be properly the son of his Father, when he said, we savv
his glory as it were of the only begotten of his Father. And though S. Thomas
had said it were not properly hyre, his other words would enforce us to
understand him not of al kind of hyre, but only of such as is between equals,
when one free man hyreth an other, for such doubtless can not be betwixt God,
and man; nay it is not so perfect hyre, or justice Note this ^xample.
as may be betwixt a man, and his bondslaue, if he should liberally give his
slave his labors, and promise to reward them as well as if he were a free man:
For though such a master of liberality, both give his slave his labors, and
promise to reward them, in which he is like to Gods dealing with us, him above
desert of his labor, as God of his liberality does with us. And therefore our
reward has less the nature of hyre then the wages of such a slave should
have. And yet notwithstanding it is not a free gift, as alms is to a beggar,
or a benefit should be to a slave, if his Lord had not bestowed his labors
upon him, and promised to reward them as if he were not his slave. And hereby
is reproved an other untruth which Bell afterward avouches upon Bell page 76. S.
Thomas 1. 2. q. 114. art. 1.
S. Thomas: vz. That he affirms that God is not said simply and truly to be
debtor unto us. For the word (truly) is by Bell untruly added: untruth 70
And S. Thomas means that he is not simply and absolutely our debtor, but upon
presupposal of his promise, and ordinance.

3. Many lines he cites out of Durand to Bell page 73. Durand. 2. d. 27. q. 2.
prove that he denied co^digne merit, but omitted other immediately before where
Durand distinguishes two kinds of merits de condigno, largely and strictly so
called. Co^digne merit largely called (says he) is a certain worthiness,
which God requires in the work for to revvard it with eternal life, and
this (says he) we have. and in these words which Bell cites denies only that
condign merits which is (says he twice) strictly (and this False translat. ^.
word Bell left twice out in his translation) and properly so called, and is
found between man, and man, and he defyneth it to be a voluntary action,
vvherby revvard is so due to the work, as he to whom it apperteineth to give
it, is simply, and properly unjust if he do not: which kind of condign merit
I also deny to be in our works. For nether is it strictly condign, nor such as
is betwixt man and man, nether should God be simply coniust if he did not
reward it, as appears by what has been said before. But suppose that Durand
had absolutely denied al condign merit in our works. What has Bell gotten more
then that one schooleman who has many other singular opinions, did in this
matter, which is no point of faith, dissent from the common doctrine of Schools?

4. After this Bell avouches Gregory of Bell page 75.
Arimino: Marsil: Thomas of Walden, Paul of Burges, and Eckins, to affirm
very constantly, That man's works are not meritorious of eternal life. But this
he affirms very untruly, and untruths 71.
lest he should be tript would neither cite their words, nor quote the place.
For no Catholic denies our supernatural works to be meritorious of eternal
life, though Paul of Burges, in psalm. 35. deny them to be meritorious de
condigno and Walden. tom. 3. de sacramentalibus c. 7. counsels to abstain
from the name de condigno, and congruo, yet he expressly avouches our works to
be meritorious. Gregory also confesses Gregor. ^. d. 17.
them to be so meritorious as in respect of merit de congruo they may be said
to be meritorious de condigno: Marsilius, and Eckins books I had not at hand to
peruse, yet doubtless they denied not our supernatural works to be meritorious,
but either only to be meritorious de condigno, which (as I said) is no point of
faith, or else perhaps only to be absolutely and perfectly meritorious de
condigno, which I also do not deny. But I marvel why Bell would make mention of
Eckins, whose very name brings to memory that he foiled Luther so in
disputation, Sur. 1519.
as being admonished by the Counselors of George Duke of Saxony to behave him
self modestly he cried out. This matter was nether begun for God, nor shall
Luthers abominable words. Sotus lib. 3. de not. and Great. c. 6.
be ended for him.

5. Next he produces Sotus writing that perfect satisfaction requires that
the whole value proceed from the debtor without any savor at al of the
Creditor, and that there be a restoring of an equivalent thing otherwise
undue. Whereupon Bell Bell page 75. untruth 72
avouches him to teach, that every satisfaction requires the like conditions.
This is manifestly false: for he speaks only of perfect satisfaction as was
the satisfaction of Christ. But to Bells argument framed hereupon. None can
satisfy for sin, therefore none can condignely merit heaven: I answer by
distinguishing the Antecedent. If it be meant of sin it self I grant it,
but deny the Consequence. And the difference is, because there can be no
satisfaction at al, unless the satisfyer be in Gods favor, which can not be,
unless the sin be already pardoned, and therefore al satisfaction supposes
sin to be forgiven freely, but merit does not so suppose eternal life to be
already given. But if it be meant of temporal punishment, which is called sin
according to the Scriptures phrase Zachar. vlt. Zachar.
and oftentimes remains after the sin it self is pardoned, as appears in
David 2. Reg. 12. v. 14. Deuter. 32. v. 51. Daniel. v. 24. Proverb. v. 6.
Moses, and others: I deny the Antecedent. For as Daniel said c. 4. we may
redeem our sins by alms, and by mercy proverb. 16. And albeit this
satisfaction be not so perfect, as it has all the conditions which the
perfection of satisfaction requires, yet has it al which the essence thereof
exacteth. Nether does Aristotle alleged by Bell teach the contrary.

6. After this because Angles (as I said ^el page 76.
before) seems to say that the condignity of our merit rises only upon the
promise of God made to reward it Bell here a new untruth 73.
avouches him to confess plainly the self same doctrine which he intends to
prove, which how true it is has been already showed, and Cap. 5. parag. 7.
withal adds that this is the maine point, and only foundation to which al
Papists do, and must untruth 74
appeal in this question. And he reproves this by the example of the loan of
a cloak in a shower of rain upon promise of an hundred pownds,
notwithstanding which promise (says he) that loan can not be condign merit
of that price. But most false it is that Angles his reason is the maine or only
foundation, to which al Papists do and must appeal in this question. For to
it appeal only such as follow Scotus. And S. Thomas 1. 2. q. 114. ar 3.
Bonauent: 2. did: 17. Bellarm. l. 5. de iustif. c. 17. and John: de Combis (as
Bell him self testifyeth) Bell page 77. Bell disproueth him self.
with the best Deuines appeal to the vertual, and proportionate equality
before explicated, which is already proved to be in our merits: And account
that foundation of Angles unsure, and inpugne it better then Bell does with his
example of the loan of a cloak which makes nothing against us. For it has
not such vertual, and proportionate equality to an hundred pownds, as our
merits have to glory. I omit Bells fond inferring, that we do not condignly
deserve eternal life if (as Deuines say) God reward us vltra condignum above
our deserts. For it only proves that we do not condignly Deuines in 4. sent.
d. 46.
deserve that excess of glory, which God will give us, when as Christ says
Luc. S. Luke.
6. v. 38. He will give good measure, and pressed down, and shaken together.
and running over. And rather proves that we do condignly deserve some degree
of glory. For if God reward us vltra condignum, beyond our deserts he
rewards us according to our deserts, and more two.

7. Likewise he cites Lyra saying that page 77. Lyra in c. 3. Tit.
Eternal salvation wholly exceeds the power of man's nature: Therefore he can
not attain unto it but by liberality of gods mercy. True: But what? because it
exceeds the power of man's nature, will Bell have it also to exceed the power
of Gods grace in which according to S. Paul we ca^ do al things: Or because
we Philip. 4. v. 13.
need Gods liberality vz. for to have his promise of reward; his grace, and to
have the good works, therefore can we not have his justice to give (as S. Paul
speaks) a crown 2. Timoth. 4. v. 8.
of justice for our works, and consummation of our race? Are Gods liberality
and justice so opposite, as they can not concur to one work? Why then did
the Psalmist sing psalm: 100. Judgment and mercy to God? Psalm. 100. v. 1. 9.
False translat.
This Bell would; and therefore when lyra said nisi ex largitate diuinae
misericordiae Bell englished him, But only by the liberality of Gods mercy.
adding, only, of his own store. And albeit Carthusianus profess that merits
are Carthus. in c. 6. Romans
not excluded, yet Bell beggeth his favor, because he writes that Eternal life
is said to be given as reward by grace, and principally attributed Bell left
out this. For the Elect by Grace deserve eternal life.
to grace, because God revvardeth us vltra condignum. Who pittieth not this
poor beggar, who is feign to go to his enemies doors a begging that, which
will do him no good, and now and then is feign to steal. I have given him more
before, let him take that, and be thankful, and try what thereof he can gather
against such co^digne merit as Catholics defend.

8. But will you see this brave champion challenger, who hitherto has sownded
Bell recanting p. 79.
Alarm, and fought furiously against condign merit, now at the end of this
Article sounding a Retreit, and confessing that, that condign merit which
Catholics defend is too good for him to deal withal. After he had cited out
of Bellarmin, that Bellarm. lib. 5. de iustific. c. 16.
our merits are not condign of justice absolutely, but posita liberali Dei
promissione supposing Gods liberal promise, (which Bell 10. False translat.
falsely translateth in respect of Gods liberal promise.) And that absolutely a
man can not exact any thing of God, seeing al are his, but only supposing his
will, and covenant, that he will not exact our works of us for nothing, but give
us reward according to the proportion of our works. As a slave (says he) can
not absolutely demand any thing of his master, seeing all the slave gets he
gets to his master, yet if it please his master to bestow his works upon
him, and to promise reward for them, as if they were not due to him, the slave
may justly demand reward for them, Bell I say, after he had cited these words
out of Bellarmin, and affirmed that Bellarmin taught this after mature
consultation with the best learned Jesuits, and the Pope him self tells us
that Bellarmin makes good his doctrine in them, and that if he, and his
fellows, and followers would stand constantly to their own doctrine, which
they publish in printed books, we (Protestants) and they should soon agree,
and these controversies would have an end.

9. What is this but in plain terms to The Tridentin Council defyned only
that we truly deserve heaven, and Bell impugneth it.
confess, that he can not impugn Bellarmins printed doctrine of condign
merit, which is the very same which al Catholics commonly print, preach, and
believe. For Bellarmin in the very words cited says. A man may ex iure justly
demand revvard at Gods hands for his works: that our merits are ex iustitia
supposing Gods promise: and that God revvardeth them secundum proportionem
according to their proportion. And affirms in the next chapter to these words
that good Sup. cap. 17.
works are condignely meritorious of eternal life by reason of the covenant,
and work together, not that a good work should not have proportion to
eternal life without the covenant, but because God is not bound to recompense
the work with that revvard, albeit it be just, and equal to the revvard,
unless he before had couenanted. Do you hold Sir this printed doctrine of
Bellarmin, does it like you? speak plainly and renounce your mere
acceptance, and bare impetration, and be not ash^med to say deuterai
phrontides sophotatai: for your second faith was best.

10. But he means nothing les, then to hold Bellarmins printed doctrine,
which (says he other where) is approved by the page 26. 125. 87. And p 29.
The Jesuits (Bellarmin) doctrine is the Popes own doctrine.
Pope, who has said all that can be said for Popery, and whose testimony
alone is most sufficient in all Popish affairs. But only by occasion of his own
foresaid false translation he hoped to make his Reader believe that Bellarmin
held condignity of merit to arise merely of Gods promise, which though he did
(as some Catholics do) belonged not to this question as is before declared,
and rather supposes, then denies condign merit. Yet is it defended of the
same Catholics in a far different sense as Bellarmin him self shows then
of Protestants. Sup. c. 17.
For they think our supernatural works to be truly good, and condignely to
deserve some reward, though not so great as eternal life is, unless God had
promised it to them: But Protestants think them to be truly naught, and sin,
and to deserve no reward, but punishment, and that God in accepting, and
rewarding them Proverb. 6. v. 16. Psalm. 5. v. 7. Sapient. 14. v. 9. Apocal. 2.
v. 6. Judith 5. v. 21. Psalm. 44. v. 8. Bell page 80. S. Augustine. lib. 9.
Confess. c. 13. L. 2. de Genesis co^t. Manich. c. 14. L. 1. de nupt. and concupis.
c. 29. Sermon. 5. de verb. Apost.
accepts, and rewards sin, which is a horrible blasphemy contrary to
Scripture, auouching that he hates sin, contrary to his goodness, that can
not accept naughtines, and sin, more then fire can water, and contrary to his
justice, which can not reward it.

11. After all this Bell alleges a saying of S. Austin VVoe even to the
laudable life of man, if thou discuss it setting thy mercy aside: which makes
little to the purpose. For S. Austin denounces not woe to good men's merits,
which otherwhere he says are great matters, and to be crowned, but to the men
them selfs, because as they have merits to be crowned, so they have demerits to
be punished, which if they were punished without mercy, woe should be to them:
Not because they should be sent to hell, but to purgatory, or (as he calls it
sermon. in psalm. 37.) Emendatory fire, and S. Austin.
there punished without mercy, which fire (says he) is more grievous then any
thing, Confess. lib. 9. c. 13. cit.
which man can suffer in this life. And to procure Gods mercy in this behalf
to his mothers soul he both prayed him self, and requested others to pray for
her. Be myndful therefore (Bell) from whence thou art fallen, and do penance.
Apocal. 2.

THE SIXTH ARTICLE OF THE DISTINCTION OF MORTAL AND VENIAL SINS
CHAP. I. The true Distinction proved and Bells objection ansvvered.
BELL perceauing that Catholics do evidently prove that there is a difference
between mortal, and venial sins durst not deny it, but proceeds as he did
in the former Article, allowing in Bell page 81.
words the distinction of mortal, and venial sins in a godly sense, which
though he be ashamed to express, yet does he insinuate Bell admits venial
sins.
in other terms of regnant, and not regnant, and means (as I suppose) that
voluntary evil acts are mortal, and inuoluntary venial, which doctrine is
already disproued in the fourth article. Wherefore here he undertakes to prove
that every sin is mortal of it own nature, and some become venial only for
free acceptance, and mercy of God.

2. Supposing therefore that some sins Mortal and venal sins are such of
their own nature.
are mortal, and others venial, I intend to prove by Scripture, Fathers, and
reason, that they are such of their own nature. The Scripture compares such
sins as are mortal, and venial to things, which of their own nature are
different as Math. 23. to a Math. 23. v. 24. Luc. 6. v. 42.
Camel, and a gnat. Luc. 6. to a straw, and a beam: Ergo: these kind of
sins are different of their own nature. Likewise our Savior Luc. 12. 58.
compares some Math. 5. v. 27.
sins to mites or farthings, which of their nature are small debts. Moreover
God has no where revealed that some kind of sins become venial only by his
mercy. Therefore we ought not to say so. The Consequence is evident. for none
knows the pleasure of God but by his revelation. The Antecedent I prove: for
Protestants can neither name the sins, which God has made venial, nor the
place, where God has revealed any such making of his. Bell cites Math. 12. v.
3. where it is said, that We shall give account of every idle word. And 1.
John. 3. v. 4. where sin is called iniquity. But in neither place it is said
that Gods mercy makes any sin venial, and other like places cited by other
Protestants rather prove that al sins notwithstanding Gods mercy are now
mortal, then that any, which of them self were mortal, became venial by his
mercy. Likewise for venial sin he names sin not regnant, whereby he
understands inuoluntary motions of concupiscence. But for such inuoluntary
motions (which Bell rightly calls Bells belief of venial sins befydes Gods
book.
not regnant sin, but wrongly venial) nether are they any true sin as
venial sin is; nor is it any where revealed, that they being of their nature
mortal sins, are made venial only through Gods mercy. Therefore Bells belief of
some sins made venial by Gods mercy is wholly besides Gods book.

3. Holy Fathers also in calling some sins Fathers.
little sins light, short, least, and daily offenses: as S. Hierom in c. 5.
Math. and l. 2. in Iouinian: S. Hierom. prope fin. S. Austin. to. 10. and 3. S.
Chrysostom. tom. 2. and Conc. 3. in Lazar. to. 2.
S. Austin sermon. 41. de sanctis. and in Enchir. c. 71. and S. Chrisostom. hom.
24. in Math. insinnuate that venial sins are such of their own nature. for
they were never little, nor light, if of their nature they were mortal, and
damnable: as a wound, which of it nature is mortal, and deadly, could never be
called a little or light wound, though God of his mercy did cure it: Likewise
S. Hierom puts a difference between S. Hieron. dial. 2. cont. Pelag. S.
Gregor. 21. moral. c. 9. S. Austin. hom. 19. de ^empore.
cacia, and hamartia: and S. Gregory, and S. Austin betwixt crimen and peccatum
yea S. Hierom epist. ad Celant. accounts it a paradox of the Stoiks to put no
difference betwixt scelus, and erratum.

4. By reason also this is evident. For who

5. Again: infidels have venial sins. Ergo venial sins become not such only
by Gods mere not imputing them for mortal. The consequence is clear out of
the Protestants doctrine, who put that not imputing only Willet contrac. 17.
part. 3. p. 560.
toward the faithful and regenerate. The Antecedent I prove because they can
do all the sins which the faithful do. If one say that sins which in the
faithful, be but venial are in Infidels mortal. This is contrary to reason,
because knowledge of Gods precept in the faithful rather increases his fault:
for the servant which knovveth the Luc. 12. v. 48.
vvil of his master, and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes, and
ignorance in infidels diminishes their fault: whereupon S. Paul said I have
gotten mercy because I did it ignora^tly 1. Timoth. 1. v. 13.
in incredulity. And I ask of Bell why God makes sin not regnant, venial,
rather then regnant, and either he must say that God does it without any cause,
or because they are inuoluntary and these voluntary, which is to say, that by
their different nature they are made mortal, and venial.

6. Finally some sins of their nature break friendship with God, and deserve
his eternal hatred, and punishment. others do not. Ergo: some of their nature
are mortal others venial. The consequence is evident: The Antecedent I prove:
because he is no wise person, who will fall out, and be offended for ever with
his friend for every trifle, as the taking up of a straw: nor he is a just
Prince, who should inflict death for stealing a pin: and I believe Bell would
think him self unjustly handled if he were so dealt withal. Wherefore if God
should do this we should neither account him a wise friend, nor a just Prince.
Now let us hear what Bell obiecteth against this so manifest truth.

7. Al his proofs may be reduced to this Bell page 81. 82.
syllogism, what is against Gods law is mortal sin: al sin is against Gods
law: Ergo al sin is mortal. Behold Bell here absolutely concludes al sin to
be mortal, and after calls our venial sins cursed, and deformed, which
argues that he thinks al sin to be indeed mortal notwithstanding Gods
mercy. The Proposition he supposes. The Assumption he proves out of
Scripture: Fathers, and Schoolmen. Out of Scripture because Christ said Math.
12. v. ^^ that we shall give account for every idle word: and S. Ihon 1. c. 3.
v. 4. tells us that Every sin is anomia that is, transgression of the law:
S. Ambrose also defines sin in general to be transgression of Gods law: And
S. Austin describes it to be Every word, deed, or desire against Gods law.
Bellarmin affirms every Bellarm. lib. 4. de. Romans Pont. c. 21. Rhemist. 1.
Io. 3. v. 4. Angles 4. sent. p. 21^. Durand. 2. d. 42. q. 6.
sin to be against Gods law. Rhemists also confess, Every sin to be a
swaruing from the Law: and doubtless (says he) what swarueth from the law, is
truly against the law. Likewise Angles, and Durand teach venial sins to be
against the law.

8. To this argument Catholics answer differently, some by denial of the
Proposition, others by denial of the Assumption. Some say that every sin
which is against the Law is not mortal, but only that which is perfectly
against it, so that it destroleth the end of the law, which is Charity and this
venial sins do not. And if I should answer thus, Bell were by and by at a Non
plus. Others say that venial sins are not against the law, because they are
not against the end of the law, but besides the law. But this difference is
rather in words then in matter, al agreeing that venial sin destroieth not
Charity nor breaks friendship 1. Timoth. 1. v. 5.
with God, which is the end for which the law was made. Yet better it is to
say, that venial sins are beside the law, then against Why venial sins are
not against the law.
the law: because what is not contrary to the end, but may stand with out
breach of it, is not contrary to the means, but may stand without breach of
them, but venial sins are not contrary to Charity the end of the law: but may
be without breach of it. Ergo neither are they contrary to the law, but may be
without breach of it. And as a man travailing, though he step out of his way
is not said to go contrary to his iourneys end: so a man walking to heaven,
though by venial sin he step out, or besides the way, yet does he not go the
contrary way to hell: The Proposition of mine argument is evident: for what can
stand with the end, can not be contrary to the means necessary to that end.
The Assumption both Catholics grant, and Heretics can not deny if they Bells
arguments a^ much against him self a^ against Catholics.
admit that there are indeed any venial sins. For venial sins (whence soever
they come to be such) break not friendship with God. And therefore if Bell
grant in deed (as he does in words) that by Gods mercy some sins are made
venial, he must also confess that by Gods mercy, they are not against his
Charity, and friendship: and so must answer his own argument, which
indifferently proves that there are no venial sins at al, whither they be said
to be such by their own nature, or by Gods mercy: for the argument assumeth
not that al which is sin of it own nature is against Gods law, but
absolutely, al which is sin is against Gods law. And therefore if Bell think
venial sin notwithstanding Gods mercy to be true sin, he must as well answer
his own argument as I.

9. Admitting therefore his Proposition I deny his Assumption: and to his proof
out of S. Matthew. I answer that we must give account for every idle word, not
because they be a against Gods law, but because they be beside it: And Bell will
beat his horse not only when he turns back, but also when he starteth out
of the way. As for the text of S. Ihon, he tells us not (as Bell avouches)
that every sin is anomia but absolutely Sin is anomia, and may well be
understood of only mortal sin which antonomastice is so called. This answer
might suffice to what he brings about this text in this Article, yet because
art. 4. he brought out of their due place many things about the greek words
anomia and adicia used by S. Ihon, which we remitted to this place, we will here
answer them at large, and afterward the rest of his proofs concerning this
Article.

CHAP. II. A text of S. Ihon epist. 1. explicated.
S. Ihons words he cites in Greek pas ho poion ten hamartian, cai ten anomian
Bell page 52.
poiei, cai he hamartia estin h^ anomia and translateth them thus. Every one
that sins transgresses 1. Joan. 3. v. 4.
the law, and sin is the transgression of the law, And hereupon infers
that Every sin is transgression of the law, and consequently mortal.
Catholics answer twoe ways. First that S, Ihon in this place by sin
understands only such sin as c. 5. v. 16. he calls sin to death vz.
mortal sin. And this I prove: First because in the next verse but one vz. v.
6. he speaks only of mortal sin, when he says. Every one that remains in
him (Christ) sins not, and v. 8. who does sin is of the Devil, and v. 9.
Every one that is borne of God commits not sin, because his seed
remains in him. In these verses it is evident S. Ihon spoke only of some
certain kind of sin which (as S. Austin S. Austin.
tract: 5. in 1. John tom. 9. says) one borne of God can not commit, vz. of
mortal sin: wherefore of the same did he mean. v. 4. when he in some sort
described sin by iniquity. Both because else it should seem a kind of
equivocation, as also because if he had described sin in general, it is
likely he would have afterward discoursed of the same, and not of one only kind
of sin. Secondly because when a word principally signifies one thing, it is
not to be extended to an other, which secondarily it signifies, unless such
extention be gathered by some circumstances of the speech, seeing therefore the
word Sin does principally signify only mortal sin, and secondarily venial
sin, according to S. Thomas. 1. 2. S. Thomas.
4. 88. ar. 1. and there is no circumstance here conuincing it to be extended
to signify venial sin, but rather to the contrary as has been showed, it is
not to be extended to venial sin. And this is confirmed because Scriptures
Fathers, and Catholic writers by Sin understand ordinarily only mortal
sin, as appears by their attributing of death, loss of grace, and heaven,
guilt of hell, separation from God, and the like to Sin, and by defyning it to
be against Gods law, or tra^sgression of the law: which agree only to mortal
sin.

2. Thirdly because S. Bid understands S. Beda 1. Io. 3.
it of such sin, as either is of contempt of the written law, or corrupts
the innocence of the law of nature. And the gloford. follows his very words:
also glos. interlin. understands it of sin contrary to equity of Gods law:
which he took of S. Bid loc. cit. Lyra expressly expowndeth Lyra 1. Io. 3.
it of mortal sin, and defyneth it to be transgression of the law. and the
same does Carthusia: and to this purpose serve al Bells proofs, that anomia
signifies transgression of the law: for if that be so, then sin is taken for
mortal sin. Nether against this exposition see I any objection, more then
that the word Sin may signify venial sin, and that also it is taken for it
c. 1. v. 8. where he says If we say we have no sin we deceive our selfs. But
we may answer that, though it may signify venial sin yet ordinarily it does
not, and therefore it is not well inferred, that here it does, especially seeing
that there are diverse circumstances to the contrary. And though it signify
sin in general c. 1. v. 8 yet seeing it does signify only mortal in this same
chapter. v. 6. 8. and 9. better it is to gather the signification of a word
out of the next use thereof, then out of the further of. And if one will thus
expownd the place of S. Ihon (as to me it seems S. Ihon means only of
mortal sin.
best) Bell were straight at a Non plus. For he supposes that the word sin
is taken for all kind of sin, and only proves that the word anomia iniquity
is taken for perfect sin, and transgression. yet because I will give him all the scoape he can ask, I admit that by Sin S. Ihon understood al kind of
actual sin, and deny (as many Catholics do) that anomia Iniquity is taken
for wickedness, and perfect transgression of the law: but generally as it is
common to perfect transgression, and only swaruing from the law. Now let us see
how Bell improueth this.

3. His first proof is because Arias Montanus page 52. Arias Montan. 1. Io. ^.
says, that anomia is transgression of the law. But this is not against us,
because we grant that it may signify so, only we deny that to be the proper
signification of the word, as is evident by the etimology thereof, which is as
much as sine lege without the law, and not contra legem: against the law* yet
because al acts against law are also without law, the word may be used for
acts against law, and so signify transgression of the law. It suffices us that
the propriety of the word is for us not for Bell, and therefore we better
expownd it of swaruing from the law, then Bell or any other does of
transgression of the law.

4. His second proof is that S. Ambros Bell page 53. S. Ambros. S. Austin.
de Parad. c. 8. and S. Austin l. 2. de consen. euang. c. 4. and l. 22. cont.
Faust. c. 27. defyne sin to be preuarication, or transgression of the law, or
to be a thought, word or deed against the eternal law, which (says S.
Austin) is divine reason, or the will of God comma^ding the order of nature to
be kept, and forbidding it to be broken. But these, Fathers define only mortal
sin; because Catholics ordinarily understand only that sin, when they
absolutely speak of sin, as men, when they speak of a thing mean of
substance. As also because S. Ambros had before spoken only of mortal sin vz.
of Adam, and Judas his sin. And S. Austin in the first place speaks of
sin against the ten commandments, which no doubt is of it nature mortal,
and in the second place he plainly defines such sin, as breaks the order
of nature, which also is mortal sin not venial; for who will say that a little
superfluous laughter breaks the order of nature. Besides it follows not
that if S. Ambros, and S. Austin defined sin to be transgression of the law,
therefore S. Ihon did so call it in this place.

5. His third proof is out of S. Bid. But S. Bed. 1. Io. 3.
he is rather against him. For he says that anomia signifies quasi contra
legem vel sine lege factum: as it were against law or without law. He says not
against, but as it were against, which more plainly he explicateth saying. Or
without the law. Lyra, and Carthusia: whom he cites seem by anomia, and
iniquity to understand wickedness, but then by sin they understand only mortal
sin, and so favor Bell nothing. But because the Bell page 56. Rhemist. 1. Io.
3.
Rhemists as preventing an objection write, that The word iniquity is
otherwise taken 1. Io. 3. v. 4. where sin is said to be iniquity then c. 5.
ver. 17. where iniquity is said to be sin, which they prove because though
the latin word be al one, yet the greek is different vz. adicia which
signifies injustice: Bell replyeth very wisely forsooth out of S. Austins words
S. Augustine. to. 9.
trac. 4. in 1. Io. to. 9. Let none say sin is one thing and iniquity an
other; Every one that sins commits iniquity. As if the question now
betwixt the Rhemists, and him had been, whither sin and iniquity were al one,
and not whether anomia, and adicia be al one. Better therefore he replieth
afterward page, 58. where he proves anomia. and adicia to be al one, because
the vulgar latin translateth them both Iniquitas. But the Rhemists answer,
That the word Iniquitas is used in a different signification, and prove it by
the different greek words, for which it is used; And against this Bell says
nothing, But being at a non plus him self, and not able to reply against this
answer, and reason, he cries out that his ansvverer is at a non plus, and
impudently denies every iniquity? to be sin.

6. But as for the Rhemists, evident it is that herein they are neither
impudent, nor at a Non plus, seeing they give a reason of what they say,
against which Bell can not reply; And as for iniquity and sin, though Psalm.
50. 118. and alibi sup.
they be oftentimes confounded both by Scriptures, and Fathers, yet if we will
speak exactly and properly, more is required to formal, and proper sin, then
to formal iniquity. For iniquity requires only want Difference betwixt formal
sin and iniquity.
of equity, and conformity to Gods law. formal sin besides this requires
voluntarines, and so al formal sin is formal iniquity but not contrariwise.
As adultery or murder committed by a fool or mad man is iniquity, but no more
sin then it is in beasts. Hereupon S. Austin l. 2. contr. Julian. c. 5. S.
Austin.
distinguished two iniquityes, one which is sin and blotted out in baptism,
an other which is the law of sin and infirmity, and remains, and is yet
iniquity: because (says he) iniquum est that the flesh should rebel against
the spirit and l. 6. c. 19. calls lust against will some iniquity, and yet
oftentimes denies it to be true sin. nether does he say in the place which
Bell cites, that iniquity and sin is al one, but that sin is, not a
different thing from iniquity, but that who commits sin commits
iniquity, which how it is true is evident by that which is said. Albeit when he
says, that al iniquity is blotted out in baptism, he confound iniquity with
sin, as before is cited out of Scripture, which argues that well may the
word iniquity be taken in a different sense John. 5. and 3. as John 5. for
voluntary iniquity, and proper sin, as appears by the greek word adicia,
and c. 3. for iniquity in general, as appears by the word anomia, which is
common to volu^tary, or inuolu^tary.

7. The places of S. Ambros and S. Austin are already answered for they define
only mortal sin. And of the same understands Bellarmin, when he says al
sin is against the law: for venial sins he proves not to be against the
law: tom. 3. lib. 1. de amiss. great. and stat. pecc. cap. 11. Nether follows
it as Bell thincketh that some sins, are no sins, but only that Some sins
are not perfectly sins, as Bellarmin proves loc. cit. As for the Rhemists.
doubtless it is false which Bell adds, that what Sup. c. 2. parag. 8.
swarueth from the law is against it, as I have proved against his bare
assertion of the contrary. Durand and Angles I confess did think venial
sins to be against the law, but neither is this a matter of faith, neither do
they intend to favor Bell any thing, but answer his argument an otherway as
has been showed before.

8. But pretty it is to see, how that because Bell page 82 Angles 2. sent. p.
275.
Angles writes, that it seems now to be the commoner opinion in schools,
that venial sins are against the law. Bell notes the Romish religion of
mutability, confessing that the old Roman religion was Catholic, Old Roman
religion Catholic sound and pure.
sownde, and pure, with which he will not contend. Behold the ytch which this
fellow has to calumniate the Roman religion. Angles in sinuateth School
opinions to be mutable. Bell applies it to Roman religion. as if it consisted
of school opinions, which may be held pro and contra, salua fidei compage
with unity in faith, as S. Austin speaks. But seeing you have granted S.
Augustine. l. 1. cont. Iul. c. 6. to. 7.
the old Roman religion to have been Catholic and pure, and slander the
late; I bring an action of slander against you, and charge you that you do
not like dolosus, versari in generalibus, but to bring good witnesses, when,
wherein, and by whom the late Roman religion corrupted the purity of the old,
knowing that otherwise (to use your phrase) all the world will cry with open
mouth Fie upon you, and your slanderous Ministry. But in the mean time let
us proceed with him here.

9. Their canonized Martyr Bishop Fisher Bell page 83. Ruffens. art. 32. cont.
Luther. Gerson de vit. spirit. lect. 1. part. 1.
(says he) and Popish Bishop Gerson wrote, that vental sins were such only
by the mercy of God. Here Bell for one truth utters twoe untruths. True it is
that B. Fisher and Gerson were in that error, but that was both before it was
condemned in the Church, as it 75. untruth
was since by Pius 5. and Gregorius 13. neither did they account inuoluntary
motions of Concupiscence for venial sins, as Bell does, but such as
Catholics account venial. 76. untruth
But untrue it is that either B. Fisher is canonized, or Gerson was a bishop
who Trithem. in Gersone.
was only Chauncellor of the university of Paris.

10. Finally he concludes this Article page 85.
with this goodly reason. one steals just so many eggs as are necessary to
make a mortal sin, A reason not vvorth a rotten egg.
an other steals one les, but there can be no reason. why God may justly
condemn the one to hell, and not the other. therefore both sin mortally alike.
To this I answer by demanding a reason. why the judge may condemn him to death
that steals thirteen pence half penny, and not him that steals one penny
les. If he answer, because the law condemns one, and not the other. I ask
again, what reason was there, that the law was made against the one, and not
against the other? And if Bell can find a reason in this, he will find one in
his own question. The reason of both is. because such a quantity is a notable
injury to our neighbor. and consequently is against charity, and so breaks
the law, and a les quantity is not; Be myndful Apocalip.
therefore (Bell) from whence thou art fallen and do penance. Apocal. 2.

THE SEVENTH ARTICLE OF UNWRITTEN TRADITIONS.
Bell intituleth this seventh article of traditions, though therein he handles
diverse other matters, as of the sufficiency and perspicuity of Scriptures,
and of the readinge them in vulgar tongues, and by the common people, of the
authority of Councels and oaths of Bishops. But these he handles so
confusedly and so tediously, being almost as long in this one article as in all
the rest, as I found much more difficulty to gather together, what he said
of every point in different places, and to bring them to some methodical order
for the healpe of the readers memory, then I had to frame an answer. first
therefore I will entreat of Scriptures next of Tradition, then of Councels, and
lastly of Bisshops oaths.

CHAP. I. The Catholic doctrine touching sufficiency of Scriptures propounded
and proved, certain untruths of Bell disproued.
ALBEIT every one be forbidden to deny any point of the Christian faith, yet
are not al commanded to know actually every point thereof, but to some it
suffices, that they believe the fundamental points contained in the Apostles
Creed, and such like: and to be so desposed in mind, as they would believe
the rest, if they knew them: which is to be believe them implicitly or
virtually. Moreover one thing may conteyne an other, either actually, as fire
does conteyne heat, and the sun light, or virtually, as a flynte conteyneth
fire and every cause his effect. These things supposed.

2. First Conclusion is. Al such points of Christian faith, as are necessary
to be actually believed of every one, that has use of reason, though he be
never so simple, are actually contained in Scripture, either clearly, or
obscurely. This is nothing against traditions, because well may they be, and
are, points of Christian faith, though they be not such, as the actual and
explicit belief of them be so necessary, as none whatsoever can be saved
without it. For it suffices that they be such as the implecite and virtual
belief of them is necessary to every ones salvation, and may be denied of none
under pain of damnation. And the conclusion is taught of Bellarmin lib. 4. S.
Augustine. lib. de doct. Christian. c. ^. to. 3.
de verbo non scripto, cap. 11. Where expounding these words of S. Austine. In
these which are plainly set down in scripture, are al those things found,
which conteyne faith and manner of life: he answers that S. Austine speaks
of those points of doctrine which are necessary simply to al, as they (says
he) are which are contained in the Apostles Creed and ten commandments.
Likewise Stapleton Staplet. Relect. Contract. 5. q. 5. i^ explic. Artic.
affirms, that the Apostles wrote al, or almost all that part of faith, which
is necessary to be explicitly believed of al and every one. And it seems
evident, because such points of faith, as are precisely necessary to be
actually known of every one what so ever, be both few and are the
fundamental, and most notorious points of Christianity, as the mystery of the
Trinity, the incarnation and passion of Christ, and such like, which are al
actually (at least obscurely) contained in scripture. For surely the prophets
and Evangelists writing their doctrine, for our better remembrance, would
omit no one point, which was necessary to be actually known of every one,
especially seeinge they have written many things with are not so necessary. And
this conclusion teaches S. Austin when he says, S. Augustine. tract. 49. in
Joan. to. 9.
that those things are written which seemed sufficient for the salvation of
the faithful. Where I note that he said not, which seemed sufficient to
Christian faith, but which seemed sufficient to salvation, because fewer
points suffice to salvation then the Christian faith contains, again In
these (things) which are plainly L. 2. de doct. l. cit. sup.
set down in scripture, al those things are found which contain faith and
manner of life. Where I also observe, that he said not absolutely al things (as
Bell translateth him) but al those Bell page 94. 110. 11. False translation.
things, insinuatinge, that he speaks not of al things belonging to Christian
faith, but only of those which are necessary to be believed and done of every
one, which he calls precepts of life, and rules of faith. And yet more
plainly, I believe also that herein S. Augustine. lib. 2. de pec. mer. and
remis. cap. vlt. to. 7.
there would be most clear authority diuinorum eloquiorum of Gods word, if man
could not be ignorant of it, without loss of his promised salvation. Where if
by diuina eloquia we understand holy writ (as Bell translateth page 95. and S.
Augustine seems to mean, because immediately before he spoke of scriptures) me
thinks he plainly avouches, that God has procured every thing to be
clearly written, which to know is necessary to every man's salvation. The same
teaches S. Cyril saying. Not al things S. Cyril. lib. 12. in Joan. cap. 68.
which our Lord did are written, but what the vvriters deemed sufficient, as
well for manners as for doctrine, that by right faith, and works we may attain
to the kingdom of heaven. And S. Chrysostom 2 Thessalonians. hom. 3. what things
soever S. Chrysostom.
are necessary are manifest out of Scripture.

3. Here by the way I must advertise the Reader of Bells evil dealing with his
master Bellarmin and other Catholics. For because Bellarmin affirms. That
the Apostles Bellarm. lib. 4. de verbo Dei c. 11.
wrote al things which are necessary for all men, and which they commonly
uttered to al, but not all the rest, Bell infers: That al things written Bell
p. 114.
are necessary for all. As if it were al one to say; Al things necessary for all
are written, and al things written are necessary. Perhaps he thinks to turn
propositions, as easily as he did his coat. And if al things written be
necessary for all, as Bell gathers, surely (as S. Hierom said to the Pelagians
teaching S. Hierom. dial. 1. cont. Pelagian.
as Bell does, that none can be without sin, but they that are skilful in the
law) a great part of Christendom must needs be damned, yea Luther and Calvin
who profess Luther. praefat. in psalm. Calvin. 3. instit. c. 2. parag. 4.
their ignorance in diverse points of Scripture. I omit that the uttering of
some things to some few, who were perfect, spiritual, and fit to teach others,
and capable of strong meat, as is manifest S. Paul did 1. cor. c. 2. v. 6. c.
3. v. 1. 2. Heb. 5. 14. 2. Timoth. 2. v. 2. Bell scorn fully calls preaching
in corners, Bell p. 114.
and such hearers Iesuited Popelings.

4. And Catholics he falsely charge Bell p. 139. 141.
with denying, that baptism of infants consubstantiality of God the Son with
his Father, and the mystery of the B. Trinity are in Scripture, or can be
proved thence. For Bellarmin proves baptism of Infants Bellarm. lib. 1. de
baptis. c. 8. to. 2.
by as many arguments out of Scripture, as Bell does vz. by three, out of the
figure of circumcision genesis 17. out of Christ's words Joan 3. and out of the
practice of the Apostles act. 16. and 1. cor. 1. whereof Bell borrowed the first
and last. The mystery of the Trinity Bellarmin proves by six arguments
Bellarm. lib. 2. de Christo c. 6. to. 1.
out of Scripture, and and the consubstantiality of Christ he proves lib. 1.
de christo. c. 4. out of eleven places of the old testament, to which he
adds c. 5. nine more, and c. 6. fifteen places out of the new testament.

5. Better he might have charged his good masters Luther and Calvin with this
matter. Luther. lib. cont. Jacob. Iatomum. Calvin. in Joan. 10. See Staplet.
Antidat. Euangel. in Io. 10. v. 30.
For Luther said, his soul hated the word omousion, or consubstantial, and
Calvin expounds these places, which make most for the consubstantiality, as
the old Arrians did. Likewise Luther lib. cont. Cochleum an. 1523. said
Infants are not at al to be baptized, if they do not believe. And lib. de capt.
Babil. c. de bapt. Sacraments profit no body but faith alone. And Calvin will
not have the Calvin. Io. 3.
words Joan 3. v. 5. (which made the very Pelagians to grant necessity of
baptizing Ex August. l. 1. de pecc. mer. and remiss. c. 30.
Infants) to be meant of baptism. Hereupon the Anabaptists who deny baptism
Balthazar Pacimontan. apud Cocl^um in ostis Lutheri. See Posse^in de ath^ismis
Haer^ticorum.
of children, profess that they learnt their doctrine from Luther, and the new
Arrians in Transiluania who deny the Trinity and consubstantiality of Christ in
their disputation with Protestants, appealed to Caluins judgment, and
professed they received their doctrine from him. And Smidelin a Smidelin in
refutat. blasphemae apolog. Danaei 1583.
great Protestant writes. That it is no marvel that very many Caluinists in
Transiluany, Poleland, and Hungary became Arrians, and of Arrians soon after
Mahometans.

6. But sport it is to hear Bell answer an Bell p. 140.
objection, which is the ground of the Anabaptists. Infants have no faith.
Ergo they are not to be baptized. First he says they have faith, and that
their faith and profession is to be baptized of faithful parents in unity of
the Catholic Church. After he denies them to have faith in act, but to have
faith fundamentally, and by inclination. How these answers agree let the Reader
judge. I would know of him. First whence he has this new point of faith, that
baptized infants have to be borne of faithful parents. Are none borne of
heretics, or Infidels? Secondly. How they make profession of it by words or
deeds, and whether Bell by their profession could discern a baptized infant
from one unbaptized. Thirdly: how infants can be justified by faith alone, and
have no Inclination to faith iustifyeth Infants according to Bell. Scripture
contains virtually al points of Christian faith. See Staplet. Relect.
controu. 5. q. 5. art. 1. S Austin l. 1. cont. Crescon. c. 33. Nullum mihi
sacrame^tum aut sermo aliquis admodum obscurior de sacris literis aperitur vbi
non eadem praecepta reperio. August. epist. 119. Propter duo praecepta
charitatis sensisse May. quicquid in illis libris sensit nisi crediderimus
mendacem facimus Deum. August. 12. confess. c. 25. tom. 1.
faith in act, but only an inclination thereto. Surely they can have
instification no otherwise then they have faith, and therefore if they have not
faith in act, they can have no justification in act, but only be inclined to
it, as they are inclined to faith.

7. Second conclusion. Al points of Christian faith are vertually contained in
Scripture. First because it teaches us to believe the Church, which teaches
actually al points of Christian faith, and therefore Scripture vertually
teaches us al. Hereupon wrote S. Austin That in doing what the Church
teaches, we hold the truth of Scriptures, albeit they afforde no example
thereof, because we therein follow the Church, which the Scripture undoubtedly
shows. Secondly because the end of al Gods word, whether written or
unwritten, is love of him self above al things, and of our neighbor as our
self, as appears by that 1. Timoth. 1. v. 5. The end of the precept is
charity, and Romans 13. v. 8. who loves his neighbor has fulfilled the law,
and to the better comprehending and obtaining of this end, he refers al
whatsoever he revealed, and this end being contained in Scripture it follows,
that the Scripture does vertually contain (as a cause does the effect) al
points of faith.

8. And hereupon also it follows that all the rest of Gods word whether
written, or unwritten may be called an explication of the foresaid
commandments, because it contains nothing, but which is vertually contained
in these commandments, and thereto referred by God, as to their end, which our
Savior meant when he said. In Matthew. 22. v. 40.
these two commandments, all the law and Prophets hang, because of them
depend, as of their end, all the rest, which the law and Prophets contain. And
hereupon said S. S. Epiphan.
Epiphan. haer. 65. That we may tell the invention of every question, out of the
consequence of Scriptures. He said not out of scripture. For all can not be
taken thence, as him self writes haer. 61. but of the consequence of them,
because al questions are resolved out of the Scriptures, or out of that which
follows of them, as the effect of the cause. And according to these two
conclusions, we may expound other Fathers, when they say al things are
contained in Scripture. For either they mean not absolutely of al points of
Christian faith, nor of actual containing (as appears by that other where
they manifestely defend Traditions) but either only of points necessary to be
known of every Christian, or of vertual containing.

9. Third conclusion: Al points of Christian faith are not actually contained
in scripture, Al points of Christian faith are not actually in the Scripture.
neither clearly nor obscurely, neither in plain words, nor in meaning. This
conclusion Bell seems to grant, page 118. where he admits of a thing
although not expressly written, yet vertually (says he) and effectually
contained in Scripture. And the whole English Article 6.
Clergy defyne. That what may be proved out of Scripture is necessary to be
believed, though it be not read. But what can be proved, what not, they alone
will be judges. But whatsoever Protestants say. I prove the S. Austin.
For as S. Austin said epist. 9. and 19. If any untruth be found in Scriptures
what authority S. Hierom. con. Heluid. S. Augustine. haeres. 84. 82. S.
Epiphan. haer. 78. S. Hilar. in 1. Math. Can. 1.
can they have? So if any part or parcel of the Bible be doubtful, what
certainty can the rest have? Secondly the perpetual virginity of our B. Lady is
a matter of faith, as appears by S. Hierom, and S. Austin, who accounted
Heluidius, and Iouinian heretics for denying it, and Protestants Willet
Tetract. 2. pillar. part. 3. p. 76. 77.
confess it. And yet it is no where testified in Scripture. Thirdly that the
seventh day commanded by God to be kept holy, is transferred verbo Dei.

10. Fourth Conclusion: Al points of Al points of Christian faith can not be
proved sufficiently and immediately out of Scripture.
Christian faith can not be sufficiently, and immediately proved out of
Scripture. In this conclusion I say not. That no points of Christian faith, nor
that al can not by some way or other be proved* by some similitude, congruity,
or probable illation; nor that immediately by testimony of the Church whose
testimony in all doctrine of faith can be immediately proved out of Scripture.
But only deny, that al can be immediately proved out of scripture by the very
words of Scripture, and so sufficiently as it suffices to captiuate our
understanding Articles 39 decreed by Bishops and Ministers 1562. and 1571.
into obedience of faith. This is directly against the sixth Article of
Protestants faith, and against Bell in this whole Article: But I prove it as I
did the former conclusion. For there is no place of all the Scripture, which
sufficiently proves all the test Al things can not be taken out of Scripture.
Epiphan. haer. 61.
to be Canonical, our B. Lady to be a perpetual virgin, and the Sabbath to be
lawfully translated from Saturday to Sunday. And it shall be more evident out of
that, which we shall say of Traditions, and in answer to Bells arguments. For the
present it suffices, that it is so clear, as our very adversaries do sometime
confess it. As See Couel art. 4. p. 31. and Hooper with him Bell p. 134. 135.
Luther. See Roffens. con. Luther. verit. 4. and Bellarm. lib. 4. de verb. Dei
c. 4. col. 164. Luther certain of Purgatory.
Bell page 134. and 135. art. 7. admits one point of faith, which is not in
the Bible, and professes that they mean not of it, when they say al things
necessary to salvation are contained in Scriptures. And Luther art. 37. said
That purgatory can not be proved out of Scripture, and yet in the assertion of
the same he said. That he was certain there was Purgatory, nor cared much what
Heretics babled to the contrary. Now let us come to Bells objections, which
albeit for the most part be against Traditions, yet because the matters of
sufficiency of Scripture, and of Traditions are connexed, and because we will
keep his order, as much as we can, we will here answer them in that order; as
they are propunded by him.

CHAP. II. Bells arguments out of the oulde Testament concerning the sufficiency
of Scripture ansvvered.
Bell cites diverse places which make Bell page 86. 87. 88. 89.
nothing for absolute sufficiency of Scriptures, or against Traditions, but
only bid us obey, and follow the law, as Iosue 1. v. 7. and 23. v. 6. and
Malach. 4. v. 4. omitting therefore these places I answer to other as Deuter. 4.
v. 2. and Proverb. 30. v. 6. where God forbids us to add to his word, and
Deuter. 12. v. 32. where we are bidden to do to the lord only that which he
commands without adding, or taking away First that these places make as much
against Protestants as Catholics. For they admit one unwritten Tradition, as
Bell confesses and appears Bell p. 134. 135. Brent. in prolegom. Kemnit. in
examine. Conc. Trid.
by Brentius, Kempnitius, and the Deane of the chapel, and the places cyted by
Bell forbid as well the adding of one thing, as of many to Gods word.

2. Secondly. I answer that they make nothing against these Traditions, which
Bell impugneth vz. such as are necessary, to Bell page 86. in praesat. Articuli.
man's salvation for such are indeed Gods word though unwritten. For the two
first places only forbid adding to Gods word any thing of our own head, or
which is man's word as may be proved. First by the reason of the forbiddance
proverb. 30. cit. vz. least we be disproued, and fownde liars: as no doubt we
might, by adding man's word which is subject to lie, but not by adding Gods
Word, which can never prove untrue, though it be not written. Secondly,
because the Jews did ever add one thing to Gods written word, as Bell
confesses Conference at Hampton Court. p 68.
page 134. and the Deane of the chapel affirmed they added both signs, and
words unto the institution of the Passover prescribed unto them by Moses:
which addition and Tradition of Jews added signs and words to Gods word
and their addition confirmed by Christ.
theirs (says he) was approved by our Savior at his last supper. And this
doctrine was exceeding well liked in the conference at Hampton Court. Thirdly
because the Prophets, and Evangelists, did add to Moses law without breaking
of the commandment in the aforesaid places.

3. Bell answers. That the doctrine of the Bell page 89.
Prophets, is nothing else but an explication of the law. But if by the word
explication, he understand only such as add nothing to the sense, or meaning
of the law, but only explicate in other words, types or figures, the bare
meaning of the law, he speaks most absurdly. For beside that it is spoken
without any reason at al, it is against reason, and sense, to say that all the
books of Iosue, Judges, Kings, and Prophets add no sense to the law of Moses.
For where does the law of Moses tell us of every word, or action of every
particular man, or woeman recorded in the books of the oulde Testament, written
since the law was given? where is every word or deed of every particular
person in the new Testament? And although diverse actions of Christ especially
his death, and passion was prefigured in the law, yet the like can not be
thought of every action, or speech of every particular person, so that the
words or figures of Moses law, actually told whatsoever particular things
either Prophets, or Evangelists ever wrote. Wherefore S. Austin S. Austin.
lib. 1. retract. c. 22. recalled what he had said lib. cont. Adimant. c. 3.
That all the precepts, and promises in the new Testament, are in the oulde. For
certain precepts there be (says he) not figured, but proper, which are not
found in the oulde Testament, but in the new. And for this cause. Tertullian.
lib. cont. Hermog. Tertullian.
called the Ghospel a supply of the oulde Testament.

4. But if Bell by the word (explication) How traditions are explicatio^s of
the law.
comprehend al such additions, as though they add to the sense and meaning of
the law, yet are either of their nature, or of the intention of the adder
referred to the better, understanding, comprehension, and fulfilling of the
law, as all the reasons, similitudes, comparisons, examples, and sentences in an
oration, are explications of the theme thereof, because though they add sense
to the sense of the theme, yet they al tend to the perfect comprehension of the
theme, I grant all the writings of Prophets, and Apostles to be explications
of the law, as has been explicated in the second conclusion, Chapt. 1. parag.
7. and 8.
but withal add, that the Traditions of the Church are such like explications.
For what they contain, is in like sort referred (as a mean to the end) to the
perfect understanding, and fulfilling of the said law, and so they are no other
additions to Moses law, nor no otherwise prohibited thereby then the rest of
Scripture is.

5. What has been said to the place of Deuteronomy. 4. may be applied to the other
place Deuteronomy. 12. if it be understood of the moral law, which God gave to the
Jews. But rather I think it is to be understood of the Ceremonial law. Both
because it is not said absolutely what I command that only do, as it would, if
it had been meant of the Moral law: but That only do thou to the lord, which
words (to the lord) insinuate the meaning to be only of the Ceremonial law,
and manner of sacrifice to be done to God. As also immediately before, God had
forbidden the Jews in their manner of worshipping him to imitate the
ceremonies of Gentiles in worshipping their Gods, because they had many
abominable uses, as of sacrifizing their children, and straight after
concludes what I command, thee that only do thou to the lord, nether add any
thing, nor deminish. Whereby we see that the word (Command) he extended only to
sacrifices, and ceremonies, which before he had prescribed to be done to him
self, and would have therein no alteration at al.

6. Nether hinders this that which Reinolds apol. these. p. 207.
Reinolds obiecteth. That mention here is made of sacrificing children, which
is forbidden by the moral law. For mention is made thereof, not as of a thing
forbidden there, but as of a reason of forbidding the Jews, in worshipping God
to imitate Gentiles, because (says God) they sacrifice children, And of this
Ceremonial law very likely it is. that God absolutely Ceremonial law perfectly
prescribed to the Jews and why.
would have no addition, or alteration at al to be made, until it were quite
abrogated by Christ. And the like reason is not of Gods law concerning faith,
and manners. For there being no such difference in the Ceremonies of the law,
but what some Jews observed al might alike, expedient it was that all the
Ceremonies should be prescribed at once, to the end al might worship God after
the same manner, especially seeing the Jews were as S. Paul writes. S. Paul.
Gal. 4. v. 1. 2. 3. little ones nothing differing from servants under tutours,
and governors, and serving under elements of the world. And therefore had all the rudiments, and ceremonies of religion most exactly prescribed unto them by
God, with commandment to abstain from any alteration.

7. But seeing in matters of faith, and Why the law touching says and
manners not prescribed al at once.
precepts of manners there is great difference, because even the same men are
not capable at once of understanding al mysteries, as appears by our Saviors
words to his Apostles. Ihon 16. v. 12. I have many things to say unto you, but
you can not carry (them) now. And much less are al men a like capable of the
same misteryes. And in like manner al men were not a like capable of the same
precepts of life. And therefore as S. Austin S. Augustine. de sermon. Domini in
^^nte.
says: God gave by Prophets the less precepts to that people, which was yet
to be tied with fear, and greater precepts by his Son to a people, whom
he had agreed to free with love. Therefore it was not expedient, that God
should at once prescribe unto men all that they were to believe, or do: but at
such times, as seemed fit to his dyuine wisdom to add thereunto by his
Prophets, and Evangelists.

8. Moreover Bell alleges Esaias. 8. Bell page 8^.
v. 20. Ad legem magis and ad testimonium. Quod si non dixerint iuxta verbum
hoc non erit ^is matutina lux. Rather to the law, and to the testimony. If they
speak not according to this word there shall not be morning light to them. This
place helps him nothing. First because the Prophet names not only the law,
but testimony also, which comprehends Gods unwritten word: as appears:
Joan. 3. v. 11. Joan. 1. 7. 8. 15. 18. 1. Timoth. 6. Apoc. 12.
Romans 8, v. 16. Hebr. 11. v. 39. Act. 4. v, 33. 1. Joan. 5. v. 33. and other
where and therefore makes more for us then against us. Secondly because Esaias
does not absolutely bid us recurre to the law, and testimony, but magis, rather
to them then to witches, of whom he had immediately forbidden us to enquire.
Wherefore Bell in not englishing the word magis as he did the rest, corrupted of
set purpose the Scripture, to make it seem magis more for his purpose Thirdly
Corrupt* of Scripture.
though by the law, and testimony we understood only Gods written word, the
place makes nothing against us. For then Esaias indeed should bid us go to Gods
written word, which we refuse not to do in all doubts, wherein it resolves us,
but forbids us not to go to any other, which is as he says iuxta verbum
hoc, agreeable to this word. yea God him self commanded us Deuter.
Deutr. 32. v. 7. to ask our Fathers, and elders, Job.
and. Job. 8, v. 8. to ask the ancient generation, and seek out the memory of
the Fathers. Wherefore either must Bell prove, that the Churches Traditions are
not iuxta verbum hoc agreeable to Gods written word (which he shall never do:)
or he must know, that God not only forbids us, but rather commands us to
seek after, and follow them.

9. S. Hierome alleged by Bell only Bell page 89. S. Hierom. in c. 8. Esaiae.
says absolutely. That doubts may be resolved out of Scripture, and who will not
seek Gods word shall abide in error, which is undoubted truth, but nothing
against us. But affirms not. That al doubts may be determined out of
Scripture, and that we ought to seek nothing else whatsoever. Yea him self
epist. ad Marcel. resolves lent to be keapt only by Apostolical tradition: And
l. cont. Heluid. S. Hierom.
brings not one place of Scripture to prove our B. Ladies perpetual virginity
against that heretic, though he bring many to show that the places, which the
heretic alleged convince not the contrary. And thus much touching Bells
places out of the oulde Testament.

CHAP. III. Bells arguments out of the new Testament touching sufficiency of
Scripture ansvvered.
HIs first place out of the new Testament Bell page 90.
is Joan. 20. v. 30. These are written that you may believe, that Jesus is
Christ the son of God. and that in believing, you might have life through his
name. And bids us observe that S. Ihons Ghospel was written after al other
Scriptures, even when the Canon of Scripture was complete, perfect, and fully
accomplished: vz. about the 14 year of Domitian almost an* 100. years after
Christ's ascension: and thereby thinks to avoid al our sottish cauils (as he
terms them.) Meaning forsooth that S. Ihon meant these words: (These are
written) of the whole Canon of the Scripture.

2. Omitting Bells manifest error, where Two gross errors in Chronographie.
Baron. An. 97. Onuphrius chron. 96. Eusebius. chronic. 97.
he makes the 14. year of Domitian to be about 100. years after Christ's
ascension, which was but about the 97. year after Christ's nativity, as is
evident by all Chronicles, or supputators of times, and so wanted almost 40. of
an 100. after his ascension. Omitting also an other manifest error, in
affirming S. Ihon to have written his Ghospel almost an 100. years after
Christ's ascension, who dyed the 68. year after his passion, See Baron. An.
101. Eusebius in chron. S. Hieron. in Scriptur. Ecclesiast. in Ioanne and in
chron.
as Eusebius and S. Hierom testify, and therefore could not write almost an 110.
years after Christ's ascension, unless he wrote many years after his own death.

3. But omitting these errors, as testimonies of Bells ignorance in histories,
which I regard not. To his argument I answer. That See S. Cyril. l. 12. in
Joan. c. 61.
those words (These are written) are meant only of (signa) miracles done by
Christ, and written by S. Ihon, to move us to believe that Christ was God.
Reinold. these. 1. Reinolds.
page 60. confesses. That they are referred properly to (signa) miracles, yet
will have them also meant of precepts, and doctrine written by S. Ihon, because
miracles are to confirm, and persuade doctrine and precepts. But I prove that
they are meant only of miracles. Because S Ihon having recorded diverse miracles
of Christ, afterward (immediately before those said words) says, Many other
miracles did Jesus in the sight of his disciples, which v. 30.
are not written in this book. And then adds. but These are written that
you may beeleue that Jesus v. 31.
is Christ the son of God etc. Who sees not here, that the demonstratiue
pronowne (These) is referred only to miracles. For S. Ihon having said that
many miracles were unwritten, straight after with the aduersatiue, or exceptiue
particle (But) which Bell guilefully leaft out) excepteth these which he had
written from the condition of others, which he had not written saying But these
are written: etc? And Reinolds reason is so far from proving his purpose, as it
proves the quite contrary. For because Reinolds proof against him self.
Christ's doctrine, and faith was the end of S. Ihons writing, and miracles the
means, and motives to bring men to Christ's faith, as him self professes in
the forsaid words, evident it is that he means both of Christ's doctrine, and
miracles, in the foresaid verse, but differently, and under different words.
For of miracles he means as motives, and means, under the words. (These are
written etc.) And of doctrine he means as the end of his writing the
miracles, under the other words (That you may believe; etc.)

4. But suppose that S. Ihon by (These) understood both miracles, and doctrine,
can Bell therefore infer that S. Ihon meant of the whole canon of Scriptures?
Surely no: because he having before said. That many other miracles of Christ
were not written in this book, and immediately adding. But these are written:
etc. can not be understood but of his own writing, and in his own. Ghospel.
wheruppon if Bell infer any thing, he must infer that S. Ihons Ghospel alone
is absolutely sufficient, and contains al things necessary. Which I hope he
will not do. Reinolds grants Io. Reinolds apol. p. 216.
that S. Ihons Ghospel is sufficient, supposing that we hear of no other. But
this is nothing to the purpose. For they out of this place infer the
Scripture to be absolutely sufficient, so as we may reject al other things
though we hear of them: And therefore seeing S. Ihon in this place can not be
understood, but of his own Ghospel, if hence they prove absolute sufficiency
of Scripture against Traditions, they must infer absolute sufficiency of S.
Ihons Ghospel against al other what soever: I omit a place Bell alleges out
of S. Cyril, with an other S. Cyril. lib. 12 in Io. cap. vlt. S. Augustine.
tract. 49. in Joan. Sup. c. 1. parag. 2. Bell page 91.
out of S. Austin, which I cited in the first conclusion. For they prove no
more then is there affirmed.

5. His second place out of the new testament is act. 20. v. 27. I have not
spared to show unto you the whole counsel of God. Therefore (says he) the whole
counsel of God touching our salvation, is contained in holy Scripture. Omitting
his needles proofs out of L^^a, and Carthu: that S. Paul means of al couns^l
touching our salvation. I answer that this place either makes directly against
Protestants, or not at al against Catholics. For seeing S. Paul speaks of
his own showing unto the Ephesians, if he be understood of showing only by
writing, it follows, that his epistle to the Ephesians contains al Gods
counsel, and is absolutely sufficient, which is against Protestants. But if he
be understood (as he should be) of showing in general, either by word, or
writing, nothing follows to Bells purpose or against Catholics.

6. But (says Bell) it will not suffice to answer page 91.
That al Gods counsel was preached, but not written, because S. Paul was an
Apostle of that Romans 1. Act. 26.
Ghospel, which was promised by the Prophets, and taught no other thing, then
that the Prophets had foretold. But this proves no more of S. Paul, then of
all the Apostles. For they were al Apostles of the same Gospel, and taught the
same doctrine, which he did, and yet some of them wrote never a word. Some
show it has to prove, that al which S. Paul preached was written by the
Prophets Sup. c. 1. parag. 7. and 8.
which how it is to be understood has been before explicated.

7. And because Bellarmin says. That the Bellarm. lib. 1. de verbo Dei. cap.
1. and 2.
Scripture is an infallible and most secure rule of faith. And That he is mad
who rejecting Scripture follows inward inspirations. Bell charge Bell page
93. untruth 77
him to contradict him self teaching else where the contrary, but cyteth no
place, because none is to be found) and to confound untruth 78
himself because he will not rely upon Gods written testimonies, but seek
after unwritten vanities, and ground his faith upon them. Here Bell slandereth
Bellarmin. For when did ever he or any Catholic refuse to rely upon Gods
written testimony? when did they not account it a most infallible rule of
faith? upon what vanities do they ground their faith? we confess Scripture to
be an infallible rule but not the total rule, but as Bellarmin Bellarmin.
says lib. 4. de verb. dei c. 12. the partial rule. Let Bell improve this Hic
Rhodus, hic Saltus.

8. Moreover he alleges S. Austin Bell page 93. S. Augustine. cont. Adimant.
cap. 3. to. 6.
writing. That there are no precepts, or promises in the doctrine of the
Ghospel, and Apostles, which are not in the old Testament. True. But as S.
Austin afterward in express words recalled, S. Augustine. lib. 1. Retrac. c.
22. to. 1. S. Paul.
and corrected this error: so I would wish Bell to do: His third place is 2.
Timoth 3. v. 15. Holy scriptures are able to make thee wise to salvation. This
makes not against us. both How Scriptures are able to make men wise to
salvation.
because we deny not that Scripturs are able to make men wise to salvation: but
only deny that they alone do it. As also because we grant, they actually
contain whatsoever is necessary to every man's salvation, and Had learned from
his infancy, which alone being not (as Protestants confess) absolutely
sufficient, so as we may reject the new testament, they can not thereof infer
Scripture to be so absolutely sufficient, as that we may reject Traditions. Now
let us come to his proofs out of Fathers, which particulerly proceed against
Traditions.

CHAP. IIII. Bells arguments out of Fathers touching sufficiency of Scripture,
and Traditions ansvvered.
VIncentius lyrin: who lived in S. Austins Vincent. Lyrin. con. haereses.
time Writes. That he enquiring of many holy and learned men. How he should
escape heresy: they al answered him by sticking to Scripture and the Churches
Traditions. And. S. S. Ireney lib. 3. c. ^.
Ireney writes of him self, that by traditions of the Church of Rome, he
confounded al those that teach otherwise then they should. No marvel therefore
if Bell being desirous no^ to escape, but to spread heresy, and loath to be Old
heretics detest traditions. S. Iren. Tortullian. S. Hilarie. S. Augustine. c. 1.
to. 6. S. Epiphan.
confownded, do with the old heretics Marcionits, and Valentinians: ex Iren:
l. 3. c. 2. and Tertul. de praescrip* with the Ari ans ex Hilario l. cont.
Constant. August. l. 1. contr. Maximin. with the Aerians ex Epipha. her. 75.
with the Ennomians ex Basil. l. de spir. sanct. c. 27. 29. with the S. Basil.
Nestorians, and Eutichians ex. 7. Synod. 7. Synod.
act. 1. impugn Traditions. And let not the Reader marvel that Bell brings
the words of diverse Fathers against Traditions, which almost al are objections
taken out of Bellarmin. Bollarm. lib. 4. de verbo Dei c. 11.
For they make no more for his purpose, then the words of Scripture did for the
Devil. or Jews, when they alleged them Math. 4. v. 6. Joan. 12. v. 34.
against Christ. And we Will bring such express words of the same Fathers for
Traditions, as shall clear al suspicion, and can admit no solution.

2. First he cyteth Dionis. Areopag. saiing Bell page 94. S. Dionys. de diu.
nom. c. 1.
we must nether speak nor think any thing of the Deity (praeter ea) beside
those things, which Scriptures have revealed. I might except, that Protestants
deny Dionis. Areopag. to be Centur. Ce^t. 1. lib. 1. c. 10. Luther. and Calvin.
ex Bellarm. l. 2. de Monachis c. 5.
author of those books, but I need not. For the words make nothing to the
purpose; both because they forbid only speaking or thincking of the Deity
beside that which Scripture reuealeth: as also because by (praeter) he
understands not every thing out of Scripture, else we should not use the words
Trinity, and Consubstantiality but only such as are quite beside, and neither
actually nor vertually are contained in Scripture. But let S. Dionis. tell
plainly his own mind concerning Traditions, Those first Captains (says he)
and Princes of our Hierarchy have S. Dionys. l. de ecclesiastic. Hierarch. c. 1.
delivered unto us divine, and immaterial matters partly by written, partly by
their unwritten institutions. How could Apostolical Traditions be more plainly
avouched.

3. Two places Bell brings out of S. Austin, S. Augustine. 2. de doct.
Christian. c. 6. and 2. de peccat. mer. and remiss. ^. vlt.
which because we alleged them in cap. 1. conclus. 2. and prove no more then
is there taught I omit. And as for S. Austin, he not only avouches Apostolical
Traditions, epist. 118. but de Genes. ad litt. l. 10. c. 23. tom. 3.
professes, that baptism of infants were not to be believed, if it were not an
Apostolical tradition, and obiecteth them against the Pelagians in lib. cont.
Julian. amoni, and gives us this rule to know them. If S. Austins rule to
know Apostolical traditions. S. Ireney lib. 3. c. 1.
the whole Church observe them and no Council appointed them: l. 2. de bapt. c.
7. 6. 23 24 S. Ireney he cyteth, because he writes That the Ghospel which the
Apostles preached, they afterward delivered unto us in Scriptures, and it is
the foundation of our faith. These words prove no more then that the Apostles
preached not one Ghospel, and writ an other, but one and the self same. But
that every one of them, or any one of them writ every whit they al preached S.
Ireney affirms not. And his affection to Traditions is evident, both out of
his words before rehearsed, as also lib. 3. c. 4. where he says we ought to S.
Ireney.
keep Traditions, though the Apostles had written nothing. And affirms many
barbarous nations of his time, to have believed in Christ, keapt the doctrine
of salvation, and ancient Tradition without Scripture.

4. The next he produces is Tertullian ^el page 95. Tertul. con. Hermogen.
writing thus, I reverence the fulness of Scripture, which shows to me the
Maker, and the things made. And soon after. But whither al things were made of
subiacent matter. I have no where readde, let Hermogenes shop show it
written. If it be not written, let him fear that we provided for them that
add or take away. Answer. Tertullian speaks of one particular matter, which
the heretic Hermogenes of his own head, not only without Tradition, or
Scripture, both contrary to both, taught of creating the world of subiacent
matter, and not of nothing. And no marvel if Tertullian said the Scripture was
full in this point, and required Scripture of Hermogenes, for proof of his
heresy; being sure he could allege no Tradition. But for true Traditions,
Tertullian is so great a manteiner of them, as lib. de prescrip. he thincketh
heretics ought to be confuted rather by them, then by Scripture, and other
where affirms Tertull. lib. de Corona milit. lib. 1. cont. Marcionem l. 2. ad
vxorem.
diverse things to be practiced in the Church as the ceremonies in baptism,
sign of the Cross, and such like, only by authority of Tradition without al
proof of Scripture. where of (says he) Tradition is the beginner, custom
conseruer, and faith the obseruer.

5. Of S. Cyprian Bell much triumphs, Bell page 96.
because writing against one particular Tradition, Primo imitare pietatem
humilitatemque Cipriani and tunc profes consilium Cipriani. August. lib. 2.
cont. Crescon. cap. 31. to. 7. S. Cyptian. epist. ad Pom peium.
of not rebaptizing the baptized by heretics, which he thought had been a
mere humane and mistaken tradition, he says. Comes it from our Lord, or the
Gospels authority? Comes it from the Apostles precepts, or epistles? For God
witnesses that the things are to be done, which are written, and proposes to
Jesus Name saying. Let not the book of this law depart from thy mouth, but
thou shall meditate therein day, and night, that thou may observe to do al
things that are written in it. If therefore it be commanded in the Ghospel, or
contained in epistles of Apostles, or acts, that who came from any heresy be
not baptized, but hands imposed upon them for penance, let this divine, and
holy Tradition be kept.

6. These words at the first view seem to make for Bell, but if the cause and
circumstances of S. Cyprians writing be considered, S. Cyprian.
they make rather against him. S. Cyprian never rejected al Traditions (yea by
it l. 2. epist. 3. he proved water to be mingled with wine in the sacrifice,
and in the epistle cited by Bell, bids us recurre to Apostolical Tradition)
but only the foresaid Tradition, because he thought as he says epist. ad
Iubaian. that it was never before commanded or written, but (as he writes
epist, ad Quint:) mistaken for an other Tradition of not rebaptizing such as
fall into heresy. Wherefore Bell page 118 most falsely affirms 79 untruth S.
Cyprian. Epist. ad Iubaian. ad Pompeium ad Quintinum. Eusebius. lib. 7. c. 3.
that he sharply reproved P. Steeuen for leaning to Tradition. For he reproved
him only for leaning to a mistaken (as he supposed Tradition) And as it is
evident out of his epistles, and the histories of that time, the question
betwixt him and S. Steeuen pope, was not whether Tradition were to be observed,
or no, but whether this were a true Tradition or no. Wherein, S. Cyprian
erroniously thincking it to be a mistaken tradition, argued against it as he
did, demanding Scripture for proof thereof, which he would never have done, if
he had not thought it to have been mistaken. The most therefore that Bell has
out of S. Cyprian for him self, is, that what is not true tradition, must be
proved by Scripture, which I willingly grant, but it makes nothing for his
purpose, as is evident. S. Augustine. lib. de vnic. bapt. c. 13. l. 1. de bapt.
co^t. Donat. c. 18. 39. epist. 48. Vincent. Lyrin. contr. ^aeres.


7. But many things I observe in S. Cyprian which make against Bell. 1 He
admits diverse Traditions: Bell rejects al. 2. He impugneth one only
Tradition: Bell impugneth al. 3. He erred in impugning one, and much more Bell in
impugning al. 4. He recanted his error before his death as S. S. Augustine. l.
6. de bapt. c. 2. S. Hieron. dial. contr. Luciferian.
Austin thincketh, and of his fellow bishops S. Hierom testifyeth: Bell
persisteth obstinatly. 5. He erred in a new question, and not determined in a
full Council says S. Austin: Bell erreth in ancient matters decyded S. August.
l. de vinc. baptism. c. 13. and lib. 5. de bapt. c. 17. S. Cyprian. epist. ad
Iubaian. S. Hieron. contr. Lucifer. August. sup. S. Cyprian. epistol. ad
Pompei. Eusebius. lib. 7. c. 3. Vincen. co^t. haeres. S. Cyprian. l. 1. epist. 3.
by many general Councels. 6. He although he thought the Pope did err, yet
separated not him self (as Bell does) from his communion as him self and S.
Hierom testifyeth. 7. He condemned none that followed the Popes opinion against
his, as Bell does. 8. He thought the Pope to err in a commandment only of a
thing to be done: Bell condemns him of errors in his judicial sentences of
faith, where as S. Cyprian professes, that false faith can have no access to
S. Peter's chair: 9. He disobeyed for a time the Popes commandment concerning
a new, and difficult question: Bell disobeyeth obstinatly his definatiue
sentence.

8. Hereby we see how little S. Cyprian makes See S. Austin lib. 2. contr.
Crescon c. 31. 32. to. 7. S. Austin.
for Bell, and though he had made more for him, let him know from S. Austin:
lib. de vnic. bapt. c. 13. and lib. 1. de bapt. cont. Donatist. c. 18. and
epist. 18. that this error was in S. Cyprian. an humane and venial error and
like a blemish in a most white breast, because it was not then perfectly
defyned by the Church. But in his followers (says he: lib. 1. cit. c. 19. it
is smoke of hellish filthiness, and as Vincent Vincent. Lyrin.
Lyrin writes The author was Catholicque, his followers are judged heretics,
he absolved, they condemned, he a child of heaven, they of hell. And let the
Reader gather by this example, the Example of the force of tradition and the
Popes judgment.
authority of Tradition and Pope. For if one Tradition prevailed then against
S. Cyprian, and a whole Council of Bishops, alleging diverse places of
Scripture, much more it will prevail against Protestants. And if the Popes
judgment even then, when it seemed to many holy, and learned Bishops, to be
against Scripture, and was supported only by Tradition, did prevail, and they
at last condemned as Heretics, who resisted: much more it will praeuaile
against Protestants, being vpholden not only by Tradition, but by manifest
Scripture also. And Bell in blaming S. Steeue^ Pope, for prete^ding 80 untruth
(as he says) false authority shows him self to be a malepert minister,
seeing S. Cyprian never reprehended him for any S. Cyprian.
such matter: yea lib. 1. epist. 3. acknowledges in the Church one Priest, and
judge, who is Christ's Vicar, meaning the Pope as is evident: because lib, 2.
epist. 10. he says that the Nouatia^s in making a false Bishop of Rome, made a
false head of the Church and l. 1. epist. 8. and epist. ad Iubaian: that Christ
builded his Church upon S. Peter. And as for S. Steeuen, Vincent Lirin: highly
Vincent. Lyrin. con. haereses. S. Augustine. lib. de vnie. bapt. cont. Petil. c.
14. Bell page 97. S. Athanas.
commends him, and the very Donatists as S. Austin writes, confessed, that
he incorruptly governed his Bishoprike.

9. Next he cyteth S. Athanasius cont. Idol: saying That Scriptures suffice to
show the truth. True. But that truth whereof S. Athanasius there disputed
against Gentiles, to wit that Christ was God, as he him self explicateth in
these words: I speak of our belief in Christ. But (says Bell.) He had made a
foolish argument, and concluded nothing at al, if any necessary truth had not
been fully contained in Scripture, As though S Athanasius had in these words
argued against Gentiles, in which he only gave a cause why he wrote that
treatise. Because (says he) Though Scriptures suffice to show the truth, and
diverse have written of the same matter (which argues that he spoke of some
determinate truth) yet because their writings are not at hand, I thought good
to write. But suppose he had argued, what folly is in this argument? Al
contained in Scripture is truth: Christ's godhead is there contained. Ergo it is
truth. But perhaps Bells dull head thought it al one to say. Al contained in
Scripture is truth (whereupon the said Syllogism depends) and Scripture
co^teineth al truth. As for S. Athanasius his reverence of Traditions, it is
evident by his proving S. Athanas. l. de Nicen. Synod. and epist. ad African.
apud Theodoret. lib. 1. c. 8.
the Godhead of Christ, and name of consubstantiality by Tradition, and by his
words lib. de incarn. verbi; who sticks to Traditions is out of danger.

10. S. Epiphan he alleges writing: Bell page 98. S. Epiphan. haer. 65 Chapt.
1. parag. 8. S. Epiphan.
That we can tell the finding of every question by consequence of Scripture.
But these words have been explicated before. As for Tradition, he says haere.
61. We must use it, for althings can not be taken out of Scripture, For the
Apostles have delivered some things by writing, some things by Tradition: The
like he says haere. 55. and 75. S. Cyril he cites where he says. That we S.
Cyrill. lib. 2. de recta fid. ad Regin.
must follovv Scriptures, and in nothing depart from their prescript: This
makes not against us, who profess so to do, and yet Withal follow
Traditions. And what account S Cyril S. Cyril.
made of Traditions appears by his observing lent. lib. 10. in leuit. and use
of the Cross. lib. 6. in Julian. which are Traditions Apostolical as witness S.
Ambros. ser. S. Ambros. Tertullian.
25. 34. 36. Tertul. de corona mil. and others.

11. He cites S. Chrysostom writing Bell page 98. Chrysostom. in psalm. 95.
That if any thing be spoken without Scripture the hearers mind wauereth
somtymes doubting, somtymes as^enting, otherwhile denying. But marvel it is
that Bell would touch S. Chrysostom, S. Chrysostom.
who hom. 42. Thesal. upon these words: (Hold Traditions) says. Hence it
appears, that (the Apostles) delivered not althings by letters: And the one
as well as the other are worthy of the same credit. wherefore we think the
Churches Traditions to deserve belief. It is a Tradition (mark Bell) ask no
more. And if Bell had cyted the words immediately before, he had explicated of
what kind of speaking without Scripture S. Chrisostom meant, namely (sine
testibus solaque animi cogitatione) without vvitnesses, and of his own head.
But Churches Traditions have her for witness, and descend from the Apostles. An
other place he brings out of the same S, Chrisostom (as he Author imperf.
hom. 41. in Math.
says) but it is out of the Author imperfect, who was a flat Arian, and
therefore his testimony is worth nothing, otherwise then he agrees with holy
fathers: though his saying cyted by Bell: That al is fulfilled in Scripture
which is sought to salvation, may be explicated by the first, or second
conclusion:

12. Next he brings S. Ambrose bidding Bell page 98. S. Ambros. 1. de fide ad
Gratian. c. 4.
us not to believe argument, and disputations, but ask the Scriptures,
Apostles, Prophets, and Christ. This makes rather for us; because it allows
enquiring of others besides Scriptures, namely of Apostles from whom the
Churches Traditions came. And nothing against Traditions, because they be no
arguments, or disputations. And indeed S. Ambrose means of humane arguments,
and reasons such as in the Chapter before he said the Arians used, to prove
Christ to be unlike to his Father. Besides he speaks only concerning one
point vz. the consubstantiality of Christ. And therefore though he had bidden us
therein seek only Scripture he had nothing preiudicated Traditions, which
plainly he maintains ser. 25. 34. 36. 38. epist S. Ambros.
81. and other where. Only I marvel wherefore Bell corrupted S. Ambrose his
words. Corrupt. of Fathers.
For where he says we deny, yea abhor Bell makes him say, we deny not, but
abhor, Making S. Ambros teach heresy in granting Christ to be unlike his
Father, which was the matter he spoke of, and to speak absurdly in abhorring a
speech which he does not deny.

13. S. Basil he cites saying whatsoever is ( Bell page 99. S. Basil. in
Ethic. defin. vlt and ad Eustachium ^icdicum.
extra scripturam) out of the Scriptue seeing it is not of faith is sin. And
in an other place. Let us stand to the judgment of Scripture, and let the truth
be judged on their side, whose doctrine is agreeable to Gods oracles. Answer.
In the first place by extra scripturam he understands things contrary to
Scripture, as in the same place he understands with the Apostle by non ex
fide things contrary to faith, as appears. both because he says such things
are sin, which is not true of things which are barely beside Scripture. as
also because he proves such things to be sin, because they be non ex fide
contrary to faith, as the Apostle speaks Romans 14. v. 23. Beside, by Scripture
he understands al Gods words, as usually we understand the whole by the
cheifest part. Which may be proved, because before he defined faith to be
certain persuasion of Gods word, and affirmed it to a rise of hearing Gods
word, and thereupon infers, what is beside Scripture is not of faith. In
which illation, if he took not Scripture for Gods whole word, as he did in
the Antecedent, he did manifestly paralogize. And thus understood, he speaks
nothing against Traditions, which are part of Gods word, and as him self
says otherwhere of as equal S. Basil. lib. de Spir. c. 27. and 29.
force as the written word is.

14. The second place makes nothing to the purpose. For he bids not us be
judged by only Scripture, yea in allowing those opinions for true, which are
agreeable to Scripture, he insinuates that to discern the truth of opinions,
it is not necessary to prove them out of Scripture, so they be consona^t
thereto. How earnest a defender of Traditions S. Basil was, appears lib. de
spir. c. S. Basil.
29 I think (quoth he) it an Apostolical thing to stick unto Traditions not
written and c. 27. Some doctrine we have by writing, some we received of the
Apostles Tradition, and both have equal force to piety. Nor any contradicts
these (mark Bell) who never so slenderly have experienced the rights of the
Church And c. 10. he writes. That Heretics abolish Apostolical Tradition, A
Trick of Heretics to reject tradition. Bell page 99. S. Hierom.
and reject written testimonies of Fathers as of no account.

15. The last Father he cites is S. Hierom, out of whom he alleges three
places. The first is in math. 23. This because it has no authority from
Scripture is as easily rejected, as it is affirmed. The second is in psalm. 86.
where upon that verse Dominus narrabit in scripturis populorum. he says. God
vvil show not by word, but by Scripture, that excepting the Apostles, what is
said afterward shall have no authority. The third place is in Hierem. c. 4. That
we must not follow the error of our Ancestors or parents, but authority of
Scriptures, and command of God teaching. Answer: In the first place S. Hierom
speaks of a particular opinion vz: That Zacharias who was slain between the
Temple and the Altar was S. Ihon Baptists father: which he supposes to have
been no Apostolical Tradition, and therefore of it says, because it is not
proved out of Scripture, it is as easily rejected as affirmed. But what S.
Hierom writes of a particular opinion held without tradition, Bell can not
justly extend to certain Traditions. The second place makes nothing against
us. Because the Traditions of the Church were taught by the Apostles, and not
by any other afterward. And S. Hieroms meaning is to deny, that any man may
teach of his own word, and authority any new doctrine, as Montanus, and such
like Heretics did, but only that, which they received from the Apostles, who
were as S. Paul says, Ephesians. 2. v. 20 our foundation. The third place makes
les to the purpose. For tradition is no error of Ancestors. And Scripture we
grant to be followed, but not it alone, but (as S. Hierom says) the
commandment of God teaching whether it be by writing or tradition. As for
traditions S. Hierom plainly allows them, Dialog. cont. Lucif. where he
confesses it to be the custom of the S. Hierome.
Church, to observe many things by tradition, as if they were written laws. And
epist. ad Marcel. receaueth lent. and lib. cont. Heluid: defends our Ladies
perpetual virginity only by tradition.

16. Many more Fathers I might allege for traditions. But I content my self
with the testimonies of them, whom Bell brought for the contrary. Let the
indifferent Reader weigh the places cited by him, and me, and uprightly judge
as he tendreth his salvation; Whether the holy Fathers rejected, or embraced
ecclesiastical traditions. Perhaps Bell will answer. That the Fathers contradict
them selfs, and say as the false mother did. Let them be nether mine nor
thine, but be divided. 3. Reg. 3. v. 26.
But who remembers Salomons judgment, will by this alone perceive to whom of
right the Fathers belong. I have answered all that Bell has brought out of them,
and most of the authorities alleged by me (especially those of S. Dionis. S.
Epipha: S. Chrisost. S. Basil) admit no answer at al: Now let us come to Bells
arguments out of Catholic writers.

CHAP. V. Bells arguments out of late Catholic vvriters touching sufficiency
of Scriptures and Traditions ansvvered.
THE first he alleges is the learned Bell p. 100. Roffensis artic. 37. Luther.
and holy Bishop Fisher (whom he untruly terms a canonized Saint with us)
Because in one place he calls Scripture the storehouse of al truths
necessary to be known of Christians. And in an other says when heretics
Veritate 4. cont. art. Lutheri.
contend with us we ought to defend our cause with other help then Scripture.
Because (says Bell) Popery can not be defended by Scripture, and avouches
untruth 81.
Papists to confess, That they can not manteine their faith by Gods written
word. Answer. How Scripture may be called a Storehouse of al truths necessary
to Christians, appears out of the first, and second Conclusion. And Sup. c.
1. parag. 2. and 7.
in the said place B. Fisher writes of Purgatory. That though it could not be
proved out of Scriture, yet it ought to be believed for Tradition. And in the
second place he nether says absolutely; That we ought not to prove our faith,
out of Scripture at al, nether to Catholics, nor to Heretics: Nor that we ought
not to prove it out of Scripture even against Heretics: For him self so
proves it against Luther, And much less says. That we can not prove it out
of Scripture (as Bell falsely forgeth) But his meaning is, That when we dispute
with Heretics, we ought to have aliud subsidium quam scripturae: other proofs
beside Scripture, and hereof he gives four reasons.

2. First because Luther professed to believe Purgatory though it were not in
Scripture: 2. Because Scripturs in some points at the first sight, and in words
seem to favor Heretics more then Catholics, as appears in the controversy
between S. Hierom, and Heluidius about our Ladies perpetual virginity 3.
Because Heretics deny many parts of Scripture. 4. Because though they admit the
words, yet they pervert the sense and meaning of Scripture, which is as much
(says Tertullian) as if they denied the words. And oftentimes the true sense
is not so evident that it alone suffices to convince an Heretik, when to
contend about it wearyeth (as the same Tertullian writes) the constant, over
turns the weak, and scandalizeth the middle sort. Whereupon he advises Sup.
cap. 19.
us wisely That in disputing with Heretics before we come to proofs out of
Scripture, we try whose the Scriptures are, and to whose possession of, right
they belong. For that being cleared it vvil soon appear (says he) who has
the true Christian faith the true understanding of Scripture, and al Christian
Traditions. And the same meant B. Fisher who also cites Tertul. and his words
make rather for Traditions then against them. And if this course were taken
with Protestants, they would be quickly confounded. For they (as Dove confesses
and it is evident) Dove of Recusancy. p. 13.
had the Scripture from us, not by gift, or loan; For we nether gave nor lent
them to Protestants; but by theaft, and stealth, as Turks and Infidels may have
them, and therefore are wrong usurpers of our goods and possessions, and justly
may we say to them with Tertullian. When and whence came Supra c. 37.
you? what do you in my possession being none of mine? By what right Marcion
(Luther) do thousel my vvood? with what license Valentine (Calvin) do
thou turn a way my fovvntains; With what authoryty Apelles (Beza) do
thou move my limits? It is my possession what do you others sovve, and feed at
your pleasure? It is my possession, I possess it of old, I possess it first,
I have strong originals from the Authors whose the thing was. Thus
Tertullian. And here I omit that Bell cites an apocriphal sentence out of Esdr.
3. 4. under the name of the wise man as if it were Salomons.

3. Next he alleges Canus his words. Bell p. 101.
Seeing the Canon of Scripture is perfect, and most Canus de locis lib. 7. c. 3.
sufficient to al things, what need the understanding, and authority of Saints
be adioined thereto. But Bell forgot to tell that Canus proposes this only as an
objection; which he answers by denying the illatio^ therein included. Because
(says he) the Fathers, are needful to right understand the Scripture, Nether
denying nor granting the Antecedent concerning the perfection and sufficiency
of Scripture. But how sufficient he thought Scripture to Canus.
be: appears l. 3. c. 6. where (after S. Ignatius epist. ad Heronem) he
calls them wolves and Heretics, which refuse the Churches Traditions and c.
7. solueth the best arguments Protestans bring against them.

4 Out of S. Thomas he cites That we Bell p. 102. S. Thom. 1. part. q. 36. art.
2.
must speak nothing of God which is not in Scripture, by words, or sense, But
this is nothing against Tradition of other things An other place he cites out
of ^. p. q. 42. ar. 4. Whatsoever Christ would have us read of his doing, and
sayings, he commanded the Apostles to write. as with his own hands. This
also makes nothing against us. Both because S. Thomas says not what Christ
would have us believe, but what he would have us read, and Traditions be such as
Christ would have us believe, though we read them not, as appears by his
Apostle 2 Thessalonians. 2. v. 15. Ho^d the T^aditions which you have learnt, either
by speech or by my epistle. As also because S. Thomas speaks not of al points
of belief, but only of Christ's sayings, and doings, besides which the very
sayings, and doings of the Apostles recorded in their acts, and epistles, or
testified by Tradition, are to be believed. I omit a petty untruth, which Bell
untruth 82
often repeareth. That we nether vvil nor can deny S. Thomas doctrine. But S.
Thomas his S. Thomas.
mind concerning Traditions appears by his words. 2 Thessalonians. 2. It is evident
that there are things unwritten in the Church, taught by the Apostles, and
therefore to be kept: For as S. Dionis. says. The Apostles thought it better to
conceal many things.

5. He cites also Victoria saying. I am Bell p. 103. Victoria de sacrament.
not certain of it, though al say it, which is not contained in Scripture.
But Victoria means of things spoken not by Tradition, but by probable
opinion, as the conception of our lady without original sin, and such like:
or he means of things nether actually nor vertually contained in Scripture,
as Traditions be according to our 2. Conclusion cap 1. An other place he
alleges out of Victoria writing, That for opinions Victor. de augmento
charitatis relect. 8.
we ought no way to depart from the rule of Scriptures. What is this to the
purpose? Let Bell prove that we either for opinions, or any thing else depart from
Scripture, and let him not slander us as he does, That we believe Bell p. 103.
83. untruth.
whatsoever the Pope tells us, though it be never so repugnant to Scripture.
For who shall be innocent if it suffice to accuse.

6. Lastly he quoteth S. Anselme 2. Timoth. 3. and Lyra Math. 19. but omitteth
their words, because they make little for him S. Anselm says that Scripture,
(and means the old Testament) can make one sufficiently learned to get
salvation, to keape the commandments, and what is more is not of necessity but
of supererogation. Which how little it makes against the belief of Traditions
were supererogation to declare. And thus much touching the sufficiency of
Scriptures: now let us entreat of their hardness, or difficulty.

CHAP. VI. Of the Difficulty or easynes of Scriptures.
SCRIPTVRES are difficult, and hard Scriptures.
to understand. This is against Bell page 107. but expressly taught by S. Peter,
2. Pet. ^. Peter.
3. v. 16. where speaking of S. Paul's epistles he says. In which are some
things hard to be understood. To this Bell frames three answers. Bell p. 107.
First that S. Peter says not the whole Scripture is hard to understand, but
some things in S. Paul's epistles. This is not to the purpose; because we say
not that the whole Scripture, that is every part thereof, is hard to
understand: But grant with S. Chrysostom. 2. S. Chrysostom. and Concion. 3. de
Lazaro.
Thessal. hom. 3. Whatsoever is necessary (to every man's salvation) is
manifest out of Scripture. And with S. Austin lib. 2 doct. Christ. S. Austin.
c. 9. Al those things which concern faith and manners are plainly set down
in Scripture. And lib. 2. de pec. mer. and remiss. c. vlt. tom. 7. I believe
even in this point we should have most clear testimony of Gods word, if man
could not be ignorant of it without loss of salvation. Yet Lex partim in
aperto est partim etia^ inuelatis tegitur Nazianz. orat. ^. de Theolog.
withal affirm with the same holy Doctor in psalm. 140. If Scripture were no
where obscure it would not exercise us. And the like he says sermon. 13. de
verb. Apost. Only we affirm that absolutely the Scripture is hard, and to The
Scripture absolutely hard though not every place thereof.
this it suffices that some places are hard. As for away to be dangerous, it
suffices that some places be perilous, though others be secure.

2. His second answer is: That S. Peter only says some places are hard to the
unlearned, which are unstable. And like is his third answer. That they are
hard to the wicked, which deprave them. But to answer thus is in deed to
deprave Scriptures, and to show him self to be one of the unlearned, and
unstable, whereof S. Peter speaks. For S. Peter absolutely says some things in
S. Paul's epistles are hard, not respectively to these or other kind of men. In
which (epistles) says S. Peter) S. Peter.
some things are hard to be understood, which the unlearned, and unstable
deprave to their own perdition. Behold he says not some things are hard to
the unlearned, and unstable, but absolutely some things are hard, which hard
things the unlearned, and unstable deprave. And as S. Austin says lib. de fid.
and oper. c, S. Augustine, tom. 4.
14. one special hardness meant by S. Peter in S. Paul's epistles is his
difficult speech, and high commendation of justifying faith, which now
Protestants deprave to their own perdition, in gathering thereof that faith
alone does justify, as some gathered in the Apostles time, against which
opinion especially (as the same holy Doctor witnesses) S Peter, S Ihon S.
James, and S. Jude S. Augustine. cit.
writ their epistles: An other special difficulty meant by S. Peter (says S.
Austin 10. c. 16) are his words 1. Corinthians. 3. If any build upon the
foundation. etc.

3. Again if Scripturs be not hard, what See S. Chrysostom. hom. 3. de Lazaro.
tom. 2. S. Hierom.
meant S. Philip to ask the Eunuch (who was as holy and studious a man as S.
Hierom, ae he him self testifyeth epist. ad Paulin:) If he understood them?
What meant the Eunuch Act. 8. v. 30. v. 31.
to answer. 6 How can I if some do not show me? Could not an holy man so wise
as he was, being Treasurer to the Q: of Ethiopia understand easy matters? If
Scripturs be so easy what need had K. David to pray for Psalm. 118. v. 34. Ib.
v. 18.
understanding to search Gods law: for opening his eyes to consider the wonders
of it? what happened to the Apostles that they could not understand Christ's
parables? what Math. 13. v 36. c. 15. v. 16.
needed the gift of interpretation given to some: 1. Corinthians. 12. v. 10. Nay al
are interpreters if the Scripture be clear to al.

4. Origin says that Scripture is reuera multis Fathers. Origin. lib. 7. cont.
Celsum.
in locis obscura, in very deed obscure in many places. And that they take away
the key of science, who say the Scripture is manifest: hom. 20. in Math. S
Chrysostom notes, S. Chrysostom. hom. 40. in Ioannem. ^om. 3.
That Christ bid not read, but search Scriptures, because summa indigent
diligentia they need great study. S. Hierom writes that all the epistle S.
Hierom. epist. ad Algosiam. q. 8. Epistol. ad Paulin. S. Augustine. l. 2. de
doct. Christ. c. 6. See 12. Conf. c. 14. sermon. 4. 5. 13. de verb. Apost. Iren.
lib. 2. cap. 47. Cyrill. praefat. lib. thesaur. S. Augustine. tom. 2.
to the Romans is nimys obscuritatibus inuoluta wrapped in excessive
obscurities. That the Apocalips has as many mysteries as words. S. Austin
notes, That to tame our pride some things are so obscurely said as densissimam
caliginem obducunt they bring over a most thick darkness. And will Bell account
that clear which the glistering beam of Gods Church (for so Bell terms S.
Austin) accounted so dark and obscure. And epist. 119. c. 21. professes to be
ignorant of many more things in Scripture then he knows: If Bell after our
holy Fathers, please to hear his own unholy syers. Luther tells him Luther.
praefat. in psalm.
that he is most impudently rash who professes to know one book of Scripture
in all points. By daily reading (of Scripture says Calvin. 3. instit. Calvin.
Quotidie legendo in multos obscuros locos incidimus, qui nos ignorantiae
coarguunt. Bell p. 102. Reason.
c. 2. parag. 4.) we fall upon many obscure places which convince us of
ignorance. Nay to what purpose does Bell require the commentaries of Fathers for
better understanding of Scriptures, if there be no difficulty in them.

5. Finally if our common laws handling nothing but buying, selling,
bargaining, and such common, and usual matters, as are daily practiced of men,
be so hard and difficult, as they require great study to be well understood, and
Clients will give great fees for Lawyers counsel in them, what shall we think of
Gods laws, which entreat of divine, and supernatural things, far above man's
reach, and capacity. Or if as S. Austin S. Augustine. tom. 6.
says lib. de vtil. cred. c. 7. He that has no skill in poetry, dare not meddle
with Terentian Maurus without a master, Asper, Cornutus, Donatus and infinite
others are requisite to understand any Poet, and do thou without a guide rush
upon holy books full of divine matters? O exceeding boldness or rather madness.
And again: If every I^. cap. vlt.
art though base and easy require a teacher, or master to get it, what is
more foolish heady pride, then not to learn the book of divine sacraments of
their interpreters? Now let us hear Bells reasons to the contrary.

6. Solomon (says he) Proverb. 8. v. 8. 9. teaches Bells Arguments. p. 108.
That the words of wisdom are easy and open to every one of understanding. But
let us hear Solomon him self. Al my speeches are just, there is not in them
any thing wicked or perverse. They are right to such as understand, and even to
such as find knowledge. What word is here of easynes, or manifestnes of Gods
words? but only of their vprightnes, and equity. And let Bell learn of S.
Austin in psalm. 146. to. 8. S. Austin.
That in Scripture there is nothing peruers, but some thing obscure. But
perhaps Bells english Bible deceived him, which to deceive the Reader used the
ambiguity of the english Bible printed 1584.
word (plain) which may signify either manifest or even) for the latin word
(aequi.)

7. After this Bell cyteth diverse places of page 108. Psalm. 25. v. 9. Joan. 7.
v. 17. Joan. 8. v. 31. 32. Math. 11. v. 25. S Paul.
Scripture to prove That God reuealeth his will to all that fear him, to little
ones: That the doers of his will know his doctrine and truth. But seeing it is no
where said That God reuealeth his will, or the good know it, by bare reading his
word, but rather the contrary; because faith comes of hearing, and how shall
they hear without a preacher Romans 10. v. 17. 15. These places make nothing for
easines of Scripture. Besides that they may be expownded, not of Gods will in all
points, but in such as are necessary to every man's salvation, which we grant
to be plainly revealed in Scripture. I omit his other places. That the
Scripture Psalm. 119. al. 118. v. 105. 2. Pet. 1. v. 19. 1. Cor. 2. v. 15. Cap.
9. parag. 17. Bell p. 108.
is a lanthern, light or candle: and That the spiritual man judges, or (as he
expowndeth) understands al things: for they be answered hereafter.

8. He alleges S. Chrisostom saying. what need we a preacher? our negligence
has brought this necessity. For to what end is a sermon needful. Al things are
clear and plain out of Scripturs: what things soever are necessary are
manifest: But S. Chrisostom speaks not of al S. Chrysostom. hom 3. in 2.
Thessalon.
things in Scripture, but only of such as are necessary to every ones
salvation, as is evident by his last words And such need no preacher for to be
understood, though they need to be believed as S. Paul testifyeth S. Paul.
Roman. 10. 17. But besides these there are things obscure as the same holy
Doctor witnesses in the same place in these words. Thou know which are
clear, what ask thou the obscure? And hom. 10. in Joan. he bids S.
Chrysostom. item Concion. 3. de Lazaro.
men note which is clear which obscure in Scripture, and to harken the
exposition of them in the Church. And for such points, preachers, and preaching
is as necessary now to us, as well for understanding as for believing them, as
they were to the Eunuch. act. 8. to the two disciples Luc. 24. Other places he
Homil. 9. Coloss. and Concion. 3. de Lazaro.
cyteth out of S. Chrysostom concerning reading of Scripture which shall be
answered in his proper place.

9. What has been answered to the words of S. Chrysostom is to be applied to
the like in S. Austin lib. 2. de doct. Christ. S. Augustine. tom.
c. 9. In these things which are plainly set down in Scripture are found, al
those things which concern faith and manners. For he says not absolutely. Al
things: but al those things: thereby insinuating that he means only of things
necessary to be believed, and done of every one: which Bell perceauing in
englishing False translat.
his words leaft out the word. Those. But I marvel what he meant to cite S.
Aust. S. Augustine. l. 2. de doct. Christ. c. 6.
writing: The holy Ghost has so tempered Scriptures that locis apertioribus by
manifester places (Bell translateth manifold places) he might provide for hunger
(desire of knowledge) and by obscurer wipe away loathsomnes. For here he
plainly teaches Scripture to be obscure in some places. But perhaps it is
because S. Austin adds. Almost nothing is in the obscure places, which is not
most plainly uttered otherwhere. But this helps Bell nothing. For nether says
he that al obscurities are plainly other where explicated. Nor that it is
plain in what places they are explicated. And so S. Austin admitting some
obscure places of Scripture to be no where explicated in Scripture, and
supposing it not to be plain in what places such obscure places as are
explicated, be explicated, admits Scripture to be obscure. An other place he
cites Bell p. 111. 112. 113.
out of S. Austin, as also S. Hierom and Theodoret concerning reading of
Scripturs, which shall be answered in the next chapter.

CHAP. VII. Of the vulgar peoples reading Scripture.
FIRST conclusion, it is not necessary to al sorts of people, that desire to
attain to eternal life to read Scripturs. The contrary avouches Bell page 103.
and 109. wherein he exceeds the heretic Pelagius who required not reading,
but only knowledge of Scripture for to be without sin, and thereby condemned a
great part of Christians as S. Hierom writes dialog. 1. cont. Pelag. But S.
Hierom.
it is so manifest as it needs no proof. For how should they do that can
not read? Does Bell think Scripture to be like a neck verse, that who can not
read it, shall be hanged? where does God command every one upon pain of death
to read Scripturs? whence came this new law which Bell proclaims? But mark
Reader, Protestants taught at first that no works were necessary to salvation.
And now Bell avouches one more (vz. reading of Scripturs) then ever Catholics
dreamed on.

2. Second conclusion, It is not expedient See S. Gregor. Nazianzen. in
Apologet. and orat. 1. de Theolog.
for every one of the vulgar sort to read Scripturs. This I prove because
unlearned, and unstable persons deprave the Scripture to their own perdition.
Many of the vulgar sort are unlearned, and unstable. Therefore many of them
ought not to read Scripture. The Minor is evident. The Mayor is auerred by S.
Peter 2. c. 3. v. 16. and proved by Hacket. More. Ket Hammont. See Stow Ann.
1561. 1579.
daily experience of new Christ's, new Jews, new heresies daily gathered out of
Scripture. And in truth the Protestants counselling of common people to read
Scripturs, is much like to the Devils persuading of Eve to eat the Apple. He
asked Eve why God forbad her to eat? they ask: why the Church forbids us to
read? And both answering alike: He replyeth you shall not die but become like
Gods. They say you shall not fall into errors, but become like Deuines. And the
event is like in both. Eve by eating fell out of Paradise, and incurred death:
simple people by reading dye in soul, and fall out of the Church.

3. But says Bell. A good should not be Bell p. 107.
taken wholly from the godly for fault of the bad. Answer. The godly are not
debarred from reading Scripture if they be desirous, and judged by their
Pastors to be such as will reap good thereby. Nevertheless they ought not without
license, lest as S. Austin S. Augustine. lib. de vtilit. credend. c. 10. tom. 6.
writes in the like case. Though they hurt not them selfs by reading, they may
hurt others by example. As he that could fly be made to go lest his example
provoke others to so perilous attempt. This (says he) is the providence of
true religion, and delivered from our Ancestors, and to alter this course were
nothing else then to seek a sacriledgious way to true religion. Moreover though
a thing be good in it self, yet it is not good but to such as know how to use
it; But every one of the common people knows not how to use Scripture. For as
Gregory Nazianzen S. Nazianz. orat. Quod non liceat semper and public de Deo
conte^dere. In Apologetico. S. Hierom. epistol. ad Paulin.
writes The word of holy writ is not so base, that it is open to the
unlearned common sort, and seely men creeping as yet upon the ground. And
again To some it is better to be taught by others. And S. Hierom complains
that every one challenges the knowledge of Scripture, and that the chatting
old wife, the doting old men, and the prating Sophister take it in hand. See
Theodoret. lib. 4. c. 17.
What would he say now if he saw Protestants children reading Scripture, and
taught to read english by the Bible? Now let us see Bells objections.

4. Bell alleges S. Chrisostom as affirming Bell p. 103. 104. S. Chrysostom.
proaem. ep. ad Romans
1. That if we read Scripture seriously we shall need no other thing. ^. That
it is a great shame for men charged with wife and children only to hear
sermons, and not withal to study Scripturs. 3. That many evils come of
ignorance of Scripture, as heresies, and dissolute life. Answer. The first
point is not against us, who grant that in reading Scripture we may find al
things necessary. But the question now is whither it be better for every one to
find such things him self out of Scripture or no. As for the second point S.
Chrisostom only says that it is a shame not to exact more diligence of men in
hearing sermons, then in gathering money. At lest (says he) be ready to hear
what others have gathered, and bestovv so much diligence in hearing what is
said as in gathering money. For though it be a shame to exact but so much of
you, yet will we be content if you perform so much. The third point is easily
answered: because he says Innumera mala nata sunt quod scripturae ignorantur.
Christ. sup. untruth 84
not: That much mischeef comes of not reading (as Bell falsely affirms page
105) but of not knowing the Scripture: vz if men will nether read it them selfs,
nor hear it readd and expounded by preachers. Nether could he think that much
mischeef can come of not reading Scripture, if so be it be heard, seeing he
promises to be content if men will hear it.

5. An other place he cites out of S. Bell p. 105. S. Chrysostom. hom. 29. in 9.
c. Genes. tom. 1.
Chrisostom where he exhorts men auscultare lectionem scripturae to harken to
the reading of Scripture. And again: At home to apply them selfs to read
Scripturs. Answer. The first part makes nothing for reading, Differences
betwixt S. Chrysostom and Protestants.
but only for hearing Scripture as is evident. The second exhorts to reading
but 1. not every man woman, and child as Protestants do, but men, and namely
such who (as he have wives, charge of children, and family. And hom. 9. Colos.
Hear you (says he) who live in the world, have care of vviues and children:
who (as he writes conc. 3. de Lazaro) have public offices, mantein wives,
and children. And yet Bell will have Bell p. 110.
him to speak to both sexes as if both sexes had wives. As for women and
children Hom. 9. ad Coloss. and hom. 37. 1. Cor.
he affirms That they ought to be instructed of men.

6. Secondly he exhorts not (as Protestants S. Peter. 2. c. 8. v. 16.
in their faith. For such are like rather to deprave Scripturs to their
perdition (as S. Peter testifyeth) then to reap good by reading them. Thirdly
the secular men S. Chrysostom.
But thou vvilt say they are obscure, what obscurity is this? I pray thee are
there not Histories? Thou know which are clear, what ask thou of the
obscure places? There are a thousand Histories in Scripture tell me one of them.

7. Fourthly he exhorts them not absolutely Proaem. ep. ad Romans
after dishonest shows, and riot, for to withdraw them from such vice, and to
employ their time better, he exhorted them to buy Bybles, and to read the
Scripture; and upon this occasion he said. That the Apostle Homil. 9. Coloss.
cit.
commanded to read the Scriptures diligently. And in like sort seeing their
children to have learnt devilish songs and dances (as Ibid.
he terms them) for to take such from them he bids men to teach them to
sing psalms. But how things ought absolutely to proceed, he utters in these
words unto men. vos oportebat duntaxat a nobis institui, Ibid.
vxores vero a vobis, a vobis and liberos: you ought only to be instructed of
us, but your wives, and children of you. And 1. Corinthians. hom 37. he says: That
S. Paul appointed S Paul.
men to reach their wives, as indeed he did in these words. If they (women)
list learn any thing let them ask their own husbands at home. 1. Corinthians.
14. v. 35. And the like he has 1. Tit. 2. Behold S. Paul bids women learn
of their husbands. Bell bids them read, and learn of Scripture, let women
choose whether they will follow.

8. Fifthly* he exhorts not secular men A main difference betwixt. S.
Chrysostom. and Protestants.
purpose, which Protestants do, to wit upon curiosity, and to become their
own interpreters following their own private spirits, and thereby to judge of
the doctrine of the Church, and their Pastors, whom Christ has given to
expound Scripturs, lest they should be carried away with all wind of doctrine.
Ephesians. 4. v. 14.
But S. Chrysostoms meaning was, that reading Scriptures for their confort (as
he writes hom. 9. cit.) in adversity, for avoiding of vice, and such like holy
purposes, they should expound them according to their Pastors instruction: you
(says See S. Chrysostom. homil. 10. in Joan. and 3. de Lazaro. Origin. 4. in
Leuit. Author imperfecti.
he) ought to be instructed of us, and the Author imperfect. hom. 43. in Math.
amongst other means, which he prescribes to lay men to know the truth of
Scripture, one is to ask the Priests whom he callet^ clauicularios
scripturarum, key keepers of Scripturs. which is the right order prescribed by
God him self Deutr. 17. v. 9. Agg. 2. v. 12. and Malach. Deuter. Aggae. Malach.
2. v. 7. And the contrary course observed by Protestants, makes Christ to
have given us needles Pastors, and Doctors, bidding Ephesians. 4. v. 11. 1. Cor.
12. v. 28. Luc. 10. v. 16.
us hear them as him self, makes every one his own Pastor, and to have the
gift of interpretation contrary to S. Paul 1. Corinthians. 12. v. 10. 30. And by
this which has been said is answered, whatsoever Bell alleges out of S.
Chrysos. page 108. 109. 111. and he sound to be quite against Protestants, and
nothing against Catholics proceedings. And though S. Chrysostom had given far
more lyberty to common Note this.
people to read Scriptures, then now the Church does, as not having then
experience of the harm redounding thereof, what marvel if the Church, finding
by the experience of more then a thousand years since S. Chrysostoms time, that
more harm then good comes thereby, has abridged that license? For as S.
Austin says S. Augustine. tom. 2.
Epist. 50 Experience of many evils makes many medicines to be found.

9. Now let us hear what Bell replyeth Bell p. 116.
against this kind of answering to S. Chrysostoms authority. First he says,
That the doctrine in the pulpit ought to be as true as in the School. This is
true, but not to the purpose, because we reprove not S. Chrysostom of uttering
untruths in the pulpit. Next he says, That the doctrine in the pulpit ought to
be as exact, and absolute as in the school, and the only difference is, that
in the pulpit it has the prick of exhortation, which is wanting in schools.
What Sir? Are these speeches of S. Chrysostom S. Chrysostom. hom. 3. in 2.
Thessalon. Bell p. 108.
cited by your self. What need a sermon? what need a preacher? as exact, and
absolute as can be delivered in schools? Surely then your preaching is needles,
and consequently the fifty pound pension given to you for it, may be well
spared. Yea if the doctrine of pulpit, and schools be of like exactnes, certes
the auditors in both places are of like capacity, and so Bells deuines be no
better scholars then his common people.

10. But little knows he what belongs Bell knovveth not what belongs to a
sermon.
to sermons, who thinks them to differ from school doctrine in nothing but
in exhortation. Are amplifications, hyperboles, and like figures excluded as
well from pulpits, as from schools? Are the same parts prescribed to be in a
lecture by school men, which are by Orators to be in a sermon or oration. Does
Bell exact as strong proofs, and like propriety of words of an orator, or
preacher persuading probably, and accommodating him self to the capacity of
his hearers, as he does of a Philosopher, or Divine teaching dogmatically. Sure
I am that both Aristotle, and common sense teach Aristotel. 1. Ethic.
contrary. But Bell every where shows him self to be one of them, who (as S.
Paul says) understand not what they say, or of what 1. Timoth. 1. v. 7.
they talk.

11. Again suppose that S. Chrysostom had spoken of this point, as exactly in
the pulpit as any Dyuine can in schools: what follows thereof? Forsooth that
Bells proposition page 103.
vz. That al persons of what sex, state, calling, or condition soever, may,
and ought to read Scriptures, and can not otherwise attain to eternal life,
passes exact speech, and albounds of truth. Because S. Chrysostom has no such
exact words: yea the words which Bell wresteth to his purpose S. Chrysostom him
self otherwise expounds as has been showed. And thus much of Bells second
reply to the foresaid answer.

12. Thirdly (says he) David, and the Berheans, had no regard of this popish
distinction of page 116.
more exact speech uttered in schools, then in pulpit. Because David Psalm.
119. v. 9. affirms. That a young man shall cleanse his ways by study,
meditation, and keeping of Gods law. The Berrheans Corrupt. of Script.
searched the Scriptures, and examined the Apostles doctrine by them. Answer.
David Psalm. 118. al. 119. v. 9.
says: A young man shall correct his ways by keeping Gods laws. But study, and
meditation are added by Bell, I wonder he added not also reading. But suppose
David had said. That a young man amendeth his life by reading Scripture, shall we
infer that he thought preachers speak as exactly as Schoolmen? The like reason
is the other. The Berheans examined the Apostles doctrine by Scripture. Ergo
they thought the doctrine of the pulpit as exact as the school: O wit whither
will thou? But Chapt. 11. parag. 4.
of the Berheans fact we shall speak more hereafter.

13. After this Bell falls to entreat in Of vvoemens teaching and reading
Scripture.
particular of woemens teaching, and reading Scriptures, propounding unto him
self this objection of Catholics. S. Paul will have women to learn in
silence, and permits them not to teach. 1. Timoth 2. v. 12. and Bell p. 116.
answers. That though S. Paul permit them not to teach publikly before men,
yet he forbids them not to read Scripture, nor to teach privately Proverb.
31. v. 1. Act. 18. v. 26. 2. Timoth. 1. v. 5. etc. 3. v. 15.
where due circumstances occur, because Bethsabe taught Solomon, Priscilla
expounded Scriptures to Apollo, Eunice, and Lois instructed Timothy in
Scriptures. Here Bell is ashamed to license women to teach publikly before men,
though he was not to make one of them head of the Church, which is a far
greater matter, and necessarily includes authority to teach the Church
publikly: but whether Heretical women how malepert. who dare teach?
Tertull. l. de praescript. Some preached publikly in Germany. Sur. An. 1522.
they may teach publikly before women, or privately before men, and what the
due circumstances are, when they may teach privately, he sets not down.
Nether do I think his Protestant sisters would regard them, who publikly before
men at table, and in their assemblies in houses, take upon them to expound
Scriptures. Surely he should do well to inform his sisters of his
circumstances. But as for S. Paul he gives them no license at al to read, or
to teach Scriptures, (excepting the case of particular inspiration, or of
necessity, when they are permitted also to baptize.) For he in the foresaid
words not only forbids them absolutely to teach, but withal appoints them
to learn, as if this alone were their duty, and belonged to them. And lest we
should think they might learn of them selfs by reading Scriptures, he
explicateth 1. Corinthians. 14. v 35. both of S. Paul.
whom, and where they must learn: vz. of their husbands, and privately at
home. If they list to learn (says he) any thing, let them (not read
Scriptures) ask their husbands at home. Behold women appointed not to teach
either publikly, or privately, but to learn, and that privately at home, and of
their husbands. And the same says S. Chrisostom. S. Chrysostom. S. Hierom.
hom. 9. in epist. ad Coloss. S. Hierom dialog. 1. contr. Pelag. where he
reprehendeth the Pelagians for licensing their women to sing with them, (as
Protestants do now, and Bell passes in silence) and saying they ought to be
skilful in Scripture. But no marvel if Protestants being Luther. de vo coiug.
Assert. artic. 16. vid. sermon. de matrimon. edit. VVitemberbergens. fol. 126. S.
Paul.
so womanish, as they profess they can no more live without them, then without
meat, or drink, and heresies have been ever spread by favor, and help of
women (as S. Hietom says epist. ad Cresiphontem) be more liberal to women,
then the Apostle, who said tt was good not to touch them. 1. Cor. 7. v. 1.

14. The examples alleged by Bell for woemens teaching are partly false,
partly not to the purpose. For Bethsabees words came either from Gods particular
inspiration, and so her teaching makes not to the purpose, or from her own
head, and so she taught not Gods word, though what she said being after
recorded by Solomon, bec^me Gods word. Priscilla is not said act 18. v. 16.
(as Bell affirms) to have expounded Scriptures, but the way of the Lord, to
Apollo: which she might do without expounding Scripture, as S. Ihon prepared
Luc. 1. v. 76. Math. 3. v. 3.
the way of the Lord, without preparing Scripture. That of Eunice, and Lois is
uncertain. For albeit it be said. 2. Timoth. 1. v. 5. That they were faithful
women, and c. 3. v. 15. that Timothy was instructed from his infancy in
Scripture. Yet it is not said he was instructed of them, but might well be
instructed of some other at their procureme^t (as it is usual for to hyre
masters to teach children) wherefore fondly does Bell avouch it to be clear,
and evident by their example, that mothers must teach, and young babes learn
Scripture.

15. But suppose that they taught their child, or grandchild for want of
sufficient men to teach, (as may be presumed, because his father was a Gentil.
Act. 16. v. 13.) what is this to women teaching without al necessity priuarly
whom soever, even their husbands, contrary to the prescript, and otder set
down by S. Paul: yea suppose that Bethsabe, Priscilla, Eunice, and Lois had
without particular inspiration, or necessity (which Bell can not prove) taught
men privately Scriptures, who sees not, but that S. Paul knew better woemens
duty then they, and that we ought rather to follow his prescript, and order,
then the example of two or three women, not the learnedest, nor greatest
Clerks.

16. After this Bell alleges Origin for Bell p. 107.
proof of common peoples reading Scripture, and affirms him to exhort the
people to read Scriptures, because he writes. Origin. homil. 4. in Leuit.
If we can not al things, let us at lest remember that we are now taught, or is
rehearsed in the Church. But Origin here exhorts the people only to
remembering, at lest (says he) Bell p. 111.
those things which are taught and rehearsed this day in the Church, to wit by
ecclesiastical persons. He brings like wise S. Austin exhorting S. Augustine.
sermon 55. de tempore.
his people not only to hear divine lessons in the Church, but also at home to
read them selfs, or to hear others. Whereupon Bell notes. That we must read
Scriptures at home in our houses. Gross absuraity of Bell.
and not hear them read in the Churches, which note is more absurd then I need
refel, yet let the Reader remember it. But S. Austins speech was not to al kind
of men, nor at al times, but to his own people, whom he knew were like to
increase their devotion in the holy time of lent (whereof he spoke) by reading
Scripture. And the like exhortation may any Catholic Bishop make to his
flock, whom he knows not to have, itching ears, and 2. Timoth. 4. v. 4.
not to be soon converted to fables, and yet withal condemn the promiscual
license granted by Bell to al sorts of people, of what sex, state, calling, or
condition soever. For so the unlearned, and unstable be licenced, yea
necessarily ought (says Bell) to read Scripture, page 103. S. Pet. 2. c. 3. v.
16.
though (as S Peter testifyeth) they will deprave it to their own perdition.

17. And such constant Catholics were those men, and women, which (as S.
Hierom S. Hierom. in psalm. 133. Epistol. ad Gaudent. and epist. ad Celantiam.
writes) did strive, who should learn most Scriptures, and whom he
exhorted to learn the Scripture without book, and to have it alvvaies in
their hands, and to teach it their children. For as him self writes epist. ad
Gaudent. cit. what we speak we speak not in general, but in part, nor say
of al, but of some. And epist. ad Paulin. reprehendeth greatly. That every one
should take Scripture in hand. Wherefore if Bell apply S. Hieroms words to al
sorts of persons of what condition Bell like a foolish Physician.
soever, he does not only against the holy Doctors meaning, but shows him
self to be a foolish Physician prescribing the like diet to al kind of
persons: not knowing who can eat milk, but not solid meat (as the Apostle
speaks 1. Corinthians 3. v. 2. Hebr. 5. v. 12. For some (as he says Hebr. 5. v.
11.) are weak to hear some part of Gods word, and much weaker would be to read
it al. Wherefore the Catholic Church (like a prudent nurse) permits such
children, as she sees strong, and able, to read Scripturs, to feed them selfs,
and cut their own meat, but to such as she perceaueth to be weak, and not so
able, she will not grant the like liberty, but cheweth their meat, or cutteth
it her self by preaching, and expou^ding Scriptures to them, lest if they were
their own caruers, they should hurt them selfs. And Protestants like careless
nurses, let al alike carue them selfs, and thereby cut their own fingers, yea
throats, and kill them selfs by taking oftentimes poison instead of meat.

18. And hereupon I must aduettise the Bell p. 112.
Reader of two untruths, which Bell fathereth upon Catholics vz. That they
deem, untruth 85 untruth 86
them most holy, who can by heart no Scripture at al, but abstain from reading
thereof, as from poison of their souls. For ignorance of Scripture in Ignorance
of it self no holiness.
it self we account no holiness at al, and much less deem them most holy
who know lest of Scripture. But great holiness we esteem it, to choose rather
harmles ignorance, then curious, and disobedient skill. As great holiness it had
been in Eve, 10 Donum ipsum vtiliter aliquando ignoratur. S. Augustine. l. 6.
cont. Iul. c. 16.
have made choice rather of ignorance of good, and evil, then of knowledge
thereof. And the like ignorance of Scripture in Catholics we prefer before
Protestants knowledge. For to be thus ignorant (says Tertullian) is better,
lest we know that we should Tertull. l. de praescript.
not. Faith (says he) shall save us, not exercise in Scripture Faith is
commanded, exercise in Scripture consisting in curiosity has glory only in
study of knowledge. Let curiosity give place to faith, let glory yield to
salvation. Thus Tertullian a most ancient writer, whose counsel I would to God
Protestants did follow. And as for Scripture we account it no poison, but the
food of life, and the reading thereof good and wholesome, if it be done as it
should, not upon curiosity, and disobedience to the Churches precept, as the
Aple was good in it self, and the eating thereof had not been hurtful, if it
had not been against Gods commandment.

19. Bell cireth also Theodoret writing. Bell p. 113.
That the Hebrew books are turned into al languages. Theodoret. lib. 5. de
Graecan. affection.
Again, That we may find ditchers, and neatheards, and planters reasoning of
the Trinity, and creation of al things. Answer. That of the Scripturs
translation shall be answered in the next chapter. The other proves no more
then that simple people knew the said mysteries, whereof, he says not, they
read, but reasoned. And S. Gregory Nazianzen. S. Greg. Nazianz. orat. 1. de
Theol.
greatly discommendeth such for it. And by the like reason, might Bell prove
every Catholic to read Scripture. Because (as Bellarmin Bellarm. lib. 2. de
verbo Dei. c. 4.
says truly:) Catholic rusticks, and women, though they understand not the
sentences of Scripture, yet they understand the mysteries of our redemption,
and can reason of them, yea better then many Protestants, who daily read
Scripture. But (says Bell) why are not al permitted Bell p. 115.
to read Scripture, if al can understand therein the mysteries of our
redemption. And like to one that has no thing to do, proves a needles
matter, that the knowledge of the mysteries of our redemption, is necessary,
and sufficient to salvation, though in the next page before he noted that al
things Contradict. 18.
contained in the written word, (which no 18. doubt are more then the
mysteries of our redemption) ^re necessary for all people. But omitting Bells
contradiction: To his argument out of Bellarmin: I answer that Bellarmin
affirms not (as Bell imposes.) untruth 87
That al can understand the mysteries in the Scripture, but rather the
contrary, when he says. That many understand not the sentences of Scripture.
And though al could understand the mysteries in Scriptures, yet al were not to
be permitted to read them, because al have not (as S. Paul writes) their
senses exercised Hebr. 5. v. 14. 1. Cor. 2. v. 5. 1. Cor. 3. v. 1. Romans 12. v.
3. 1. Cor. 3. v. 2. Hebr. 5. v. 12.
to the discerning of good and evil: al are not perfect to have wisdom spoken
amongst them: al are not to be instructed as spiritual, but some as carnal: Al
will not be wise to sobriety, but some more wise then behooves them. Romans 12.
v. 3. Finally al are not capable of solid meat, but some of mikle only.

CHAP. VIII. Of the translation of Scripture into vulgar tongues.
IT is not expedient to have or use commonly Scripture not to be used commonly
in vulgar tongues.
Scriptures in vulgar languages. This is against Bell p. 106. but it follows
of that which has been proved in the former Chapter. For if it be not
expedient absolutely for the vulgar sort to read Scripture, it is not expedient
that it be common in vulgar tongues; lest some like foolish Eve be tempted by
the sight thereof, curiously and against command to read it. Secondly because
nether the Jews, after their language was corrupted by their captivity,
translated the Scripture into their vulgar language. Nor the Church ever
commanded the Scriptures to be translated into every vulgar tongue, but
generally used them in Hebrew, greek, and latin, in which tongs they were
written. As for the English Bybles translated by Protestants, See Conference at
Hampton Court. page 45. 46. 47.
they al hitherto have been naught, as them selfs confess, and are now about a
new translation, which hereafter perhaps will be found as faulty as the former.
Whereby we see that the English faith hitherto has been false, as builded upon
the English Bible, which was false, and consequently The good which
Protestants have gotten by English Bibles.
who dyed in it, dyed in a false faith, and relied upon man's word in steed of
Gods. And this is the true death which common people have incurred, and all the
good they have reaped by reading Scriptures in English, according to the
serpentine counsel of Ministers. For where before they knew so much of Gods
word, as was sufficient to salvation, by reading English Bibles they have read
a lying word, as now after 46. years experience they both see, and confess,
and because they would not content them selfs with knowledge sufficient to
sobriety, and salvation, but as the Apostle S. Paul.
writes Romans 12. v. 3.) be more wise then behooued them, God has sent them
(as the same Apostle says) 2 Thessalonians. 2. v. 11. the operation of error to
believe lying.

2. Against this Bell obiecteth: That the Bell p. 106.
Apostle calls them mad who read the Ghospel 1. Cor. 14. v. 24.
to people in a language unknown to them, and the people also that listen
thereto as Catholics do. Answer. The Apostle is so far from condemning
service of God in a tongue unknown to the hearers, as he says to such a one.
Thou do well. 1. Corinthians. 14. v. 17. But indeed he says, That if Idiots and
infidels hard us so doing they would say we were mad. If all the Church meet
together (says he) Only Idiots and infidels condemn service in an unknown
tongue.
and al speak with tongues, and Idiots or infidels enter, vvil they not say
that you are mad? 1. Corinthians. 14. v. 23. Wherefore not S. Paul, but only
Idiots or infidels condemn the Churches service in an unknown tongue.

3. And if the sacrifice and prayer of Zachary Luc. 1. v. 10. and 11.
(which the people did not so much as hear or see) did greatly profit them,
why may not the sacrifice, and prayers of Priests, which the people both see,
and hear, greatly profit them, though they understand them not. And if Bell will
excuse Zachary, and the Jews, (yea God who commanded it Leuit. 16.) from
madness though they stood without doors, and could nether hear, nor see, and
much les understand the sacrifice, and prayers. Much better (if he please) may
he excuse Catholics who both see, and hear, and parrly understand the
Catholic service. And though Bell scoff at Catholics, listening to the
Ghospel tedde in latin. Yet Origin Origin.
hom. 20. in Iosue writes, That with only hearing Scripture, though we do not
understand The Devils words not understood work evil Ergo Gods words not
understood do good.
it, the poison of naughty spirits, which besiege us, is driven away as it were
with a prayer, and holy spirits are invited to help us. For (says he) If
words of coniuration pronounced, though not understood, work enchantments, how
much more virtue think we have the words of holy Scripture. And if S.
Chrysostom hom. 3. de Lazar. S. Chrysostom.
might say, That though we understand not Scripture, yet ex ipsa lectione multa
nascitur sanctimonia, much holiness rises by very reading. Why may we not say
the like of very hearing? And because Bell urges this objection no father, I
answer it no fuller, who list see more of it, let him read Rhemist. 1. Corinthians.
14. D. Stapleton upon the same place, and Bellar. l. 2. de verb. Dei c. 16.

4. Bell obiecteth out of Theodoret, That page 113. Theodoret. lib. 5. de
Graecan. affection.
the Hebrew books were translated into al languages. This is nothing against
us, who deny not but Scripture has been, and may be, upon just and urgent
causes translated into vulgar languages, so it be not vulgarly used, and common
to al kind of vulgar people: Bell p. 106. untruth 88 Vid. Indic. libror.
prohibit.
And here by the way, I must advertise the Reader of diverse untruths uttered by
Bell, concerning this matter. 1. That the Pope burns Scriptures in vulgar
tongue. This is not so: For he burns only heretical translations, and al
England knows, how current the Rhemists testament is amongst Catholics. 2.
That the Pope excommunicateth al lay untruth 89 untruth 90
men, that reason of matter of faith, or dispute of his power. and cites 6.
decret. lib. 5. cap. Quicunque. Here be two untruths. For nether is there any
word of reasoning of the Popes power, but only of disputing of the Catholic
faith; without touching whereof, we may reason of the Popes power in diverse
ways, as is showed art. 1. cap. 1. Nether forbids he lay men to reason, or
At what time lay men are for bidden to dispute of faith.
dispute of faith with whom-soeuer, or in what case soever, but only with
Heretics (as is evident out of the whole chapter, which instructs
Catholics, how they ought to behave them selfs toward Heretics) and when
Clergy men may dispute, as when that Canon was made they might in all
Christendom. And in this case it is unlawful for lay men to dispute of faith,
both because generally they are not sufficiently S. Greg. Nazianz. orat. 1. de
Theol. in Apologet. and orat. Quod^ non liceat semper and public de Deo
contedere.
learned to defend the faith against Heretics, as also because disputing of
faith is proper them, to whom preaching belongs, who are not lay but Clergy
men. Whereupon said S. Gregory Nazianz. It is not every ones part to dispute of
God. This is not so base matter, or pertaining to them, who as yet creeping on
the ground, are busyed with earthly study. Every one may think of God, but not
dispute of God. Thus S. Gregory for his great knowledge surnamed the Divine,
whose counsel I suppose every wise man will sooner follow then Babbling Bell. And
the civil Cod. de Sum. Trin.
law punishes al lay men, that publikly dispute of faith. 3. That Priests
oftentimes understand untruth 91
not the latin words of absolution. This he might better object to his fellow
ministers, See Bells lack of latin art 5 c. 4. paragr. 10. and art. 2. c. 4.
parag. 13. and ar^. 7. c. 9. parag. 19. untruth 92
made oftentimes of cobblers, tinkers, and taylers, who may thank the Lord (as
one of them did) that they know nothing of the Romish tongue. 4. That in the
Churches we read unto the common people latin sermons. In deed we read such in
our service, but read them to the common people no more, then we read the Mass
to them. But read both in honor, and service to God, who understands as well
latin as english. And thus much touching Scripture: now let us come to
Traditions.

CHAP. IX. Of Apostolical Traditions whether there be any or none.
OF the Traditions which the Church manteineth, some were instituted by Christ,
some by his Apostles by the inspiration of the holy Ghost, and others by the
Church it self. The question is whether there by any of the two former kinds
of Traditions instituted, or delivered by the Apostles, and thereupon called
Apostolical what ^ind of traditions Bell impugn^th.
without writing, which concern things (as Bell says in the beginning of this
article page 86.) necessary to man's salvation. For though (as I said before)
the Scripture contain al Chapt. 1.
things, which are necessary to be known actually of every one, yet because
every one is bound to deny no point of christian faith, but at lest vertually,
and implicitly to believe al, such traditions, as concern matters of faith, or
manners, may (as Bell speaks) be said to concern things necessary to man's
salvation. This supposed, I affirm with the uniform consent of al holy
Fathers, that there are such traditions, and it follows of that which we
proved in the first chapter, that the Scripture contains not actually al
points of christian faith, and otherwise I prove it: because S. Paul 2. S.
Paul. S. Basil. de Spirit. c. 29. S. Chrysostom. 2. Thessalon. hom. 4. S.
Epiphan. haer. 61. S. Damascenus 4. de fid. c. 17.
These. 2. v. 15. says Hold the Traditions which you have learned, whether it
be by word, or by our epistle, therefore he delivered some Traditions only by
word as S. Basil. S Chrisostom. S. Epiphanius S. Damascen out of this place do
gather.

2. Secondly S. Ihon the last writer of Scripture said. Having many things to
write to 3. Joan. v. 13.
you, I would not by paper, and ink. Ergo many things which were to be told
to christians, S. Shon left unwritten, yea thought it not expedient to write
them. Bell answers Bell p. 117.
That the Apostles taught no needful doctrine, which they did not after commit
to vvriting. This answer insinuates, that the Apostles taught some needles
matter, contrary to S. Paul 2. Timoth. 2, Tit. 3. and that, which S. Paul
commanded the Thessalonicenses to hold, and S. Ihon said he had to write, were
needles things, which is but to blaspheme the Apostles. Thirdly in the law of
nature there were traditions as is evident, and testified Genesis 18. v. 19.
Likewise in time of the Conference at Hampton Court. p. 68. Valor. Max. lib. 3.
c. 319. de scauro and vario seuero, S. Dionis. l. 1. eccles. hier. c. 1. S.
Ignat. ep. ad Heron. S. Iren. lib. 3. c. 3. S. Ciprian. l. 2. epist. 3. S.
Basil. lib. de Spirit. 6. 27. 29.
law written as English Protestants confess: why not therefore in time of the
Ghospel?

3. Fourthly I will propose to the Reader a choice some what like to that which a
Roman made to his Citizens, when being accused of his adversary in a long
oration, he stepped up and said, my adversary affirms and I deny it, whether
believe you citizens. And so in few words rejected his adversaries long
accusation. For S. Dionisius Areopag. S. Ignatius, both scholars of the
Apostles, S. Ireney, S. Cyprian, S. Basil. S. Chrisostom S. Epiphanius S.
Hierom. S. S. Chrysostom. 2. Thessal. hom. 4. S. Epiphan. haer. 61. S. Hierom.
dial. contr. Lucif. S. Augustine. epist 118. and l. 10. de Genen. ad lit. c. 23.
Austin and others affirm, that there are Apostolical Traditions: Bell and some
few new start up Heretics deny it. Whether believe you Christians? This choice
is far above that of the Roman. For there was but one against one, yea ones
bare denial against the others proofs. But here are many against few: Saints
against (to say the lest) ordinary fellows: Doctors of Gods Church, against
unlearned Ministers: Catholics against Heretics: yea manifest proofs against
bare denyals. And shall we not especially in a matter of fact (as is whether the
Apostles left any unwritten Traditions or no) believe many, most holy, most
learned, most incorrupt, most ancient witnesses, yea whereof some were eye
witnesses of the matter, before a few, unlearned, unconstant, iangling, new
fellows? S. Hierom. epist 61. c. 9. S. Augustine. de Symbolo ad Catechumen.
Ruffin. in Symbol. S. Hierom. con. Heluid. S. Augustine. haer. 55. S. Epiphan.
haer. 78. Locis supra cit. etc. 3.


4. Moreover whence have we the Apostles Creed, but by Tradition, as testify S.
Hierom, S. Austin, and Ruffinus: whence the perpetual virginity of our B. Lady,
as appears by S. Hierom, S. Austin, S. Epiphanius: whence the lawful
transferring the Sabbath day from Saturday to Sunday, but by Tradition. Whence
many other things, as testify S. Hierom S. Dionis. S. Iren. S. Cyptian,
Tertull. Origin, S. Basil S. Epiphan, S. Chrisost, S. Hierom, S. Austin, S.
Ambrose, and others, but by Tradition. But especially, whence have we the Bible
it self? Whence have we that every book chapter, and verse of it is Gods
word, and no one sentence therein corrupted in all these 1600. years? where have
we that the Gospel bearing the name of S. Thomas, who was an Apostle, and eye
witness of Christ's actions, is not as well, or better Christ's Ghospel, then that
which carries the name of S. Luke, and was written only by hearesay Luc. 1. v.
2. S. Hierom. de Scriptur. eccles. in Luca. Bell brings six answers.
as is professed in the very beginning, but by Tradition? This reason so
courseth Bell up and down, as like fox many times vnearthed, even for wearines
he runs into the hunters toil, granting what the argument would.

5. His first answer is That there is great difference Bell p. 134.
betwixt the primmatiue Church, and the Church of late days. For the Apostles
heard Christ's doctrine, savv his miracles, and were replenished with the holy
Ghost, and consequently must needs be fit vvitnesses of all that Christ did, and
taught, which adjuncts the Church of Rome has not. Here Bell blasphemeth
Christ's Church of late days, auouching her to be nether replenished with the
holy Ghost, Symbol. Apostol.
contrary to our Creed, professing her to be holy, and Christ's promise, that
the holy Ghost should remain with her for ever. Nor to be a Joan. 14. v. 16.
fit witness of his truth, contrary to S. Paul, affirming her to be the pillar,
and strength of 1. Timoth. 3. v. 15.
truth; and to Gods, sending her to preach, and testify his truth to infidels,
to whom if she be no fit witness, the fault is in God to send such insufficient
witnesses, as infidels are not bound to believe.

6. And Bell is far deceived in thinking, that seeing, or hearing make men
sufficient witnesses of divine, and infallible truth, or What makes
sufficient vvitnesses of Gods truth.
the want of them makes insufficient. For not humane sense, which is subject
to error, and deceit, but Gods divine assistance, makes men infallible, and
sufficient witnesses of his truth, and the want of this, insufficient. Wherefore
S. Matthew was as sufficient a witness of Christ's nativity, which he saw not, as
of other things he saw, and S. Luke as sufficient a witness of the things he
wrote by hear say, as S. Ihon who saw, and heard almost al he wrote because
they were equally assisted by God in their writing. And in like sort the Church
of what time soever is equally a sufficient, and infallible witness of Christ's
truth, though she be not an eye, or ear witness of his speeches, and actions,
as the primative Church was. Because Math. 28. v. 20. Joan. 14. Math. 16.
Christ's promises of his presence, and the holy Ghosts assistance, and that the
gates of Hell should not prevail against her, appertain equally to the Church
of al times:

7. But suppose that the present Church could not be a fit witness as the
primative Bell answers not to the purpose.
was, what is this to the argument, that proves necessity of Tradition,
because without testimony of the Church, we can not discern true Scripture
from false. This Bell should either grant, or deny, if he meant to answer to the
purpose, and not tell us of an other matter, vz. That the present Church can be
no fit witness, whereof (if it were true) would follow, that we can believe no
Scripture at al, seeing we have no other infallible external witness of
Scripture.

8. His second answer is: That as Papists Bell p. 134.
admit the Jews Tradition of the old Testament, to be Gods word, and vvithal
refuse many other Traditions of theirs: So Protestants admit this Tradition Bell
admits tradition.
(of the Bible to be Gods word) and reject al other. And page 128. He dares
not deny Traditions absolutely, yea admits them, when they be consonant to
Scripture. Behold the silly fox in the toil. We contend against Protestants,
That Scripture is not sufficient to prove al points of Christian faith, but
that Tradition is necessary for some, and Bell here confesses it, where is now
the downeful of Popery? Me thinks. it is become the down* fall of Protestantry.
Where is now Bells first proposition? page 86. and 88.
That Scripture contains in it every doctrine necessary to man's salvation.
Where is now that page 87.
we must not add to Gods written word, if this Tradition must needs be
added thereto? where is now, that the present Church can be page 134.
not fit witness, if by her testimony, we come to know Gods truth? Where is now
the curse, which S. Paul (as thou say page 117.) pronounces Bell cursed of S.
Paul by his own judgment.
against him, that preaches any doctrine not contained in Scipture? where is
now. That Scripture is the sole, and only rule of faith?

9 But seeing the fox is in the toil, we page 128.
must needs have him preach, and tell us of whom he first had this Tradition.
Perhaps he will confess with his brother Dove, that Protestants had the Bible
as Gods word Dove of Recusancy. page 13.
from Papists. Sure I am, he can name no other of whom he first had it.
Likewise he must tell us. How he believes this Tradition. Whether as fallible
and humane truth, or as infallible and divine. If as fallible, and humane,
surely he can believe nothing in the Bible as divine truth* If as infallible,
and divine truth, surely the Papists Church for whose only testimony (speaking
of outward testimonies) Protestants first believe: as an infallible truth that
the Bible was Gods word) has infallible authority.

10. Nether is Bells comparison true. For we believe not the old testament to be
Gods word, for any Tradition, which the Jews have, but which the Catholic
Church has from the Apostles, and their successors, even (as S. Austin
writes) from the very Cont. epist. fundam. c. 4. to. 6.
seat of Peter, to whom our Lord commanded his sheep to feed, to this present
Bishop, who delivered unto the Church, and she to us, as well the old as the
new testament for Gods word. Let Bell if he list believe the old testament, for
the tradition of Jews, and if he can not find the like uninterrupted
tradition for the new testament, but in the Papists Church, let him confess,
that for her authoriry he believes this tradition as infallible truth, and I
ask no more.

11. But what shift finds he for this notorious contradiction, in admitting
one tradition, and before impugning traditions in general. Forsooth because as
he says (and it is his fourth solution) When Protestants Bell p. 135.
say Scripturs contain al things necessary to salvation, they speak of
Scripturs already agreed upon Protestants admit tradition.
to be such, and so exclude not this tradition, but vertually include it in
their assertion: Behold the fox again in the toil, admitting one tradition
full sore against his will. O violence of truth (says S. Austin l. cont.
Donatist. post Collar. c. 24.) stronger then any rack, or torment for to wring
out confession. For here Bell in name of Protestants confesses, that
Protestants overthrow their own arguments against traditions.
they must needs admit one tradition, which not only overthrows al their
arguments against other traditions, For why may they add one tradition to Gods
written word, rather then more? why may they believe any thing out of
Scripture, and no more? why is one tradition equal to Gods written word, and
no more? How is one tradition certain and no more: But also shows that either
they receive this tradition for no authority at al, but only because it
pleases them, or that they believe it as infallible verity, for the authority
which they account but fallible. For I ask why they believe this tradition? If
they answer, because it comes from God. I demand how they know that? Not by
the Bible as is evident. If by the Church; then I ask why they believe the
Church, rather in this tradition, then in other, and whether they believe her
testimony to be infallible in this point or no: And whatsoever they answer,
they must needs fall into the toil.

12. His third solution is. That the new Bell p. 135.
Testament is but an exposition of the old, and therefore may be tried and
discerned by the same. But Sir? will you indeed try the new testament? Bell vvil
examine Scriptures.
will you take upon you to judge Gods word? Surely this pride exceeds
Lucifers, this is to make your self judge above the highest. And if you will
try Gods word, by what will you try the old testament? Surely by tradition, or
by nothing. Thus we have heard Bell twice plainly confessing some tradition to
be necessary, and now the third time supposing it. For magna est vis veritatis
and praeualet.

13. Yet because his stomach could not page 135 al. 117.
digest any one tradition at al, he flies to a Fifth solution, commonly given
by Protestants. vz. That Canonical Scripture may be discerned Psalm. 119. v.
105. 1. Pe^t. 1. v. 19. 2. Cor. 5. v. 3. 1. Cor. 2. v. 15. 1. Joan. 2. v. 27.
Joan. 10. v. 3. 4. 1. Reg. 3.
from not Canonical by themselves, as light is from darkness. This he proves
because Gods word is called a light, and a lantherne, said to shine to men
spiritual men said to judge al things, the unction to teach al things, and
Christ's sheep said to hear, and know his voice. But this is easily refelled.
First because though Samuel were a faithful, and holy man, and God spoke thrice
to him, yet he took his word for man's word, until Hely the high Priest told
him it was Gods word 1. Reg. 3. Gedeon was faithful, and yet knew not at first
that it was God that spoke unto him by an Iudic. 6.
Angel, and therefore demanded a miracle in confirmation of it Iudic. 6. The
like may be said of Manues wife Iud. 13. and perhaps of Manue him self. For
though in his prayer he profess that God had sent the Angel, whom he took to
be a man, yet does he not profess that God had sent him especially, and
perticulerly to do that message, and seeing he knew not, that it was an Angel,
until he ascended in the flame of the sacrifice, yea seemed to doubt whether
his words would prove true, when he said. If thy speech be fulfilled, likely it
is that he was not certain that it was Gods word, before he was certain,
that it was his Angel. Likewise S. Peter was faithful, and yet at Act. 12.
first he knew not, that it was an Angel that spoke, and delivered him act. 12.

14. Secondly the true sense, and meaning of Gods word, is not so evident to
the faithful, for to discern it from the false sense, as light is discerned
from darkness. Ergo, nether Gods true word is so evidently discerned by them
from the false word. The consequence I prove, because Gods word consists
more in his meaning then in letters. Let us not think (says S. Hierom) S.
Hierom. in Calat. 1. and dialog. con. Lucif.
that the Ghospel is in the words of Scripturs, but in the sense. Again:
Scripturs consist not in reading but in understanding. And therefore if it be
discerned by it self, it is rather discerned by the sense, then by the letters
or words. The antecedent I shall prove hereafter, and it is evident by the
example of the Apostles, who though they were faithful oftentimes understood
not Christ's meaning, especially when he spoke in parables, or of his passion by
the example of the faithful Eunuch, and by the testimony of S. Peter 2. Pet. 3.
v. 16.

15. Thirdly the distinction of Scripturs from not Scriptures, is not so
evident, as the distinction of light from darkness is. Ergo, they are not so
easily discerned. The consequence is evident. The Antecedent I prove, because
then no man could err in it, as none can err in the distinction of light from
darkness. Bell says. That only faithful can discern Scriptures. But this
conuinceth that their distinction is not so evident as that of light from
darkness: for this al men, yea beasts of sight can discern. Nether can Faith
can not discern any thing clearly.
faith be needful to discern light, or any thing which is so evident, because
as S. Paul says Hebr. 11. v. 1. It is an argument of things not appearing, and
it breadeth certainty, not euidency in the believer.

16. Beside if faithful could as clearly discern Scriptures, as they can
light, they should no sooner here a sentence of Scripture, then they should
discern it to be Scripture, as they no sooner see light, then they discern it
from darkness, which experience teaches to be false: yea Luther a faithful man
(in Bells opinion) could not discern, yea could not believe S. James epistle
Luther. edit. Iennen. Surius Ann. 1522.
to be canonical, but called it absolutely a strawish thing, as his books first
printed, and diverse others testify, and Whitaker Whitaker. lib. 1. contr.
Duraeum p. 22.
dare not deny, yea confesses that he calls it strawish in respect of other
epistles, which is more then to deny it to be Gods word. Wherefore let Bell make
his choice, whether Luther was not faithful, or S. James epistle not so
evidently discerned by the faithful to be Gods word as light is. Finally
Protestants admit one Tradition, as necessary to discern Scriptures, or Bell
lies page 135. Ergo: Scriptures are not so evidently discerned by them selves
as light is. For what need is there of an other thing to discern light, or
any thing so evident.

17. Nether have Bells arguments any difficulty to answer. For Gods word is
called a lantherne, or light, not because it is so evident, as light is; but
because, being once believed to be Gods word, it shows us the way to heaven,
as light does to earthly places, and thereupon it is called of the Psalmist a
lantherne to our feet. And for the Psalm. 118.
same cause faith is called light, though it be an obscure knowledge. Hebr. 11.
v. 1. and by it we see God only in aenigmate: 1. Cor. 13. v. 12. and not
clearly. And in like sort S. Paul 2. Corinthians. 4. v. 4. (where Bell cites 2. Corinthians. 4. v. 4.
amiss. c. 5.) says the Ghospel shines, not because it is evident, and
clear, but because it expels the ignorance of infidelity, which
metaphorically is called darkness. That of the spiritual man 1. Corinthians. 2. v.
15. is nothing to the purpose, both because al faithful are not spiritual, but
some carnal 1. Corinthians. 3. v. 1. 2. 3. and Galath. 6. v. 1. and therefore may we
better infer that the Ghospel is not evident to al faithful: As also because S.
Paul explicateth, not by what means the spiritual man judges al things,
whether by the euidency of the things (as Bell would have him to judge Scripture)
or by some outward testimony. Moreover S. Ihon says the unction teaches 3.
Joan. 2. v. 27.
us al things, which we deny not, but no where, that it alone teaches us
without the testimony of the Church, which is that we deny, and Bell should
prove. Finally Christ's sheep hear, and know his voice Joan. 10. Joan. 10. v.
3. 4.
v. 3 4 which no man doubts of, but the question is whether they hear it of
him self alone, or of the Church, and whether they know it by it self, or by
testimony of the Church, to which purpose this place serves nothing.

18. Bells sixth solution is, That we believe Bell p. 136.
not the Scripture to be Gods word, because the Church teaches us so, but
because it is of it self axiopistos worthy of credit, and God inwardly moves
us to believe it. That we believe it not for the Churches authority he proves.
Because else the formal object of our belief, and last resolution therein,
should not be the first verity, God him self, but man, which is contrary to S.
Dionis. and S. Thomas S. Dionis. de divine. nom. c. 7. S. Thom. 2. 2. q. 1. art.
1.
Aquinas, who teach. That the formal object of our faith is the first verity,
and S. Thom. adds, That faith believes nothing, but because it is revealed
of God: Also because S. Austin says, That man learneth S. Augustine. tractat.
3. in Joan. to. 9.
not of man, that outward teachings are some helps, and admonitions, but who
teaches the heart has his chair in heaven. That the Scripture is of it self
axiopistos, or worthy of credit, we deny not, only we deny, that by it self
without testimony of the Church, we can know that it is so worthy. Nether deny
we, that God inwardly moves our hearts to believe it, only we say that thereto
he uses also the testimony of the holy Church, nor ordinarily moves any
thereto, without the external testimony of the Church. wherefore albeit it be
most true that we believe the Scripture to be Gods word, because God moves us
thereto: yet false it is to deny, that we believe it not also, because the
Church does teach it. Because Gods inward motion, and the Churches outward
testimony, are no opposite causes, and impossible to concur to one, and the
same effect; but the second is subordinate to the first, and can not work
without it, as the first (though it can) does not work this effect without the
second. Wherefore well said S. Austin Non crederem Euangelio nisi Cont. epist.
fundam. c. 4. to. 6.
me Ecclesiae authoritas commoueret. I would not believe the Ghospel, unless the
authority of the Church did commoue me thereto.

19. This place of S. Austin so stingeth page 137.
Bell, as he wyndeth every way to avoid it. First he tells us that there is a
great difference Bells lack of latin.
between mouere and commouere: because mouere is to move apart by it self,
commouere to move together with an other. This difference is false. For nether
is mouere to move apart, but absolutely, as it is common to moving apart, or
with an other. Nether, though commouere do more properly signify moving with an
other, is it always so taken, as infinite places both of holy and profane
writers can testify: yea Bell him self with in 8. lines page 138.
after englisheth it absolutely moving. But suppose it were: what infers Bell
thereupon. Forsooth that S. Austins meaning is nothing else, but that the
authority of the Church did outwardly concur with the inward motion of God,
to bring him to believe the Ghospel. That the Church did jointly concur to S.
Austins faith of the Ghospel is certain, and so Bell translating commouere for
jointly moving I refuse not. But false it is that the Church did jointly
concur with God, only to the bringing of S. Austin to the faith of the
Ghospel, and not to the conseruing him in the same faith. Because c. 4. he
says, That if thou percase can find any manifest S. Austin.
thing in the Ghospel of Maniches Apostleship, thou shall weaken the authority
of Catholics with me, who bid me believe not thee, which authority being
weakened, now nether can I believe the Ghospel. Behold the authority of
Catholics conserved S. Austin in the faith of the Ghospel, without which he
professes that he could believe the Ghospel no longer. And again. Amongst
other things, which most justly as he says hold him in the Church he
reckons authority, and succession in the Church.

20. But do you think that Bell will stand to his expounding of commouere, and
granting the Church to concur with the inward motion of the holy Ghost to
bring a man to believe the Ghospel? No surely: For in the next page he tells
us. That the page 138.
authority of the Church, did move (behold jointly moving forgotten) S. Austin
to hear the Ghospel preached, and to give some humane credit unto it. For
divine faith proceeds not from the outward teachings of man, as I have proved
(says he) already out of S. Austin. This denial of divine faith to proceed
from outward teaching of man, is directly against Scripture, and S. Austin. For
Romans 10. v. S Paul. Roman. 10.
17. Faith comes of hearing (the preacher.) The Colossians learnt the grace
of Christ of Epaphoras. Coloss. 1. v. 7. The Thessalonians Coloss. 1.
learnt the Traditions, which they should keep by speech and letter: 2 Thessalonians.
2. Thessalon. 2. 1. Corinthians. 4. Philemon.
2. v. 15 S. Paul begat the Corinthians in the Ghospel. 1. Corinthians. 4. v. 15.
He begat Onesimus: Philem. v. 11. He and Apollo were Gods helpers in bringing
the Corinthians to Christ's faith. 1. Corinthians. 3. v. 9. They that succor
preachers are called cooperators of the truth 3. Joan. v. 8. and therefore 3.
Joan. 8.
much more the preachers them selfs. And if divine faith proceed not at al
from outward teaching of men, why did Christ send his Apostles to teach al
nations? Math. Math. 28.
28. v. 19. why appointed he in his Church some teachers for consummating of
Saints Ephesians. Ephesians. 4.
4. v. 11, Why was S Paul a teacher of Gentiles? 1. Timoth. 2. v. 7. others?
act. 13 v. 4. How 2. Timoth.
could S. Paul bestovv some spiritual grace upon Act. 13.
the Romans. Romans 1. v. 11. Did Christ send these Apostles to teach human
faith? was Romans 1.
S. Ihon Baptist sent before Christ to give humane knowledge of salvation to
his people? Luc. 1. v. 77. Lastly nothing is more Luc. 1.
frequent in Scripture then that one man teaches an other, and surely it
means not of humane learning, or belief. For what cares the Sctipture for
that, but of divine, and such as brings to heaven and salvation, such as made
Jews compunct in heart. act. 2. v. 37. such as disposed Gentiles Act. 2. and 10.
to receive the holy Ghost. act. 10. v. 44.

21. Likewise it is against S. Austin: First he thinks (as Bell confesses)
the Church to concur, with the inward motion of the holy Ghost to the faith
of the Ghospel: But faith of the Ghospel, to which the holy Ghost inwardly
concurreth is divine. Ergo to this the Church concurreth: Besides S. Austin
affirms, that authority holds Cont. epist. fundam. c. 4. tom. 6.
him in the Catholic Church. And that if the authority of Catholics were
weakened, he would not believe the Ghospel, which he would never say, if his
divine faith did not depend upon the Catholics authority. Moreover what more
evident then the holy Fathers, when they speak of believing the Ghospel, they
mean of divine, and Christian faith. And what faith should S. Austin mean of,
but of such faith as he exhorted the Maniches unto, which was divine. And in
the place alleged by Bell, he calls outward teaching help to faith, and
only means, that a man can not learn faith of man alone, without al inward
teaching of God. And therefore adds. That if he be not within, who teaches
the Tract. 3. in 1. Joan. 10. 9.
heart, in vain is our sound, and where Gods inspiration is not, there in vain
words sound outwardly. which is most true, and nothing against us. Lastly it is
against reason. For the authority of Gods Church is not mere humane, but in
some sort divine, as a witness by God him self appointed to testify his truth.
And therefore he said, who hears Luc. 10. v. 16.
you hears me: therefore the faith that proceeds from such authority is not
humane.

22. Wherefore Bell not trusting much to this shift flies to an other: vz. That
S. Austin said not these words of him self, as he was then a christian, but
as he had been in times past a Maniche. This he proves: Because in the same
chapter he says. That the authority of untruth 93 1. untruth 94 2. untruth 95
3.
the Ghospel is above the authority of the Church, and in the chapter before.
That the truth of Scriptures must be preferred before authority, consent of
nations, and the name of Catholic, and promises to yield to Maniches
doctrine, if he shall be able to prove it out of Scripture. But both this
answer, and proofs are most falsely avouched upon S Austin. For if he had meant
the foresaid words of him self only, as when he was a Manichist, he would not
have said, Non crederem nisi commoueret etc. I would not believe, unless the
Church did commoue me: But non credidissem, nisi commouisset: I had not or would
not have believed, unless the Church had commoued me. Which Bell well marking,
made him say so in english, though he had not said it in latin. Besides False
translat. 12.
in the same chapter he adds. Qua (authoritate Catholicorum) infirmata iam
nec potero Euangelio credere. which (authority of Catholics) being
discredited, I shall not be able now (mark Bell) to believe the Ghospel.
Moreover cap. 4. he said, That besides other motives, the authority of
Catholics (tenet) does hold me in the lap of the Church.

23. Bells proofs are nothing but his own untruths. For though it be true. That
the Scripture is of greater authority then the Church, yet nether does S.
Austin say it in that place, nether makes it any thing against us. For albeit
the Scripturs be in it self of greater authority, yet the authority of the
Church is both infallible, and more evident to me. And what marvel if for an
infallible authority more evident, I believe an other though greater, yet not
so manifest. As S. Ihon was sent to give testimony of Christ Joan. 1 v. 8. and
yet far inferior to Christ. Nether says S. Austin. That truth of Scripture is
to be preferred before authority and consent of Catholics. But Bell added the
word Scripturs as though S. Austin meant, that their truth could be known,
without the authority of Catholics, or be opposite unto it, which he
manifestly denies. Nether means he of the truth of Scripturs (which the
Manichist against whom he wrote rejected almost wholly, and he him self
professes he could S. Austin speaks of most manifest and evident truth and
such is not the Scriptures.
not take for truth, if it were contrary to Catholics) but of any known
truth in general, which he says (and truly) is to be preferred before al
authority opposite unto it, because such authority is not infallible, but false,
and deceitful. And therefore he speaks upon supposition, that if it were true
(which other where he avouches to be impossible) that Manichists taught truth,
and Catholics error, then their truth were to be preferred before the name
of Catholics, consent of nations, and authority begun with miracles,
nourished with hope, increased with charity, established with antiquity, and
succession of Priests, even from the seat of Peter, to whom our Lord after his
resurrection commanded his sheep to be fed unto this present Bishop. But says
the glorious Saint unto maniches, and I after him to Protestants. Amongst you
only sounds the promise of truth, which if it were so manifest, as it could
not be doubted of, it were to be preferred before al things, that hold me in
the Catholic Church.

24. His third untruth of S. Austins promise, is directly contrary to S. Austin
in the S. Austin would not believe Maniche though he had manifest Scripture.
Sup. paragr. 18.
same place. If (says he) thou shall read any manifest thing for Manichey out
of the Ghospel, I vvil believe nether them nor thee. Not them because they lied
to me of thee. Not thee, because thou bring me that Scripture, which I
believed through them who have lied: As for Bells reasons to prove, that we
believe nothing with divine faith for authority of the Church, they are easily
answered. For though the formal object of faith be the first verity, yet not
simply as it is in it self, but as it is proposed unto us by the Church. And
therefore though we believe nothing, but because it is spoken, and revealed by
God, yet because he speaks not immediately to us by him self, but by the
mouth of his Church, whom who so hears, hears God, and Luc. 10. v. 16. 1 Thessalonians. c. 2. v. 13.
whose word is not man's word, but truly Gods word. therefore faith is not
without the testimony of the Church. As for S. Austins authority it has been
answered before: as also his arguments. which Bell brings against Traditions.

CHAP. X. Of the certainty of Apostolical Traditions.
THERE are certain and undoubted Apostolical traditions. This is against Bell
page 128 129. etc. But I prove it, because the traditions of the Bible to be
Gods word, of the perpetual virginity of our B. Lady, of the transferring of
the Sabbath, and such like, are certain and undoubted. Besides if in the law of
nature, and Moses, traditions were keapt certain, why not in the law of
grace. But more evident will the conclusion be, if we descend to particular
traditions, which Bell endeuoreth Bell p. 128. 129.
to prove uncertain. First he setteth-downe this Proposition. Unwritten
traditions are so uncertain as the best learned papists are at great
conte^tion about them This he proves in the tradition of Easter, about which
contended S. Victor P. and the Bishops of Asia above 1400 years ago both
earnestly alleging Apostolical traditions. Likewise S. Anicetus, and S.
Policarpe who lived al within 200. years after Christ, when the Church was in
good estate, and stained with fevv, or no corruptions.

2. Mark good Reader his conclusion, and proofs thereof, and thou will need no
more to assure thy self of the truth of Roman religion: His conclusion is:
That traditions are so uncertain as the learnedest Papists contend about them.
This he proves: because S. Victor P. contended with the Bishops of Asia. S.
Policarpe with S. Anicetus P. Surely he means that these men were Papists, or
else his conclusion is unproven. And consequently Papists, and Popery were 1400.
years ago within 200. Popery confessed to be vvish in 200. years after Christ.
Great Britany converted first to Popery.
years after Christ, when the Church (as he says) was in good estate. And if
P. Victor were a Papist, then was also his immediate predecessor S. Eleutherius,
who sent S. Fugatius and Damian to convert Britany, and consequently this Island
was first converted from Paganism to Popery. Moreover both sides earnestly
alleged Apostolical tradition, and stowtly defended the same says Bell, Ergo:
nether side was Protestant, and Bell against al Gods Church which lived within
200. years after Christ
both agreed against him, thar there are Apostolical traditions, and that they
are of great weight, seeing such great Saints so long ago did so stowtly
defend them, on what side now is Bell, who stowtly oppugneth, what Saints with all Gods Church so long ago defended? what need more proof of traditions or of
Papistry? Surely Bell quasi sorex suo iudicio periit. Here he has bewraied him
self to be against al Saints, that were within 200, years after Christ, and
against the Church, when she was in good estate.

3. But now to Bells argument. The tradition of keeping Easter was uncertain
200 years after Christ. Ergo it is now. Answer. Eusebius. lib. 5. c. 23. 25. and
l. 3. de vit. Constan. c. 18. 19. Nicephor. l. 4. c. 36. Theodoret. l. 2. hist.
c. 9. Epiphan. haer. 70. Tripart. lib. 9. c. 38. Epist. 2. Petri 2. and 3.
Joan. Epist. Iudae and ad Hebraeos. Apocalipsis See S. Hierom. in Script.
ecclesiasticis. Et Eusebius. l. 5. c. 3.
This tradition was then uncertain only in Asia, and certain in the rest of
Christendom, as is evident by the Councels then held in Rome, Palestine,
Pontus, France, Achaia, who al accepted this tradition, as did after the first
general Council in Nice. And though it had been then uncertain, Bell could no
more infer it to be so now, then he can infer the same of many parts of the
Bible, which both then, and long after were doubted of, and yet accepted now of
Protestants. But well may I infer, if S. Policarpe and his fellows erred in not
accepting one popish tradition, much more Bell in accepting none.

4. But (says Bell) S. Policarpe Policrates, page 129.
and other Bishops did in those days make no more account of the Popes
opinion, then of an other man's, did think them selfs his equals in government,
and that he defended an error, and withstood his proceedings. Here is false
conueiance to join S. Policarp, who lived, and dyed in union, Eusebius. lib. ^.
c. 24. and Iren. apud ipsum.
and communion of the Pope, and before this controversy was defyned, with
Policrates, and his fellows, who were excommunicated, as declining (says
Eusebius) into Loc. cit.
heresy for their obstinacy in error, after the whole Church had defyned the
contrary. These indeed (as heretics use to do) made no account of the Popes
opinion, or judgment, but condemned him of error, and withstood his
proceedings, though they never thought them selfs his equals, as Bell without al
truth, or proof affirms, yea Polecrates when he says, I will not fear S.
Hierom. de script. eccles. in Papia. Nicephor. l. 4. c. 37.
them, who threaten me, and I must obey God more then men, shows him self to
be under the Popes obedience, but supposing him self to defend truth, feared
not his excommunication. But how much al Christendom at that time, and ever
since made account of the Popes sentence, appears by that (as Eusebius, and
others write) they al followed Eusebius. sup.
it, and condemned them as Heretics who withstood it. And S. Policarp so
esteemed Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 24. and 5. Ireney apud ipsum. Nicephor. l. 3. c.
30.
it, as that he came to Rome to confer with the Pope about that matter, and
doubtless would have subscribed to his sentence, if it had been pronounced in his
days, as his scholar S. Ireney did, by whom we may gather his masters
account of the Church of Rome. He therefore lib. 3. cap. 3. S. Iren.
calls Rome the greatest and antientest Church founded by S. Peter, and Paul,
and that by Tradition which it has from the Apostles, and always keapeth, by
succession of Bishops we confound (says he) al them that gather otherwise then
they should, and that al Churches must recur to Rome for her more potent
principality.

5. The second Tradition is that of keeping Bell p. 130.
lent which (says Bell) is not Apostolical: because S. Chrisostom writes. That
Christ S. Chrysostom. hom. 47. in Math. to. 2. Eusebius. lib. 5. c. 24.
bid us not imitat his fast, but be humble: Nor certain because Eusebius out of
Ireney writes That in his time some thought we ought to fast one day, others
two, others more and non nulli forty, which variety of fasting began not now
first, or in our days, but long before, I think by them, who keeping not
simply what was (traditum) delivered from the beginning, did afterward fall into
an other custom either of negligence, or of ignorance. Here Bell shows his
lack of judgment in citing a place clearly against him self. For here S
Ireney, and Eusebius after him clearly affirm. That at the beginning there was
one manner of fasting lent appointed, though some afterward either of ignorance
or negligence did break it, which proves not the said Tradition to be
uncertain in the whole Church, unless Bell will impute the fault of some few to
the whole. And of the Roman Church, she (says Ireney lib 3. cap. 3.) always
keapt the S. Ireney. Ex histor. tripart. lib. 9. c. 38.
Apostles Tradition. And by this is answered what he brings out of Socrates
touching the diversity of time, and meat used in fasting lent. Albeit what
Socrates says of the Roman Church fasting but three weeks before Easter, and
not on Saturday is an untruth. For they fasted 40. days, as witness S. Leo.
sermon. 12. de Quadrag. and S. Gregory S. Leo. S. Gregory. S. Innocent. S.
Augustine.
hom. 16. in Euang. And likewise Saterdaies as testify S. Innocent. epist. ad
Decent. and S. Austin epist. 86. and 118. where also he alleges S. Ambrose.

6. And that lent is an Apostolical Tradition, not only S. Hierom epist. ad
Marcel. S. Hierom. S. Ambros.
witnesses, and S. Ambrose sermon. 25. 34. and 36. says it was commanded by
Christ: and S Austin haer. 53. accounted the Aerians S. Augustine. S. Epiphan.
haer. 75.
heretics for denying the set fast (of lent, and others) to be solemnly kept.
But it is evident also because evermore it has been observed, as appears by
S. Ignatius epistol. ad S. Ignatius. S. Iteney. Origin. S. Basil. S.
Chrysostom. S. Augustine. S. Leo. S. Gregory. S. Grego. Nazianzen. in sanct.
lauaerum. ^oncil. Lao^i^cen. Can. 10.
Philip. S. Ireney loc. cit. Origin. hom. 10. Leuit. Basil. orat. 2. de
ieiunio: Chrysostom hom. 1. in Genesis and 11. hom. 16. and 73. ad populum. S.
Austin epist. 118. and 119. and sermon. de quadrag. Leo and Gregor. loc. cit. And
what S. Chrysostom meant in the words cited by Bell, he him self explicateth in
these words. Because I am sorry (says he) if neglecting the rest you think
fasting sufficient to save you, which is the meanest of the virtues. So that he
meant that Christ bid us not only fast lent, but more especially be humble, See
S. Hierom. ep. ad Celantiam. Math. 9. v. 13. Ose c. 6. v. 6. untruth 96 Bell p.
130.
and mild. The like speech used Christ when he said: I will have mercy, and not
sacrifice vz. only, and rather then mercy. And so we may say with S. Chrysostom
he commanded not fasting, but humility. And Bell uses his old trade in
auouching us to think it greater sin to eat flesh in lent, then to commit
adultery, murder, or perjury. Whereas every Catholic knows these sins to
be against the law of nature, and lawful in no case whatsoever, and the other
against a positive precept, which according to the general custom of the
Church, binds none under 21. or above 60. years old, no sick body, no
laboring man, no woeman bearing, or nursing children, besides many other
particular cases wherein fasting in lent is dispensed withal.

7. Eight Traditions more Bell reckons Bell p. 131. 132. 133.
as of celebrating in unleavened bread, of Christ's age, when he dyed, of his
reign on earth after judgment, of Zacharias that was slain betwixt the
Temple, and the altar, of the Popes teaching successively the self some doctrine
with S. Peter, of our ladies conception without original sin, of Constantins
baptism at Rome, and lastly of honoring Saints: But these are either falsely
alleged for traditions. or little, or nothing to the purpose. For that of
celebrating Leo 9. ep. ad Michaelem Pattiarcha^. c. 29. Eugen. 4. in decreto
vnionis. These tvvoe were no traditions but erroneous opinions. See S. Hierom.
de scriptur. in Padia. Bell impugneth histories in steed of Traditions. Origin.
in 25. Math. Basil. homil. de human. Christ^ General. Nissen. orat. de Christ.
natiu. Cyrill. cont. Anthropo. This is no Tradition but if it be meant of the
Popes teaching as he is Pope it is in Scripture if as a prinat man, it is an
opinion.
brating in unleavened bread, concerns no thing necessary to man's salvation,
as testify P Leo 9. and P. Eugenius 4. and therefore is none of these which Bell
undertook in the beginning of this article to impugn. And though S. Ireney
were deceived about Christ's age when he suffered, and Papias about his reign
after judgment, that makes not much to the purpose For well may the Church be
certain of Traditions, though one Father were mistaken about one Tradition, and
an other about an other. That of Zachary that he was S. Ihon Baptists father
who was so slain S. Basil reports not as an Apostolical, but an historical
Tradition, and though S Hierom deny it, yet Origin, S. Greg. Nissen, S. Cyril
and Valentinian affirm it.

8. As for the Popes successively teaching the self same doctrine with S. Peter,
the truth thereof unto S Victor P. time about the year 187. is testified by S.
Ireney lib. 3. r. 3. until S Cornelius P. about the year 251. by S. Cyprian
lib. 1. epist. 3 unto S. Lucius 1 P. about 257. by him self epist. ad Episc.
Hispan. and Gall. until S. Dammasus P. about the year 380 by S. Hierom epist.
ad Damas. until S. Leo 1 Pope about 450 by Theodoret epistol. ad Renatum: until
S. Gelasius 1. P. about 496. by him self epist. ad S. Ireney. S. Cyprian. S
Lucius. S. Hierom. S. Theodoret. S. Gelasius 2. S. Ihon. 2. S. Gregory. Agatho.
Nicolas 1.
Anast. until S. Ihon 2. Pope about the year 533. by him self epist. ad Justin.
until S. Gregory the great about the year 600. by him self lib. 6. epist. 37
until Pope Agatho about the year 681. by him self in his epistle approved 6.
Synod. act 8. and 18. until P. Nicolas about the year 860. by him self epist.
ad Michael. Imperat. until P. Leo 9 about Leo 9.
the year 1050. by him self epistol. ad Petr. Antioch. until Pope Innocent. 2.
about the year 1140. is insinuated by S Bernard epist. S. Bernard.
190. And the same may be proved of the rest of the Popes since. Now let us see
whom Bell opposes to these so many, so holy, so ancient witnesses.

9 Forsooth Nicolas de Lyra a late friar. Bell p. 132. Lyra in cap. 16. Math.
Tit. 3. v. 11.
O truly said of S. Paul, that Heretics are condemned by their own
judgments. For who condemns not him self if he will believe one late writer,
before so many, so holy, so ancient. And much more, if that Author be found to
affirm nothing to the contrary For he only says, That Summi Pontifices
inueniuntur apostatasse a side. Popes have apostated from the faith. which is a
far different thing. For well may one be an Apostata, Math. 26. v 70. Council.
Sinuessan. Damasus i^ Marcelli^^.
and yet teach the doctrine of his Predecessor. As S Peter denied his master,
and yet taught no contrary doctrine. S. Marcellin offered sacrifice to Idols,
and yet taught no Idolatry. Caiphas murdered Joan. 11. v. 51. S. Augustine. l.
4. de doctr. Christian. c. 27. to. 3.
Christ, and yet prophesied. For as S. Austin said of some Bishops that they
durst not teach heresy, lest they should leese their Bishopriks. So we might
say of Popes, that though some of them had apostated from Christ, yet they
durst not teach heresy, or apostasy, lest they should be deposed, but might with
a wicked, and deceitful heart (to use S. Austins words) preach things, which are
right, and true, or (as S. Paul speaks) preach Philip. 1. v. 18.
Christ upon occasion not upon truth. But indeed never did any Pope in his heart
apostatat from Christ.

10. That point of our ladies conception Bell impugneth an opinion for tradition.
without sin is no Tradition, but a pious, and probable opinion of many, and
denied of diverse Catholics, as of S. Thomas, and S Bernard whom Bell him self
cites and others. And as for Constantins baptism at Bell impugneth a History
in steed of tradition. page 133.
Rome it concerns no matter of salvation, but is a mere historical
Tradition, sufficiently proved by Card. Baronius Annal. Ann. 314. and unawares
contested by Bell him self when he says, that he has seen at Rome the font,
and that Constantin is worthily See Nicephor. lib. 7. c. 35.
called great. For why should that font be conserved so long, but as a monument
of so memorable a christning. How can Constantin be worthily surnamed great of
Christians. if at his death he communicated with Arians, and was baptized of
them at Nicomedia, as their fellow heretik Eusebius first reported to purchase
credit to his heresy. If this had been so, he should rather have been syrnamed
of Catholics the Apostata, or Heretic.

11. The last tradition of honoring Saints Bell p. 133.
(Bell says) made some to honor Heretics for Saints as Platina (says he)
writes of the Platina in Bonif. 8.
corpse of Herman an heretic honored as Saints relics at Ferrara for 20.
years together: Answer untruth 97
How Apostolical a thing the honoring of Saints is, Bellarmin shows lib. de
Sanct. beatit. c. 19. Where besides Scripturs, and Councels he proves it by the
testimony of 30. Fathers, whereof 25 lived above a thousand years ago. But is
not this a strange metamorphosis, to make the error of common people a popish
Tradition. Beside Platina affirms no such thing him self, but only, that
some others write so. But nether he nor any other write, that it rose of popish
Tradition. That is Bells accustomed use of addition. And therefore where he
notes danger in believing Tradition, he might have noted danger in crediting
his own relation. Yea what danger is in not believing Roman Tradition,
appears both by the testimony of Fathers before cited, and by the example of
Policrates and his fellows the Quartadecimans, and by S. Cyprian,
Quartadecimans are Heretics ex Epiphan. haer. 50. and 70. Nicephor. l. 4. c.
39. August. haer. 29. Socrates lib. 5. c. 22. Tripartita hist. Vincent. Lytin.
and his followers the Donatists reproved only by Roman Tradition. As
testifyeth Tripartit lib. 9. c. 38. and Vincent Lyrinen: But suppose that they
of Ferrara had upon Tradition taken occasion to commit Idolatry. Shall we reject
al things whereof men take occasion to offend? So we might reject Christ who was
set unto the ruin of many Luc. 2. v. 34. and by whom the Jews took occasion
of scandal: So we might reject Scripturs, by which heretics have taken occasion
he heresy: Sun and Moon because Gentiles have by them fallen into Idolatry.
Cannot Bell distinguish between use, and abuse of Traditions, betwixt scandal
given and taken. Thus much of the certainty of Tradtions: Now let us come to
the examination of them.

CHAP. XI. Of the examination of Traditions.
APostolical Traditions are not to be examined by Scripture. This is against
Bell page 117. but evident. Because Apostolical ^el p. 117
Tradition is the Apostles word, their S. Paul. ^. Luke.
word, is Gods word 1 Thessalonians. 2. v. 16. But Gods word is not to be examined at
al: Ergo: nether is Apostolical Tradition. Well might the Church at first
examine a Tradition, whether it were Apostolical or no (as she did examine
diverse parts of the Bible whither they were Scripture or no) but finding it to
be Apostolical, she could no more examine it by the Bible, then she can examine
one part of the Bible by an other. And Bell in saying That the new testament may
Bell p. 135. al. 117.
be examined by the old shows him self rather to be a Jew then a Christian.
For how dare he examine that which is certain to be divine truth? Or how can he
examine the new testament by the old, if he be not more certain of the old then
of the new. But how Traditions ought to be proved hear Tertullian. Tertullian.
lib. de Corona.
It can not seem none, or a doubtful fault against Custom, which is to be
defended for it name sake, and is sufficiently authorized by protection of
consent. Plainly reason is to be enquired, but so as the Custom be retained,
not to destroy it but to uphold it That thou may observe it more, when thou
art sure of the reason of it. But what a thing is it that one shall call Custom
in question, when he has fallen from it.

2. But (says Bell) Scriptures are called canonical Bell p. 117.
because they be the rule of faith. Therefore al things are to be examined by
them. And for this cause (says he) Esaias sent us to the Law and testimony
Esaiae 8.
to try the truth. Malachias bid us be myndful Malach. 4. Psalm. 119. 2. Pet.
1. Joan. 5. Math. 22. Act. 17. 1. Joan. 4. Gal. 1.
of Moises law: David said Gods word is a lathern: S. Peter a shyning light.
For this cause Christ exhorted the Jews to read Scripturs, and said the
Pharisees erred, because they knew not the Scripturs. The Berheans examined S.
Paul's doctrine, S. Ihon bid try the spirits: S. Paul pronounced him accursed
That preached any doctrine not contained in Scripture as S. Austin and S. Basil
expound him. S. August. l. 3. cont. Petil. c. 6. S. Basil. sum. 72 c. 1. Bible
only Canonical Scripture, but not it alone Canonical. Sup. c. 2. parag. 1. and
7. etc. 9. paragr. 17.


3. Answer. The Bible alone is called Canonical Scripture, because it alone of
al Scripturs the Church follows as an infallible rule in believing, or
defyning any thing. But it nether is, nor is called the only Canon of faith. In
the rest Bell affirms, but proves not that that was the cause why the
Scripture said so. As for the places of Esaias. Malachy, David and S. Peter they
have been answered before. As for exhortation of Christ, I might deny that he
there exhorted the Jews to read Scripture, but Scrutamini Scripturas. See S.
Gyrill. l. 3. in Joan. c. 4.
affirmed that they did read them, because they thought they contained life.
But suppose he did exhort them to read Scripturs for to find whether he were
the Messiah or no, whero^ as he says there, they give testimony, what is this
for trying of al matters by them. Can Bell infer an universal proposition of
one singular? That of the Pharisees Corrupt. of Script.
contains two corruptions of Scripturs. For neither did Christ say, The
Pharases, power of God,) but ignorance both Math. 22. v. 29.
of Scripture, and of Gods power: you err (says he) knovving nether
Scripturs, nor the power of God. So if they had known Gods power, though it had
not been by Scripture but by Tradition, or revelation (as Job and Job 19. v. 25.
the faithful uncircumcised did) they had not erred about the resurrection.
Beside, the resurrection is a particular matter, and evidently testified in
Scripture, what proves this concerning al points of faith?

4. As for the Berhaeans whom Bell will have to have examined the truth of S.
Paul's Act. 17.
doctrine: I ask of him whither they were faithful whilst they examined it, or
faithles? If faithles, why proposes he them to us as an example to imitat? If
he will follow them let him confess him self to want faith, and none will
discommend him for examining either Traditions, or Scripture; For in infidels
such examination is some disposition to faith, but in the faithful an argument
of doubt, and distrust. If faithful? how could they examine, whither that were
true or no, which they assuredly believed to be divine truth? Wherefore they
examined not the truth of S. Paul's doctrine. For they received it How the
Berhaeans examined S. Paul's doctrine.
(says S. Luke) with all greedines, and believed: but did for confirmation and
increase of their faith, search the Scripturs whether these things were so or
no, vz in Scripturs, that is fortold in Scripturs; And this kind of examining
Traditions we disalow not.

5. As for S. Ihon: He bid us try doubtful What S. Ihon bid us try. 1. Joan.
4.
spirits, but not Apostolical spirits, or Traditions. Besides he bid us not try
them only by Scripture, and therefore he makes nothing for Bells purpose.
Finally as for S. Paul he accursed not (as S Austin notes S. Augustine. ^o. 9.
tract 98. in Joan) him that should preach more then he had done. For so he
should prejudice him self, who coueted to return to the Thessalonians to
preach more then 1 Thessalonians. 3. v. 10.
he had done, and to supply (as he writes the points which wanted to their
faith. But only such as preach things beside (vz quite) How S. Paul under
stood the word beside Gal. 1. v. 2.
that Ghospel which he had preached, which things v. 6 and 7. he calls an
other Ghospel inuerting Christ's Ghospel. Such were the cirrumcision, and
observation of Jewish ceremonies, against which he disputes in the whole
epistle. But what is this against Apostolical Traditions, are they a second
Ghospel? do they inuert Christ's Ghospel? are they Jewish ceremonies.

6. Beside S. Paul nether speaks of Scripture, S. Paul speaks not of
Scripture but of his own preaching.
nor can be understood of it alone. For when he says (besides that which we
have euangelized to you) he nether had written any thing before to the
Galathians; Nor then, nor after writ to them al points of Christian faith. And
therefore when he speaks The like says S. Ignat epist. ad Heron. of those
that teach praeter eae quae traditl sunt.
of his own euangelizing both in time before the writing of that epistle, and
unto the Galathians, evident it is he meant not of euangelizing by only
writing, but rather of euangelizing by word of mouth, because before the
writing of that epistle, he had euangelized to the Galathians only by word of
mouth, and of that euangelizing he speaks, which before times he had used to
them. And so this place makes more for us then for Bell.

7. As for S. Austin, and S. Basil they say not That S. Paul meant of
euangelizing by only Scripture, but out of this place infer, that nothing is to
be preached which is beside Scripture, in that sense wherein S. Paul used the
word (Beside) vz: so beside as it is an other Ghospel, inuerting Christ's
Ghospel, which they rightly inferred. For what is so beside Scripture, as it is
a new Ghospel, and inuerteth Christ's Ghospel, is in like sort beside that which
S. Paul had euangelized to the Galathians, and no Apostolical Tradition, but a
cursed doctrine. And thus much of Bells proofs out of Scripture touching
examination of Traditions; Now let us see his proofs out of Fathers.

CHAP. XII. Bells arguments out of holy Fathers about the examination of
Traditions ansvvered.
FIRST he says, That in S. Cyprians days Bell p. 117. untruth 98 untruth 99
nether Tradition was a sufficient proof of doctrine, nor the Popes definitive
sentence a rule of faith. These be both untruths. For that Tradition was a
sufficient proof of doctrine in S. Cyprians days is evident by the testimony
of his master Tertullian, S. Ireney, and S. Dionis. before his time, and S.
Basil, S. Sup. cap. 4. S. Augustine. l 2. de bapt. c. 9. Tripartit. l. 9. c. 38.
Vincent. Lyrin. Socrates lib. 5. c. 22. Te pacatum reddat traditio. Basil. hom.
contr. Sabellian. Chrysostom. hom. 42. 2. ad Thessa^. Cap. cit. parag. 6.
Chrisostom and others after his time before cited. And by his own words
before alleged, and the decyding of two controversies only by Tradition, the
one in his own time about the baptism of heretics, the other before his time
about the time of Easter. Nether did he ever doubt that true Tradition was
sufficient proof of doctrine of which S. Chrisostom said. It is Tradition,
seek no more: but thought (and truly) that humane, and mistaken Tradition was
no sufficient rule, as has been showed before. And that the Popes definitive
sentence in his time was a sufficient rule of faith is evident by his own
saying. That false faith can Cyprian. lib. 4. epistol. 8. calls Rome the
Matrice and root of the Catholic Church. S. Cyprian. l. 1. epist. 3. S.
Augustine. l. 6. de bapt. contr. Donat c. 2. S. Cyprian. ep. ad Pompei^m. Eusebius.
lib. 7. hist. c. 3. Vincent. Lyrin. S. Augustine. lib. de vnic. bapt. cap. 13.
See c. 4. parag 7. and 8. S. Hieroms account of the Popes decree.
have no access to S. Peter's chair, and that Heresies, and Schisms rise not,
but because it is not thought that there is for the time one Priest in the
Church, and one judge in Christ's room, and by his own subscribing at the last
to the Popes commandment, though he thought it had been contrary to Scripture.
Nether did he ever withstand the Popes definitive sentence. For P. Steeuen did
not defyne as a matter of faith, but only commanded that such should not be
rebaptized, but the Tradition observed, as both S. Cyprian: Eusebius. Vincent
Lyrinen: and others testify. And this command S. Cyprian did not at first obey,
wherein he offended as S. Austin writes though after he did* as the same S.
Austin does likewise testify. And no doubt but he thought as well of the Popes
decrees as S Hierom did, when he wrote to P. Damasus: Decree I pray if it
please you I will not fear to say three Hypostases if you bid. And requested him
for Christ's sake to give authority, either to affirm or deny three hypostases.
And dare thou Bell make no account of the Popes sentence, when so great and
holy a Doctor, so highly esteemed it, as without it he durst nether affirm,
nor deny three hypostases, and with it doubted not to do either.

2. After this Bell alleges the practice Bell p. 118.
of Fathers, who when the Arians (says he) would not admit the word homousion
because it untruth 100.
was not in Scripture (mark how he confesses him self to imitate Arians) the
Fathers did not prove it by Tradition, nor say that many unwritten things are
to be believed. This is not so. For S. Athanasius says that the Bishops of the
Nicen S. Athan. apud Theodoret. l. 1. c. 8. See epist. ad Epictetum. l. cit.
Apud Athanas. and Theodoret. l. cit. S. Grego. Nazianz. orat. 2. de Theolog.
Council did not invent that word, but set it down testimonio patrum by
testimony of their Fathers, and Eusebius though an Arian confesses the same.
And S. Gregory Nazian. writing against the Arians says, that it should suffice
us that our Fathers thought not as they do; and the same argument uses also S.
Athanasius writing against the Apollinarists. And how untruly he affirms,
that the Fathers did not say many unwritten things are to be believed, I refer
my self to their testimonies alleged above cap. 4. But says Bell S.
Athanasius proved homousion, because though the word was not in Scripture the
sense was. A goodly reason: He proved it out of Scripture, therefore not out of
Tradition; as if one should say. He proved it out of S. Ihon therefore not out
of S. Paul.

3. Origin (says Bell) hom. 25. in Math. Bell p. 118.
and hom. 1. in 1. Hierem counsels us to try al doctrins by Scripture. This
is untrue. untruth 101. Origin.
For Origin speaks not of al, but only of our opinions, and doctrins. Our
opinions and expositions (says he) have no credit without their testimonies.
Again: We must allege the sense of Scripture, for testimony of all the words
we utter: Terrullian calling that truth which is first, and false which is
after, makes nothing to his purpose. Next he alleges S. Austin saying, That
we must not consent even S. Augustine. lib. de unit. eccles. c. 10. to. 7.
to Catholic Bishops error, or private opinion against Scripture. Error
against Scripture is not to be followed. Ergo: nether Apostolical Traditions
contested by the whole Church. Surely Bell has great facility in inferring
quodlibet ex quolibet: He brings also S. Chrisostom calling Gods laws a S.
Chrysostom. hom. 13. in 2. Cor. to. 4.
most exact rule, and bidding us learn not what this, or that man thinks, and
of these things enquire these points also out of Scripture. Answer. S.
Chrysostoms meaning is, that Gods word is most exact in the matter whereof he
talked: vz. whither poverty be to be preferred before riches, in which matter
we ought (says he) to leave the opinions of this, or that worldly man, who
prefer riches, but seek what the Scripture says of it. And Bell to make him
False translat. 13.
seem to say, That al truth is to be sought out of Scripture, translated these
words, Deque his a Scripturis haec etiam inquirite, thus: Search the truth out
of the Scriptures Englishing nether de his, nor haec.

4. After S. Chrysostom he cites two page 120. Chap 5. parag. 5.
sentences out of Victoria cited by him, and answered by us before. To whom he
adioyneth Canus teaching. That Priests are not Canus l. 3. de loc. c. vlt.
to be heard unless they teach according to Gods law. Certain: And then
infers, That Papists teach plainly that no doctrine is to be received, which
is not tried by Gods word. True also, if Council. Trident. sess. 18. in saluo
coductu dato Protestantibus.
Trent prescribed to the Protestants. But they will try divine truth contained
not only in Traditions, but also in Scripture, and that part by which they will
try the rest, they will expound according to their own private spirits, which is
to make them selfs rule and judges of al: wherefore vainly does Bell profess to
agree with the Pope in all controversies page 120.
if he will be tried by Gods word. For unless Bell be made judge, and tryer both
of Gods word, and of his meaning, or (as Protestants speak) unless he may judge
which is Scripture, and which is the true sense, there must nether trial, nor
judgment pass. For unless Protestants may have all the law in their own hands
they will accept no judgment.

5. But because Bellarmin grants, that Bellarm. lib. 2. de Council. c. 52.
singuli Episcopi: al Bishops severally may err, and sometime do err, and
dissent one from an other, so that we know not which of them is to be followed:
Bell thinks page 121.
that he has a great catch. yet remembering him self better, that though
Catholics grant that every Bishop severally may err, yet deny that they can
err al, when they are gathered in a Synod confirmed by the Pope, he takes
occasion to make a long digression about Councels.

CHAP. XIII. Of the authority of late general Councels.
GENERAL Councels in these our days are as certain as before times. This is
against Bell page 123. saying, that in our days they are like a nose of wax,
and as uncertain as the wind. And because he denies not, but that general
Councels in some times have been certain (forsooth such as defyned nothing
contrary to Protestantisme) I will only prove, that they are now as certain as
ever. First because Christ promyseth, that he would be in the midst of them
that are gathered in his name Math. 18. v. 20. S. Math.
That the holy Ghost should teach us al truth. John. 16. That the gates of hell
should not prevail S. John. v. ^3. S. Math.
against his Church. Math. 16. v. 18. which promises are limited to no certain
time, but are extended (as he says Math. vlt.) even to the end of the world.
Likewise Christ's command of hearing his Church. Math. S. Math. v. 17. S. Luc.
18. of hearing preachers sent by him. Luc. 10. of obeying our Prelates and
being subject to them. Hebr. 13. v. 17. binds as well S. Paul.
in our days as before times. wherefore either the Church, Preachers, and
Prelates teaching in a general Council in our days, can not err, or Christ in
our days commands us to believe heresy and lies.

2. Secondly the present Church of our days has authority to decyde
controversies in faith: Ergo, we be bound to obey her decision: Ergo, it is no
lie. The Antecedent is an article of Protestants faith. Article 39. Art. 20.
The first consequence I prove, because who resists power in matters
belonging to the power refisteth Gods ordinance, and purchases damnation to
him self. Roman. 13. verse. 2. 3. which being true of temporal power, and
concerning wordly matters, much more true it is of spiritual power, and in
matters of faith, and salvation: The second consequence is evident. For God who
is truth it self, and can not lie, can not bind us (especially See S. Gregory
lib. 1. epist. 24.
under pain of damnation) to believe and follow lies. Thirdly as Protestants
except against the Councels in their times, al heretics may except against the
Councels of their times, and so none shall See l. Marciani. C. de sum. Trinit.
be condemned as Heretics, no Council certain, but al things remain as
uncertain, as if there had never been any Council at al, which is to take away
the end of calling Councels. For if they can not make things certain, to what
purpose are they gathered. Finally Bell can give no sufficient reason, why
general Councels be not as certain now as ever, as shall appear by the answer
to this his objection.

3. He obiecteth that Bellarmin lib. 2. de Council. cap. 11. writes: that is
the true decree of the counsel, which is made of the greater part. But Canus
says lib. 5. de locis Canus.
cap. 4. q. 2. That voices prevail not with us, as in humane assemblies.
Again, these matters of faith are judged not by number, but by weight. And the
gravity and authority of the Pope is it, which gives weight to Councels. Ergo,
(says Bell) there can be no certainty in Bell p. 121. 122.
Councels. A goodly reason sutely: Two Catholic writers agree not whether
should be accounted the decree of a council, if the greater number of Bishops
should define against the Pope, and the lesser number of Bishops. Ergo no
council in our days is certain. As if nothing were certain, if two
Catholics disagree about it. Will Bell allow me to argue so against
Protestants? I believe I should find scarce any one point of faith certain
amongst them. But he should rather hane inferred: Bellarmin, Canus, and al
Catholic writers agree, that it is the decree of the Council, and certain
truth, which the greater part of Bishops defines, and the Pope confirms.
Ergo general councels in our days are certain; Namely that of Trent, in which
the most, yea al (as appears by their subscriptions) defyned, the Pope
confirmed.

4. I might omit a friuolcus objection, which he makes against Bellarmin of
contradiction. Because Bellarmin says, that Bellarm. lib. 2. de council. c. 18.
the assembly of Bishops in lawful councels is an assembly of Judges, and
their decrees l^ws necessarily to be followed. And yet affirms that it is al
one for Councels to be reproved by the Pope, and Cap. 11.
to do against his sentence: For though Bellarmin affirm Bishops to be
Judges, and their judgment to be necessarily followed as law. Yet as himself
explicateth cap. 11. it is not necessarily to be followed antequam accedat
sententia Summi Pontificis. before it be confirmed by the Pope. As the Peers
in parliament are Judges, and their acts necessary to be followed, but not
before they be confirmed by the Prince, who in not confirming them,
disannulleth them.

5. And because Bellarmin writes, that Bellarm. lib. 2. de council. c. 19.
one cause why the Pope was never personally in any Council of the East was,
least he being then the Emperors temporal subject should be placed under the
Emperor. Bell infers both that the Pope is proud, page 122.
and that the East Church never acknowledged his supremacy. But as for pride it
is none, to honor (as S. Paul did) his ministry, Romans 11. v. 14.
to challendge the place due to his dignity, and authority. For (as S. Gregory
a S. Gregor. lib. 4. epist. 36. ad Eulagium.
most humble man said) Let us keep humility in mind, and yet conserve the
dignity of our order in honor. No marvel then if Popes being head and
presidents of Councels, where matters of Church and faith are handled, and
Emperors (as S. Gregory Nazianz^ S. Gregor. Nazianz. orat. 14. ad sub.
speaks) but sheep of his flock, and subject to his power, and tribunal, did
look to sit there above Emperors. Yet the great Emperor Theodosius highly
commended Theodoret. lib. 5. c. 18.
S. Ambrose for putting him out of the Chauncel: And in the Nicene Counsel
Eusebius. lib. 3. de vit. Constant.
Constantine that worthy Emperor entered last, and after all the Bishops were
set; nor did not sit in a great throne beseeming his estate, but in a low
chair, and that not before he had craved pardon, and asked leave of the
Bishops, as Theodoret whom Bell Theodoret. lib. 1. c 7. Nicephor. l. 1. c. 19.
calls a Saint, Nicephorus, and others do testify. Albeit the Nouatian
heretic Sozomene, who lies much (as writes S. Sozome. lib. 1. c. 19.
^regor. l. 6. epist. 31. Nouel. 9. andC. de sum. Trinit. lib. vltImo. Council.
Calced. act. 1. Athanas. apol. 2. Socrates lib. 2. cap. 13. Sext. Sinod. act.
18. Theodoret. lib. 5. c. 9. Euap. lib. 1. c. 4. Martian. ep. ad Leonem. Gelas.
ep. ad Episcopum Dordon. Council. Nicen. epist. ad ^^^^est.
Gregory) do seem to say, that he sat at the top of the Council, in a most
great throane.

6. As for the Eastern churches acknowledging the Popes primacy, it is so
manifest, as Justinian Emperor of the East writes. No man doubts but that
at Rome is Summi Pontificatus apex: the top of the priesthood. And if more
witnesses need in so evident a matter, certain it is, that the general
councels in the East were called, and their decrees confirmed by the Pope. And
the Council of Calcedon professes in plain terms, that omnis primatus, al
primacy belonged to the Archbishop of Rome, and the same acknowledge the
Grecians in the seventh synod in the Councels of Lateran, Lions, and
Florence. Likewise some Patriarchs Leo epist. 59. 60. 61. Conc. Constant. ep.
ad Damas. Council. Calced. act. 16. 7. Sinod. act. 2. Conc. Lateran. 13. c. 15.
Council. Florent. in lit. vnionis. Council. Lugdun. in 6. tit. de election. cap.
vbi periculum. Baron. 536. Council. Calced. act. 3. Gelas. ep. ad Faustum.
Sozom. lib. 3. c. 7. Baron. Ann. 372. Baron. 342. Chrysostom. epist. ad Innocent.
Ex lit. Leon. and Valent. ad Theodos. Athanas. ep. ad Felicem. Basil. ep. 52.
ad Athan. Chrisost. ep. ad Innocen. Theodoret. epist. ad Renatum. Gregor. l. 7.
epist. 63.
of the East (to omit Bishops) were by the Popes authority created, as
Anatholius of Constantinople by Pope Leo epist. 53. ad Pulcheriam, others
deposed as Anthimus of Constant: Dioscorus, and Timothy of Alexandria, and
Peeter of Antioche. Other being deposed or vexed appealed to Popes, as S.
Athanasius and Peter of Alexandria, S. Paul, S. Chrisostom: and S. Flauian of
Constantinople, Paulin of Antioch: which evidently proves the Popes Primacy
over them. Finally to omit the testimony of S. Athanasius, S, Basil, S.
Chrisostom, Theodoret, and other Doctors and saints of the East church, both
the Emperor and Patriarche of Constantinople did in S. Gregory's time (as he
witnesses) daily profess the church of Constantinople to be under the Roman
Sea.

7. Now to his reason. Bellarmin says. The Emperor of the East would have
sat in Council above the Pope. Ergo, the East church never acknowledged his
primacy. Who sees not the manifold weakness of this reason. First I deny, that
any religious Emperor of the East would have sat above the Pope in Council,
as appears by the fact of the two great Emperors Constantin, and Theodosius
before rehearsed, and by Justinius humbling himself unto the Pope prostrate on
the ground, Justinians See Art. 1. c. 6. parag. 6.
lowly adoring, and Justinian the second his kissing of his feeet. Is it likely
that these who so honored the Pope out of Council, would have sat above him
in Council? And albeit one grecian Emperor, after both religion, and reverence
thereto was decayed in Greece, and the whole nation fallen into Schism and
heresy, did in the Counsel of Florence attempt Council. Florent. in initio.
to sit above the Pope, yet the like is not to be thought of other religious
Christian Emperors, whereof, diverse as Bell testifyeth art. 1. page 17. humbled
themselves, and yielded even their sovereign rights to Popes. Yea the self
same Emperor, who by some evil suggestion would have sat above the Pope,
would at his first meeting with him have kneeled unto him. But suppose Council.
Florent. sup.
that the grecian Emperors, by reason of their temporal superiority, would
have sitten above the Pope, Do they therefore deny his spiritual primacy? No
more surely then a gentleman does deny his pastors spiritual authority over
him, because he will sit above him. Did not the grecians even in the Florentin
Council, where they attempted In lit. vnionis.
to place the Emperor above the Pope, defyne together with the Latins, that
the Bishop of Rome has primatum in vniuersum orbem, primacy over the whole
world.

8. In two other matters Bell iniuryeth Bell p. 127.
the Pope, auouching, that he would never show his face in any Council. And
that he shamefully untruth 102. untruth 103.
abuses the world, because he can not communicate his supreme judicial
authority to his Legates, and will approve nothing decreed in Council, unless it
be agreeable to that which he decrees a part in his chair at home. For the
first of these is a manifest untruth; because the Pope has been personally
present almost in all the general councels held in the west, as at Florence, at
Constance, at Viena, at Lions, at Rhemes, at Claremount, and diverse councels of
Lateran. In the other the Pope abuses the world no more, then does the Prince
abuse the Parliament, when sending thither the L. Chaunceller to supply his
place, and praeseed in his room, will nevertheless approve nothing what the
Peers do, or decree, unless himself judges it convenient.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the oath which Bishops use to make unto the Pope.
BECAUSE Bishops swear fidelity to the Pope, and to keep and defend the
primacy of the Roman Church, and rules of holy fathers against al men, and
nevertheless as Bellarmin writes, are not to obey Bellarm. lib. 1. de council.
cap. vlt.
him, but when he commands according to Gods law, and holy canons, and may
notwithstanding their oath speak their mind in council, and depose the Pope,
if he become an heretic. Bell infers diverse page 125. 126.
things requisite to be answered: First, that Bishops swear the Pope can depose
al Emperors and Kings in the Christian wordle. Secondly, that they swear to
admit his decree, whom they untruth 104.
freely grant may be an heretic: Thirdly, that they swear obedience to him
in matters of faith, whom they can depose for heresy: Fourthly, that the Pope
is not supreme Judge of controversies, seeing Bishops may examyne and judge,
whether what he commands be agreeable to Gods word, and the Canons. Lastly,
that they swear flat rebellion against their Soueraigns, seeing they swear to
defend the Popes Primacy against al men whomsoever.

2. Answer. As for the oath of Bishops made to the Pope the lawfulnes thereof
appears, because it is made withal Catholic princes consent, and meant only
in just and lawful things, which are according to Gods law, and holy Canons.
And it has been used above a thousand year ago, as is evident by the like
oath made by a Bishop unto S. Gregory the great. And S. Boniface the S. Gregor.
^^ 10. ep. 31. Baron. Ann. 723.
Apostle of Germany, and worthiest man that ever England bredde, did swear
when he was consecrated Bishop to concur with See Council. Tolet. 11. can. 10.
the Pope and commodities of his church. And as for the first point which Bell
infers, it is untrue, as appears by the answer to the first article. The
second and third contain no inconvenience. For we must obey what he decrees,
or defyneth Iudicially as sitting in S. Peeters chair, though in heart he were
an heretic. As our Savior commanded S. Math. 23. v. 3. S. Mare. 8. v. 15. S.
Math. 16. v. 6.
the Jews to follow what the Scribes taught out of Moses chair, but abstain
from their private leaven. If Bell can not imagine how a man by Gods disposition
may utter truth contrary to his own mind, let him remember Balaam, and
Caiphas, Numer. 22. Ioh. 11. v. 52. Chap. 10. parag. 9. Bellarm. lib. 4. de
Romans Pont. cap. 6. and 7. Bell p. 125.
and what has been said before out of S. Austin. Besides we grant not freely,
as Bell freely forgeth, that the Pope may be an heretic. For Bellarmin (whose
only testimony says Bell is most sufficient in all popish affairs) defends
the contrary And by that which has been said to these two points appears the
answer to the fourth. Because Bishops must not examine the doctrine, which the
Pope delivers iudicially out of S. Peter's chair, as supreme pastor of Gods
church, but only that, wherein he utters his own private opinion.

3. And as for the last point; Bishops swear no rebellion: Both because they
swear to defend the Popes primacie, only according to Gods word, and holy
Canons, which admit no rebellion. As also The weapons of our warfare are not
carnal. 1. Cor. 10. v. 4. Eusebius. lib. 6. c. 25. Gelas. epist. ad Anast. S.
Chrysostom. lib. cont. Gent.
because the defense which Bishops are to use, is not by insurrection and
rebellion, but by spiritual chastisment, and correction. In which sort S.
Fabian defended the orders of the Church against the Emperor Philip. S.
Innocent: defended S. Chrisostom against Archadius, S. Babilas and S. Ambrose
punished their Emperors without any rebellion at al.

4. After the foresaid collections, Bell page 128. Rhemists Act. 15. untruth 105.
avouches an untruth upon the Rhemists affirming them to tell plainly and
rowndly, that the determination of Councels is needles, because the Popes
judgment alone is infallible. Where as they in that place which Bell cyteth
write, that though the Sea Apostolic have infallible assistance, yet the
determinanation of Councels are necessary for many causes, as for searching out
the truth, for the recovery of heretics, and contentation of the weak, who
not always giving over to one man's determination, yet will either yield to the
judgment of all the learned men, and Bishops of al Nations, or else remain
desperate, and condemned before God and man. As the Apostles (say they) though
assisted by God, yet thought it necessary to call a Council, for decyding a
controversy risen in their days. I omit three other points touched here by
Bell. That the general page 128.
Councels is above the Pope, can, and has deposed him, because he neither
proves them, nor they concern any matter of Catholic faith. And are
lardgely and learnedly handled of Bellarmin lib. 2. de council. And thus much of
Bells seventh article. Be myndful therefore Bell from whence thou art fallen and
do Apocalip.
penance. Apoc. 2.

THE EIGHT AND LAST ARTICLE OF KEEPING GODS COMMANDMENTS.
CHAP. I. The possibility of keeping Gods commandments explicated and proved
out of Scripture.
GODS children can by his grace keep his commandments. This Bell absolutely
denies page 143. 148. 149. and 152. though in the very beginning of this
article he were a shamed to deny it plainly, but admits it (says he) in a
godly sense, and in some sort, and only denies it in a Popish sense. But this
godly sense is so ungodly, and the sort so sorry, as he is ashamed to utter it.
For as S. Hierom writes of the S. Hieron. epist. ad Cresiphontem. Iren. lib.
1. cap. 35.
Pelagians, to have discovered the opinions of Protestants, is to have overcome
them, the blasphemy is manifest at the first: yet may we gather his meaning by
that he says page 149. That God has given us those commandments, which we
can not possibly keep, and page 144. that every breach of them is of it nature
deadly. The mystery therefore of his counsel is, that Gods children can not
possibly, even with his grace keep his commandments, but that they must
needs oftentimes break them deadly. This kind of keeping Gods commandments
he terms imperfect, and vnexact keeping. But indeed it is no keeping at al,
nor a point of Gods children but of the devils, and a true breaking of them.
For how are they Gods children, if they love him not, how love they him, if
they damnably offend? If you love me says Christ Ioh. 14. S. Ioh.
v. 15. keep my commandments; and how can they keep them, if they damnably,
and deadly break them? can true keeping, and true breaking stand together.

2. God commanded his precepts to be kept, not so sillily as Bell would, so as
they be oftentimes deadly broken; but as David says Nimis Sphodra Psalm. 118.
v. 8. God (says Psalm.
S. Austin upon that place conc. 4.) has very S. Austin.
much commanded his precepts to be very much kept. And according to S. James,
who offends S. James 2. v. 10.
in one is guilty of al. Wherefore deadly breaking of one of Gods laws, can no
more stand with keeping them, then theft or murder can stand with keeping the
Princes laws. Nor they, who oftentimes deadly break Gods laws, be his
children whilst they do so, more then thieves and murderers be good subjects.
And as for the Luther. sermon. de natiu. B. Mariae makes al Christians as holy
as the mother of God.
Popish sense, it is not as Bell falsely imposes, that we can keep Gods
commandments so perfectly, as we be free from sin: For so (as S. John
says) we should deceive our selves, and as Bell confesses we do daily
acknowledge our sins, but so Bell p. 150.
as we be free from deadly sin, which destroieth The Apostles were clean,
and yet had need to have their feet vvashed. Ioh. 13. ver. 10. 11. S. Hierom.
dialog. 2. cont. Pelag. S. Gregor. 21. moral. c. 9. S. Augustine. hom. 19. de
temp. to. 10. lib. 1. contr. duas epist Pelag. c. 14. to. 7. enchirid. c. 69.
charity the end of the law, and keep the commandments in all great, though
not in small matters. For as S. Hierom says we may be without cacia, though not
sina amartia, or as S. Austin, and S. Gregory gather out of S. Paul sine
crimine, though not sine peccato, that is without great sin, though not
without small sin, without mortal, though not without venial. And to keep
Gods commandments in this sort, is substantially to keep them, because we
break not the end of them, which is charity; and yet not perfectly, and
exactly. as who steals but trifles keeps the Princes laws, though not
perfectly; but if he steal great matters, he is said no more to keep 1.
Timoth. 1. 7. 5.
but to break them. And in this sense, do Catholics defend the foresaid
conclusion, which though I might prove many ways, yet will I content my self
with such proofs, as Bell undertakes to answer, and in that order as he
propounds them.

3. First therefore I prove it. because a young man told Christ he had kept all the Math. 19. v. 20.
commandments from his youth. Bell answers that S. Hierom says he lied, and
S. Austin Bell p. 150.
thinks he spoke more prowdly then truly, S. Augustine. epist. 89.
nevertheless more probable it is that he spoke truly, because not only our
Savior did not rebuke him (as likely it is he would have done, if he had told
him a lie) but, as S. Marcke testifies, beheld him, and loved him, Marc. 10.
v. 21.
and said, one thing is wanting to thee, go sell whatsoever thou have, and give
it to the poor, and come, and follow me. If the man's speech had been a lie,
it would not have provoked Christ's love, but his offense; and if he had broken
Gods commandments, Christ would have advertised him whom he loved, rather of
keeping the things which he commanded, then which he counseled, as is the
giving al we have to the poor. Wherefore S. Chrysostom hom. 64. in Math. S.
Chrysostom.
says, this man was no dissembler. And S. Hierom. dialog. 2. contra Pelag.
affirms, S. Hierom.
that Christ loved him, because he said he had done al, omnia fecisse se dicit,
quamobrem and amatur a Domino: he said that he had done al things, wherefore he
was also loved of our lord; which evidently conuinceth that his speech was
true: for Christ could not love him for a lie. Neither will Bell I hope marvel,
that we expound S. Matthew rather by S. Marcke, then by S. Hierome, and S.
Austin, especially seeing S. Hierome alrered his opinion, ad S. Austin spoke
but doubtfully, saying I think. Nevertheless because some fathers have thought
that the man's speech was not true, Catholics rely not upon this argument.

4. Secondly S. Paul says. For not the Romans 2. v. 13.
hearers of the law are just with God, but the Doers of the law shall be
justified. Ergo there are some Doers of the law, and it is possible to be done.
Bell answers that the page 151.
Apostle spoke not absolutely, but upon supposal of a thing, which (says he)
is impossible, that there were doers of the law, for such says Bell, should be
justified by their work, though they could not glory in them. But that S.
Paul spoke absolutely, and not upon any impossible supposal is evident. First
because in the first part of the sentence he spoke absolutely of hearers, and
not upon any impossible supposal, when he said they are not just. Ergo: in the
second part he spoke so of Doers, when he said they shall be justified.
Wherefore as well may Bell say there are no hearers, as no doers of the law.
Secondly because in the next verse before, he verse. 12.
had said absolutely. Whosoever have sinned in the law, shall be judged by the
law. Which he proves saying. For not the hearers etc. Wherefore as the
proposition which he proved is absolute, and upon no impossible supposal; so is
that by which he proves it. And in verse. 14.
the verse next after he brings a proof, that the Doers of the law shall be
justified, though they heard it not, because Gentiles who have no law,
naturally (that is without See S. Austin. lib. 4 contra Julian. cap. 3. tom. 7.
instruction of the law) Do those things which are of the law: Behold the
Apostle auouching that Gentiles do the law, and by their example proving the
Doers thereof to be justified.

5. And so frequent it is in scripture to Psalm.
affirm, that there are Doers, and keepers of Gods laws, as it is avouched
more then twenty times in one Psalm 118. I will keep thy iustifications v. 8.
I have sought thee in my whole heart. v. 10. I have cleaued to thie testimonies
Lord. v. 31. I have run the way of thie commandments. v. 32. I will keep
thy law in my whole heart. v. 34. I will keep thy law always. I have not
declined from thy law. I have kept thy law. v. 55. I have not forgotten thy
law. v. 61. I am partaker of all that keep thy commandments. v. 63. I have
not forsaken thy commandments. v. 87. I will keep the testimonies of thy
mouth. v. 88. I have forbidden my feet from euel way, that I may keep thy
words. v. 101. I have not declined from thy judgments. v. 102. I have sworn
and determined to keep the judgments of thy justice. v. 106. I have not erred
from thy commandments. v. Deliver me because I have not forgotten thy law.
v. 153. I have not declined from thy testimonies. My soul has kept thy
testimonies. I have kept thy commandments and testimonies. Seek thy servant,
for I have not forgotten thy commandments. v. 176. What but to set his mouth
against heaven. Psalm. 72. and to give God the lie. Psalm. 98. 3. Reg. 14. Act.
13. Iosue 11. v. 15.
I omit Moses, Aaron, Samuel, David, Iosue, Zachary, Elizabeth; and the
Apostles, who are said to have kept Gods law, and some of them in all their
heart. Only S. Paul Luc. 1. Ioh 17. v. 6. Contradict. 19.
I can not omit, because Bell artic. 4. page 48. grants that he was most
free, and innocent from actual sin, therefore surely he kept Gods law
perfectly: for if he brake it he sinned actually.

6. Thirdly Christ said, if thou will enter Math. 19. v. 17.
into life, keep the commandments. but entering into life is possible. Ergo:
keeping the commandments. Bell answers, that Christ showed not here, how one
may attain to eternal life, but how perfectly they who look to be justified
by good works must keep the commandments: For Christ (says he) being asked
what good a man Gods word shamefully vvr^sted.
should do to attain eternal life, ansvvered. If thou will have eternal life
by doing good works, then must thou keep the commaundeme^ts, but this is
impossible (says Bell.) Here is most shameful abuse of Gods word, and this
shows Bell to have a seared conscience. For neither 1. Timoth. 4. v. 3.
in the man's question, nor in Christ's answer, is there any word about what
perfection of keeping Gods commandments is requisite to come to heaven by this
way, or that way: vz. by believing, or by working, or by both. But only about
the mean in general to come to heaven, what that was, which the man supposing
to be good, asked what good he should do to come thither (which question of
his is common either to faith, or works, or both; for all include doing good)
And our Savior answered him, If thou will enter (not this way, nor that way,
but absolutely) into life, keep the commandments. As David demanding Psalm.
14. v. 1. 2.
absolutely, who shall dwell in Gods tabernacle? answers him self. He that
walks without spot, and works justice. And as him self otherwere
absolutely says. Math. 7. v. 21.
Not every one that said Lord, Lord shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven,
but be that does the vvil of my father. And surely if this man asking simply,
and of a desire to learn, as Calvin Calvin.
grants, had asked the way to heaven by an impossible mean (as Bell
imagines) Christ the author of truth, and who loved him, as S. Mark says,
would rather have Marc. 10.
bidden him give over that impossible way, and taught him the true, then how he
should proceed in his erroneous, and impossible way.

7. And though the man had asked Christ particularly, how he should come to
heaven by good works, whence has Bell, that his means to come to heaven is
impossible? will not Christ say in his last sentence. Come you blessed of my
father, possess the Kingdom provided for you, from the constitution of the
world: because I was Hungry and you gave me to eat etc. Math. S. Math.
25. v. 34. 35. as well as he will say, Go you from me you cursed into
everlasting fire etc. because I was Hungry and you gave me not to eat. v. 41.
Are not good works accounted the means, and cause of coming to heaven, as
the want of them the mean, and cause of going to hell. Yea does not Bell say
artic. 5. page 73. that good works are so necessary to attain eternal life,
as Contradict. 20.
the usual, ordinary, and undoubted means (mark the word) by which God
decreed from eternity, freely for his own name sake, to bring his elect to
salvation. And that without them none have been, are, or shall be saved. How
are they now become an impossible mean to come to heaven? how did the man
enquire of an impossible way to heaven, by good works? what need this
challenger any adversary, who thus overthrows him self.

8. Fourthlie I prove the conclusion: because Math. 11. v. 30. 1. Ioh. 5. v. 3.
Christ says, my yoke is svveete, and my burden light. And S. Ihon says,
his commandments are not heavy. Ergo they are possible. Bell answers that
these words are meant Bell p. 152.
not in respect of us, but of Christ, whose keeping the commandments is
imputed to us: which S. Austin (says he) meant S. Augustine. lib. 1. retract.
c. 19. tom. 1.
when he wrote. Then are all the commandments reputed as done, when
whatsoever is not done is forgiven.

9. But this is easily refuted. For S. John spoke in respect of us assisted by
Gods grace, when he said. This is the law of God, that we keep his
commandments, and his commandments are not heavy. He says not (Christ)
but (we) must keep Gods commandments, and to animate us thereto, he adds,
that they are not heavy vz. to us. And cap, 2. v. 2. he gives us a sign to
try if we know God: vz. if we keep his commandments, Bell either keeps
Gods commandments, or knovveth not God.
and v. 3. affirms, that who keeps not his commandments knows not God:
wherefore either Bell keeps the commandments, or he knows not God. Likewise
Christ meant his yoke was sweet, and his burden light to us. For immediately
before he Cap. 11. v. 29.
said Take up my yoke upon you, and learn etc. and you shall find rest to
your souls. For my yoke is sweet, and burden light. To whom means he it is
light, but to us, whom he bids take it up? and whom he promises shall find
rest by it? or what reason had it been for Christ, to exhort us to take up his
yoke, and tell us we should find rest by it, because it is sweet to himself?
As for S. Austin he said our defectuous keeping S. Augustine. sup. to. 1.
is counted a full keeping, when the defect is pardoned; which is a far
different thing from saying. That Christ's keeping is counted our keeping. And
he means that our keeping is defectuous, because we keep not the
commandments ad vnum apicem (as he says) to the last ioat or title: But
through venial sins have need to say. Forgive us our trespasses, which venial
trespasses being pardoned, we are accounted to do al Gods commandments.

10. An other answer Bell puts in the page 152.
margent, and in latin. That Christ means not of the yoke, and burden of
the law, when he calls it sweet, and easy, but of the Ghospel. That Christ
meant of the law of the Ghospel, I grant with S. Hierom S. Hierom.
dialog. 2. contr. Pelag, and is proved out of these words: my yoke, my
burden. But what is this to the purpose? Is Bell become a libertine, thincking
as his father Luther did, that the ten commandments Luther.
belong not to Christians, or that the Ghospel commands only faith? Did
Math. 5. v. 19.
Christ come to dissolve the law of nature, and to exempt us from al law, but
of believing in him? If Bell be of this mind, let him utter it plainly, and say
Christ came not to fulfill the law, but to dissolve it, that his Romans 3. v. 31.
faith establishes not the law, but destroieth it. Or if he think that the
law of the ghospel. Besides the precepts of faith, includes at least the law
of nature, let him confess that the ten commandments, and all that God
binds us unto, is not only possible, but easy, and sweet, vz. to such as
Psalm. 118. v. 32. Omnia facilia sunt charitati cui vni Christi sarcina leuis
est. Aug. donat. and great. c. 69. to. 7. see the place. S. John.
love God, as was David when he said, I have run the way of thy
commandments, when thou did dilate my heart. And how sweet are thy speeches
to my jaws, above honey to my mouth. The law of thie mouth is good to me,
above thowsands of gold and silver. For as S John says 1. c. 5. v. 3. this is
the love of God that we keep his commandments. If Bell say that it is
impossible to love God as we ought to do. This is reproved, because he loves
God as he should do, who loves him withal his heart, al his Deuter. 6. v. 5.
soul and power. But Iosue so loved God, of whom it is written. 4. Reg. 23.
That he 4. Reg. 23.
returned in all his heart, in all his soul, and al his strength. Likewise David
sought God David.
in all his heart. Psalm. 118. and followed him in all his heart. 3. Reg. 14. And
God has verse. 8.
some servants, that walk before him in all their heart, with whom he keeps
his covenant, and mercy, 2. Paralip. 6. v. 14. And Deuter. 30. v. 6. God
promises to circumcise the Jews hearts, that they might love him in all their
hearts, and al their soul. And thus much for proof out of scripture, now let
us go to the Fathers.

CHAP. II. The possibility of keeping Gods commandments proved out of Fathers
and reason.
MANY holy Fathers I might allege for this verity, but I will content my self
with two only, whom Bell obiecteth against him self, and undertakes to
answer. S. Hierom. See S. Hierom in cap. 5. Mathei.
S. Hierom dialog. 1. contr. Pelag. we confess (says he) God has given
possible commandments, lest he should be author of iniustce. Behold our
conclusion both affirmed, and proved. And Dialog 2. I say a man may be without
vice, which in greek is called cacia, but not anamartyton, that is without
sin, which is as much as if he had said. He can be without mortal, but not
without venial sin. Again: God has not commanded impossible things, but
has ascended up to such height of patience, as for their great difficulty he
may seem to have commanded almost impossible things. Again: we curse their
blasphemy, who say. That God has commanded to man any impossible thing.
This Bell alleges out of his 3. and fourth book page 153.
against Pelagians, whereas he wrote but one epistle, and three books or
Dialogues against Pelagians. But it is in his epistle to Damasus de exposit.
fidei. And therein S. page 149. S. Austin. See S. Austin in Psalm. 56. tom. 8.
where he says the Apostles did that charity, then the which, none can be
greater.
Hierom curses this blasphemy of Bell: God has given us those commandments,
which we can not possibly keep. Likewise S. Austin ser. 61. de temp. God could
not command any impossible thing, because he is just. The same he repeateth
lib. de nature. and great. cap. 69. and lib. 2 de pen. mer. and remiss. and in
psalm. 56. I can not doubt (says he) that God has neither commanded any
impossible thing to man, nor that any thing is impossible to God to help,
whereby it may be ^one which he commands.

2. For avoiding these authorities Bell deuiseth three shifts. First, that Gods
commandments were possible to us before Adams fall. Secondly, that they were
possible to Christ, whose keeping them is accounted ours Thirdly, that even to
us they are now possible to be kept imperfectly, though not perfectly, which is
(says he) the doctrine of Aquinas: yet seeing that S. Thom. 2. 2. quaest. 44.
art. 6. untruth.
none of these shifts would serve, he falls to prove, that we may be justly
damned for not doing impossible matters; because Infants unbaptized, are damned
for original sin, which says he they could not possibly avoid. And in the
margent calls this a dilemma, which no Papist can avoid: But none of these
shifts will suffice. For S. Hierome S. Hierom.
epist. ad Ctesiph. writes, that the commandments are possible to us by Gods
grace. And dialog. 2. cit. That they are so possible, as that David we know
(says he) has done them. If they be possible to us, then not to Christ alone;
and if David did them, man after Adams sin may do them. And the reason which
he, and S. Austin after him gives of Gods justice, conuinceth the same. For it
is against his justice, to command us impossible things, as well after Adams
sin as before. Likewise S. Augustine after the Apostle says, that the justice
S. Augustine. sermon. 6. de verb. Apostol. cap. 9. Romans 8. v. 4.
of the law is fulfilled in us. Ergo not in Christ alone.

3. As for the third shifte. S. Thomas says indeed, that the precept of
loving God withal our heart etc. can not be perfectly kept, but imperfectly, yet
in a sense quite contrary to Bell. Perfectly says he is the precept kept, when
the very end intended by the commander is achieved. Imperfectly, when albeit
the end be not attained, yet the way unto it is not left. As a soldier
fighting, and ouercomming, perfectly fulfilleth the command of his captain,
bidding him fight. And an other fighting, and doing nothing against the duty
of a soldier, but not ouercomming, fulfilleth it, but imperfectlie. Whereby we
see plainly, that though S. Thomas deny, that the end, (vz. to be wholly united
to God) for which he gave that precept of love, be not possible in this life,
yet he grants that we may so fight, or labor for the attaining it, as we
do nothing against the order commanded by God, or the duty of a spiritual
soldier. Which is indeed substantially to keep the precepts, though S. Thomas
in respect of keeping them, and also attayning the end, for which they were
made, call it imperfect keeping. For seeing God commands not the end, but
only intends it (as S. Thomas says) if the order and means commanded be
fulfilled, then surely the commandment is fulfilled, though the end of the
commander, which is only intended, not commanded be not attained.

4. And as for Bells dilemma it is easily answered, and therefore might have
been better left out (as himself writes in the margent) For though Infants
after they have sinned, and eaten the aple in Adam, cannot avoid the guilt
thereof, but must needs contract it by origin from Adam. As a man after he has
committed adultery can not but contract the guilt of adultery: Yet because as
Infants sinned in Adam, so they might have not sinned in him, and so have
avoided the guilt of sin, falsely does Bell Bell page 51. art. 4.
say they could not possibly avoid it. And I wonder why having taught before,
that concupiscence (which is the effect of original Contradict. 21.
sin) is voluntary, he will now say that Infants could not possibly avoid
original sin. But it is his custom to gainsay himself.

5. By reason also it may be proved, that are impossible? To man alone? and
that is not the question nor denied of any Catholic: or to man with Gods
grace? and that is contrary to S. Paul saying I can do al things in him that
strengthens S. Paul Philip. 14 verse. 13 S. John.
me: and injurious to Gods grace, making it impotent, which S. Ihon makes so
potent, as he avouches, that he can not sin, in whom it remains 1. Ioh. 3.
v. 9. why did God say sufficit tibi gratia mea: my grace suffices thee 2. Corinthians 12. if his grace suffice S. Paul. v. 9.
not. Likewise if God commanded impossible things, he should be the Author of
injustice, or unjust; as affirm S. Hierom dialog. 1. contr. Pelag. and S.
Austin de not. and great. cap. 69. and sermon. 61. de temp. For it is an unjust
law which is impossible, and to punish breakers were against right, and equity.
As Bell himself would grant if upon pain of death he were bid to fly to
heaven, and executed if he did not. Wherefore S. Hierom epist. ad Ctesiphont:
writhus. S. Hieron.
we pronounce the commander unjust, whiles we complain, that the very Author
of equity, has commanded impossible things. And Simon Magus (says Vincent.
Lirinen.) made God Author of Vincent. Lirin.
sin, in affirming us to sin of necessity. Now let us see Bells proofs to
the contrary.

CHAP. III. Bells arguments out of Scripture against the possibility of keeping
Gods commandments ansvvered.
BELL proves Gods commandments to be impossible First, out of S. James
saying. we al offend in many things. Answer. Jacob. 3. v. 2. Si quis in verbo
non offendit, hic perfectus est vitae. v. 2.
S. James means of venial sins, as idle words are, whereof he speaks in
the same verse. And though Bell reply, that he has already proved, that every
sin is mortal in it own nature, yet neither is that true, Art. 6. cap. 6.
as before is showed, nether though it were, could it disprove my answer. For
it suffices (which Bell denies not) that there indeed Bell art. 6. page 81.
are venial sins (whether they be such by their own nature, or by Gods
mercy) in the which just men may offend, and not break Gods law deadly.

2. Next he alleges S. Paul's words page 144.
Galath. 3. verse. 10. Cursed be every one that shall not abide in all things that
are written in the hook of the law to do them. what can hence be inferred to
Bells purpose I see not, except that al men are cursed, or else freed from al
laws of God, and true libertines. But in truth it makes more against him,
then for him. For S. Paul's intention was to prove, that faith in Christ was to
justification, and that the works of the bare law without faith were not
sufficient. And therefore having proved by Abraham's example, that faith does
concur to justification, in the tenth verse proves, that works of the bare
law suffice not. For whosoever (says he) are of the works of the law (vz.
without faith) are under curse. For it is written accursed be etc. Because such
as want faith, can not abide in all things of the law, and consequently are
under curse. But what makes this against those who have faith and grace. Such
can do al Gods will with David: act. 13. Such err not from Act. verse. 22.
Psalm.
Gods commandments: Psalm. 118. Such can fulfill al things, and let not pass
one word of al Gods commandments with Iosue. Iosue.
cap. 11. Such are doers of the law and justified. Romans 2. v. 12. 14. finally
such because S. Paul.
the seed of God is in them neither sin, nor can sin. 1. Ioh. 3. verse. 9.
and consequently S. John.
avoid the foresaid curse. Neither do their venial sins incur the curse:
for it is pronounced only against heinous crimes, namely Idolatry, incest,
murder, and the like, as is evident by the 27. of Deuter. Deu^^.
from whence the Apostle recites the curse But Bell who confesses him self to
incur the crime accursed by the law, must needs confess him self to be
under that curse, or say, that he is not bound to Gods laws made against
Idolatry, Incest, murder, and the like.

3. The like text he brings out of S. page 144.
James. 2 v. 10. whosoever shall keep the whole law, and offended in one is
made guilty of al. This place also makes rather against Bell. For it supposes
that all the law may be kept, as well one point as the whole; and only teaches,
that the keeping of the whole law will not save, if one point thereof be deadly
broken. But this is nothing against Gods children, who as long as his seed
abides in them sin not. Ioh. 3. v. 9. S. Ioh.
nor offend deadly in one point, but abide both in the whole law, and every
point thereof.

4. Diverse other places Bell alleges to prove that al men are sinners, and
that the just do sin, which no Catholic denies, as Bell might learn out
of the Tridentine Council. But how follows it Council. Trident. sess. 6. cap.
11.
thereof, that the Just whiles they are Just sin deadly, or cannot avoid al
deadly sin. This is the marque which Bell should page 143.
shoot at, and hoped in the beginning of this article to hit the nail on the
head; but as S. Hierom said to a Luciferian: whiles he S. Hierom. dialog.
contra Lucifer.
follows his vain of gainsaying, he has mist the question, as some rather
prayers then speakers use to do; who not knowing to dispute yet cease not to
quarrel.

CHAP. IIII. Bells arguments out of Fathers against the possibility of keeping
Gods commandments ansvvered.
FIRST, out of S. Austin he alleges, page 145. S. Augustine. lib. 1. de
doctrine. Christ. c. 22. to. 3.
that God commanded us to love him with all our heart, soul, and mind, and
thereby left no part of our life vacant to take fruition of any other thing.
But S. Austin in these words meant nothing else, but that we must love nothing
as our end, and for it self but Gods for so he uses the word fruition, and
therefore adds which Bell left forth. But what other thing comes to our mind
to be loved, let it be carried thither, whither the whole current of love
runs.

2. Other words he cites our of lib. de page 146.
perfect. iusti. ratiocin. 16. but they are in 17. cap. 8. where S. Austin
writes. That as long as there is any thing of carnal concupiscence, which may
be bridled by refrayning, God is not loved (omnimodo) altogether with all the
soul. And yet though none in this life have that perfection it is commanded,
because it is not well run, if it be not known whither to run. Answer. What
S. Austins meaning is herein himself explicateth, saying, that the precept of
loving God withal our soul is not omnimodo altogether fulfilled whilst we have
inordinate motions. He denies not substantial fulfilling which auoideth sin
(yea lib. de spir. and liter. cap. vlt. affirms, S. Augustine. tom. 3.
that though we did not love God withal our hearts, and soul, so as we had no
motions of lust: yet if we did not obey them, we need not to ask God
forgiveness) but only denies omnimodam impletionem, which in the place cited he
called most supereminent perfection of loving God, and says not it belongs
to this, but to the next life, vz. to be perfectly performed. Wherefore when
he says such perfection is commanded in this life, he means not that it is
commanded as a thing which we are bound to perform, but only as an end to
which we should run. For though (says De perfect. instit. loc. cit.
he) no man perform it, yet we run not well, if we know not vvhither to
run, and how should we know if it were shevved by no precept.

3. Next he cites S. Thomas only because page 147. S. Thomas ^. 2 q. 44. art
he uses the words perfectly, and imfectly. But how coutrary to Bells meaning
has been before explicated, which reproves his untruth in affirming himself
to teach the self same doctrine with Aquinas. What has been said to S.
Austin, and S. Thomas is to be applied to S. Bernarde, S. Bernard. hom. 50. i^
Cant.
when he says in the like sort, that the precept of loving God can not be
fulfilled in this life. And that God in commanding impossible things made not
men preuaricators* but humble. For beside that S. Bernard, as himself,
speaks this only, if the precept of love be understood of affectual charity,
or charity in work, and grants that so it is fulfilled, if it be perfectly
observed, as (said he a little before) it may be in this life by Gods grace.
Besides this I say, immediately before the words which Bell cyteth, he grants,
that initium perfectumque the beginning and perfection of charity may be
experienced by Gods grace in this life. If perfection be had, surely the
precept is fulfilled. For (as himself says sone after) do thou not think
is sufficient to the fulfilling the precept of loving thie neighbor, if thou
observe it perfectly. And Bell page 151. grants, that who perfectly observes
the law shall be justified.

4. And though he differ, or (as he speaks) defend the consummation of
charity to the next life, and therefore accoumpt the precept of charity
impossible, as far forth as it imbraceth the consummation, yet he means not,
that it imbraceth consummation as a thing needful to be performed, which (he
says) shall be our reward in heaven, but as the end to which men ought to
endeavor, vt scirent (says he) ad quem iustitiae finem pro viribus niti
oporteret, that they might know to what end of justice they ought to endeavor
withal their power. Behoulde he says not, that we ought to attain to the said
end, but to endeavor all that we can; and therefore God in commanding that end
in such sort as he does, makes men no finners, though they attain not to it.

5. After these fathers he brings two page 150.
reasons. The one out of our Lords prayer, where we are taught to ask
forgiveness. But where pardon is demanded, ths law is not exactly observed. The
other is out of our daily confessions, where we acknowledge our fault, and most
great fault. Answer; As the petition of forgiving our sins, does evidently
convince, that we do not so exactly keep the law, as we never swerve from it:
So the other petition of doing Gods will in earth as it is in heaven, evidently
conuinceth, that we can do it without deadly breaking it. As for our
confession, we do not confess that our daily offenses are most great faults,
but daily confess our most great fault, whether it were done then or before.
Besides that humble and penitent minds account themselves greatest sinners,
and their offenses greatest faults. So S. Paul 1. Timoth 1. v. 15. accounted S.
Paul.
himself the chiefest sinner. Yea good souls (as S. Gregory says) acknowledge
sin where S. Gregor. epist. ad August. Cant. cap. 10. Job cap. 9. S. Gregor.
in Psalm. 4. Paenitent.
none is, and with Job, fear al their works. And as the same holy Doctor
notes, the reprobate account great sins little, and the elect little sins
grear, and which before they thought were light, straight they abhor as heavy
and deadly. And S. Hierom S. Hieron. epist. ad ^^lant.
observes, that it increases warines to take heed of little (sins) as if
they were great. For with so much the more facility we abstain from any sin,
by how much more we fear it.

6. And hence Bell may see, why we in daily confessions confess our most great
fault, which I would God he would imitate, and both confess, and amend his
heinous fault* of sinning against the holy Ghost, and impugning the Catholic
Church, which he knows to be Gods Church. Otherwise let him assure himself,
that shame will be his end in this life, and endless punishment his reward in the
next. Well he may beat against this rock, but like the waves, he shall without
hurting it, beat himself in pieces, and be resolved into froth and foame. Let
him write books, let him spend himself, and make nets with the Spider of his
own guts, they will prove only spider webbes, apt to cath or hold none, but
such as like inconstant and fleshly flies are carrayed about with every mind
of new doctrine, and following their carnal appetites, and licentiousnes, seize
upon fleshly bait And so Bell though he could become an other God Bell, he
should but be Beel zebub the God of flies. Be myndful therefore (Bell) from
whence thou art fallen, and do penance. Apocalip. 2.

FINIS.
Al praise to Almighty God.
A TABLE Of the things contained in this book vvherin a signifies article. c.
chapter and parag. paragraph.
ADDITION of one tradition as much forbidden as of many ar. 7. c. 2. parag. 1.
Addition to Scripture, which forbidden, which not ar. 7. c. 2. pareg. Anomia
how it may signify transgression of the law ar. 6. c. 2. parag. 2. Antichrists
true hinderance meant by S. Paul ar. 1. c. 9. parag. 4. Antichrists hinderance
not taken away in Pipius time a. 1. c. 9. parag. 3. Angles falsely charged by
Bell art. 5. c. 5. parag. 6. S. Antonin falsely charged by Bell art 3. c. 1.
parag. 1. and 13. Apostataes may teach true doctrine art. 7. c. 10 parag. 9.
Apostles Creed conserved by Tradition art. 7. c. 9. parag. 4. S. Athanasius
explicated, and his reverence of Traditions art. 7. c. 4. parag. 9. S. Austin
as a Christian said he would not believe the Ghospel without the Church art. 7.
c. 9. parag. 22. Saint Austin would not believe Maniche though he had had
express Scripture ar. 7. c. 9. parag. 24. S. Austin how he compared
Concupiscence with blindness of heart. art. 4. c. 3. parag. 1. S. Austins opinion
of habitual Concupiscence, art. 4. c. 1. parag. 18. S. Austins opinion of
inuoluntary motions, art. 4. c. 1. parag 13. S. Austin prevented Bells
objections, art. 4. c. 1. parag. 18. S. Austin how he meant that we love not
God altogether art. 8. c. 4. parag. 2. S. Austin how he called our keeping the
commandments defectuous. art. 8. c. 1. parag. 9. S. Austins teuerence and
rule to know Traditions. art. 7. c. 4. parag 3. S. Austin said the Apostles eat
bread our lord. art. 2. c. 5. parag. 8. S. Austin said Judas eat our price.
art. 2. c. 5. paragr. 8. S. Austin why he said Judas eat bread of our lord.
art. 2. c. 5. parag. 8. S. Austin would not credit the Scripture if the
Catholics were discredited. art. 7. c. 9. parag. 22. S. Austin and S. Prosper
Papists out of Bell. art. 2. c. 4. parag. 13.
B.
S. Basil explicated, and his reverence of Traditions. art. 7. c. 4. parag. 13.
S. Bid a Papist. art. 4. c. 4. parag. 4. Bellarmins doctrine of merit the
common doctrine of Catholics. a. 5. c. 6 parag. 9. Belief in all points not
prescribed at once. art. 7. c. 2. parag. 7. Bell a right Apostata from
Preisthood. art. 1. c. 9. parag. 31. Bell against Calvin. art. 5. c. 2. parag.
3. Bell admits Tradition. a. 7. c. 9. parag. 811. Bells answer about Tradition
of the bible refuted. art. 7. c. 9. parag. 5. Bell admits venial sins. art.
6. c. 1. parag. 1. Bells belief of venial sin beside Gods book. art. 6. c.
1. parag. 2. Bell a Papist by his own judgment. art. 4. c. 1. parag. 10. Bell
against al Gods Church which lived in the first 200. years. art. 7. c. 10.
parag. 2. Bell alleges authority against him self. a. 7. c. 10. parag. 5.
Bell answers not to the purpose. art. 7. c. 9. parag. 7. Bells argument
returned upon him self. art. 2. c 6. parag. 3. Bells blasphemy against God. art.
8. c. 2. parag. 1. against his Church. a. 7. c. 9. par. 5. against
justification. a. 4. c. 2. parag. 1. Bells blasphemy accursed by S. Hierom, art.
8. c. 2. parag. 1. Bells blindness discovered, art. 1. c. 9. parag 6. Bell bound
to recant, art. 3. c. 1. parag. 13 a. 2. c 5. parag. 9. Bells buckler the
Princes sword, art. 1. c 1. parag. 10. Bells challeng is Bellarmins objections,
art. 4. c. 3 parag. 2. Bells complaint against Catholics, art. 5. c 1 parag. 1
Bell condemns as blasphemy in the Pope which he judges treason to deny to
Princes, art. 1. c. 9. parag. 23 Bells contradictions, ar^. 1. c. 5. parag 4. c.
8. parag 5 a. 2. c 2. parag. 4. a. 4 c 1. parag 12. 13. c. 2. parag. 6. art. 5.
c. 3 parag. 3. c. 5. parag. 7. art. 7. c. 7 parag. 19 art. 8. c. 1. parag. 5 7.
c. 2. par. 4. B^l c^rrupted Scripture, art. 7. c. 2. parag. 8 c. 7. parag. 3.
12. corrupts S. Ambros, art. 7 c. 4. parag. 1^. Bell cursed of S. Paul by his
own judgment, art. 7. c. 9 parag 8. Bell discredited him self, art. 1. chap.
9. parag. 10. Bells dissimulation, art. 1. c. 1. parag. 1. a 2. c 1. par. 5 art.
3. c. 1 parag. 2. B^l denies divine faith to proceed from man's teaching, art.
7. c. 9 parag. 20. Bell disproueth him self, art. 5. c. 6. parag. 6. art. 4. c.
1. parag. 17. Bell exceeds Pelagius, art. 7. c. 7. parag. 1. Bells faith
grownded upon reason, art. 2. c. 1. parag 7. Bell slenderly grownded in faith,
art. 2. c. 5. parag. 6. Bells false translation, art. 2. c. 3. parag. 8. c. 4.
parag. 13 a. 4 c. 2. parag. 4. 7. 10. c. 5. parag. 4. c. 6. par. 3. 4. 7. 8.
art. 7. c. 1. parag. 2. c. 9. parag. 22. c. 12. parag. 3. Bell a foolish
physician, art. 7. c. 7. parag. 17. Bells godly sense an ungodly shift, art. 5.
c. 3. parag. 2. Bells godly keeping Gods commandments an ungodly breaking of
them, art. 8. c. 1. parag. 1. Bell keeps Gods commandments or knows him
not, art. 8. c. 1. parag. 9. Bells ignorance in history, art. 1. c. 9. par. 2.
Bells ignorance in latin, art. 5. c. 4. parag. 10. art. 7. c. 9. par. 19. art.
2. c. 4 parag. 13. Bells ignorance in logik, art. 2. c. 6 par. 2. 4. Bells
ignorance in preaching, a. 7. c. 7. par. 10. Bell impugneth errors, histories
and opinions in steed of Traditions, a. 7. c. 10. par. 7. 10. Bell impugneth an
opinion of Protestants and Canonists as a point of Popery, art. 3. c. 1. parag.
2. Bell impugneth his own slanders as a point of Popery. art. 1. c. 1. parag.
5. Bell impugneth a school point as a point of Popery. a. 2. c. 1. parag. 6. a.
5. c. 2. parag. 4. Bells ladder of lying, art. 2. c. 5. parag. 7. Bell makes
Srripture like a neck verse, art. 7. c. 7. parag. 1. Bells malice and folly in
reprehending the Rhemists, art. 5. c. 4. parag. 3. Bell notes S. Austin what is
quite against him self, art. 2. c. 5. parag. 6. Bell overthrows at once what
he intended to prove in all the Article, a. 4. c. 3. parag. 8. Bell prefers
reason in matter of faith before authority, art. 2. c. 1. parag. 9. Bells
question like to that of the Capharnaits, art. 2. c. 1. parag. 11. Bell
recanting, art. 5. c. 6. parag. 8. Bell seems a Libertin, art. 8. c. 1. parag.
10. Bells shifts to avoid authority, a. 8. c. 2. par. 2. Bells vain boast, art.
5. c. 4. parag. 9. Bells vain protestation, art. 7. c. 12. parag. 4. Bell cursed
by the law or keeperh it, art. 8. c. 3. parag. 2. Bells untruths whereof diverse
are slanderous, a. 1. c. 1. parag. 1. c. 7. par. 4. c. 9. parag. 28. 33. a. 2.
c. 4. par. 14. c. 6. par. 8. a. 3. c. 1. par. 1. 10. 13. a. 4. c. 1. parag. 9.
c. 2. par. 1. 4. 5. 6. a. 5. c. 5. par. 7. 9. 10. c. 6. par. 1. 2. 4. 5. 9. a.
6. c. 2. par. 9. a. 7. c. 3. par. 7. c. 4. parag. 6. 8. c. 5. par. 1. 4. 5. 8.
c. 7. par. 4. 18. 19. c. 9. parag. 22. c. 10. parag. 6. 11. c. 12. parag. 1. 2.
3. c. 13. par. 8. c. 14. par. 1. 4. a. 8. c. 2. par. 2. Bell will not have us
hear Scripture read in Churches, art. 7. c. 7. parag. 16. Bell will examine
Scripturs, art. 7. c. 9. par. 12. Bell wresteth Scripture, art. 8. c. 1. parag.
6. Berengarius dyed a Catholic, a. 2. c. 5. par. 1. Berhaeans example
explicated and what they examined, art. 7. c. 11. parag. 4. S. Bernards meaning
about possibility of loving God, art. 8. c. 4. parag. 3. 4. S. Bernards meaning
about merit, art. 5. c. 5. parag. 9. Bible alone canonical Scripture but not
alone Canonical, art. 7. c. 11. parag. 3. Bible conserved and believed to be
Gods word by Tradition, art. 7. c. 9. parag. 4. Bilson attributing to Kings
participation of Gods name, power, honor and homag^, art. 1. c. 7. parag. 7.
Bishops oath to the Pope made with consent of al Catholic Princes, a. 7. c. 14.
par. 2. Bishops oath to the Pope lawful, and ancient, art. 7. c. 14. parag. 2.
Bishops swear no rebellion. a. 7. c. 14. par. 3. Britanny converted first to
Popery, art. 7. c. 10. parag. 2.
C.
Catholics and Protestants true difference in whom the supremacy is, art. 1.
c. 2. parag. 3. Catholics never attributed to the Pope power proper to God,
art. 1. chap. 7. parag. 5. Catholics faith of the Eucharist grownded upon
Scripture and Fathers, art. 2. c. 1. parag. 7. 8. Catholic Church like a
prudent nurse, art. 7. c. 7. parag. 17. Catholics and Protestants opinion
about deposition of Princes compared, art. 1. c. 3. parag. 8. Catholics
falsely charged where Protestants might better, art. 7. c. 1. par. 4.
Catholics falsely charged about disobedience to evil Kings, art. 1. c. 9.
parag. 34. Catholics how they think the commandments possible, art. 8. c. 1.
parag. 2. Catholics have Tradition even from S. Peter, art. 7. c. 9. parag.
10. Catholics use Scripture in vulgar tongue, art. 7. c. 8. parag. 4. Calvin
attributes divine power to Magistrates, art. 1. c. 7. parag. 3. Calvin
confesses S. Austin to think inuoluntary concupiscence no true sin, art. 4.
c. 1. parag. 18. Calvin accounts the sacrifice of the cross insufficient,
art. 2. c. 4. parag. 5. Calvin father of the new Arrians, art. 7. c. 1. parag.
5. Caluins small account of Gods word when it is against him, art 2. c. 1.
parag. 10. Caluinists become Arrians, and Mahumetans, art. 7. c. 1. parag. 5.
Ceremonial law perfectly prescribed to the Jews, art. 7 c. 2 parag. 5 6.
Charles made Emperor without consent of Eastern Emperors, art. 1. chap. 9.
paragr 19. Choice propounded to Protestants about Emperors made by Popes, art.
1. c. 6. parag. 3 an other about Traditions, art. 7. c. 9. parag. 3. about
Luther, art. 7. c. 9. parag. 16. Christ's body to be organical in the sacrament
no point of faith, a. 2. c 1. parag. 6. Christ's body in his nariuity in a little
room art. 2. c. 1. parag 12. Christ's body in on^ place naturally in many
sacramentally, art. 2. c. 2. parag. 6. Christ's body broken in a sign, art. 2.
c. 5. parag. 3. Christ's body broken in a sign which really contains it. art.
2 c. 5. parag. 4. Christ's blood is a testament, a 2. c. 3 par. 7. Christ's blood
how powered out, or shed at his supper, art 2. c. 4. parag 8. Christ car^yed him
self literally or really in his own hands, art. 2. c. 4 parag. 1. Christ
nether killed nor dies at Mass, art. 2. c. 3. parag. 6. Christ offered
sacrifice at his last supper, art. 2. c. 2. parag. 2. Christ's sacrifice at his
last supper not imperfect nor at his passion needles, art. 2. c. 4. parag. 4.
Christ sacramental being, a representation of his natural being, a. 2. c. 4.
parag. 1. Christians bound to obey as well the present as the primative Church,
a. 7. c. 13. par 2. S. Chrisostom about Traditions explicated, art. 7. c. 4.
parag. 11. S. Chrisostom about reading Scripture explicated, and opposite
therein to Protestants, art. 7. c. 7. parag. 8. S. Chrisostom how he mea^t that
Christ bid us not immitate his fast, a. 7. c. 10. par. 6. S. Chrisostom gives
not people liberty to expound Scriptures contrary to their Pastors, a. 7. c. 7.
parag. 8. Churches authority not mere human, art. 7. c. 9. parag. 21.
Churches authority concurreth to divine says, art. 7. c. 9. parag. 20.
Churches authority both first brought and continued S. Austin in belief of the
Ghospel, art. 7. c. 9. parag. 19. Church within 200. years after Christ highly
esteemed Traditions, a. 7. c. 10. parag. 2. Church may justly abridg any
liberty given by S. Chisostom, art. 7. c. 7. parag. 8. Church of late days as
infallible witness of Gods truth as the primative, art. 7. c. 9. parag. 5. 6.
Church present only infallible external witness of Scripture, art. 7. c. 9.
parag. 7. Church believes not the old testament for any tradition of Jews,
art. 7. c. 9. par. 10. Church of the east acknowledges the Popes primacy, art.
7. c. 13. parag. 6. S. Cyprian wherein he erred, a. 7. c. 4. par. 6. 7. S.
Cyprian rejected one only Tradition, art. 7. c. 4. parag. 7. S. Cyprian opposite
to Bell about Traditions in most things, art 7. c. 4. parag. 7. Commandment may
be substiantially kept by Gods grace, art. 8. c. 1. parag. 1. Commandments
truly kept of the man Math. 19. art. 8. c. 1. parag. 3. Commandments can not
be truly kept and deadly broken, art 8 c. 1. parag. 2. Communion book made out
of the Missal and Portesse, art. 2. c. 6. parag. 10. Councels acknowledge the
Popes primacy, art. 7. c. 13. parag. 6. Councels determination not needles,
art. 7. c. 14. parag. 4. Councels in our days as certain as before time, art.
7. c. 13. parag. 1. Councels in some sort like to Parliament, art. 7. c. 13.
parag. 4. In Confiteor why we say our great fault, art. 8. c. 4. parag. 5.
Concupiscence diversely named, art. 4. c. 1. parag. 3. Concupiscence how
commanded not to be at al according to S. Austin, art. 8. ^. 4. parag. 2. art.
2. c. 3. parag 6. Concupiscence actual though inuoluntary is evil, art 4. c. 1.
parag 4. Concupiscence actual inuoluntary no formal sin, art. 4. c. 1. parag
7. Concup^^cence actual if voluntary is formal sin, art. 4. c. 1. parag. 5.
Concupiscence if never inuoluntary nothing is inuoluntary, art 4. c 1 parag 10.
Concupiscence habitual both positive and privative evil, art. 4 c. 1. parag. 1.
Concupiscence habitual in the not regenerate materially original sin, art. 4.
c. 1. parag. 2. Concupiscence habitual in the regenerate no formal sin, art.
4. c. 1 parag. 14. Concupiscence how it need for giuenes, a. 4 c. 3 parag. 3.
Concupiscence habitual and actual in whomsoever may be called sin, art. 4. c.
1. parag. 6. Concupiscence indirectly volu^tary known by the law to be true
sin, art. 4. c. 3. parag. 9. Concupiscence directly voluntary not executed,
hardly known to be sin without the law, art. 4. c. 2. parag. 9. Condign
merit no point of faith, art. 5. c. 3. parag. 4. Condign merit proved, art. 5.
c. 3. parag. 4. 6. 7. Condign merit what it requires, art. 5. c. 3. parag. 7.
Condign merit of man explicated by the labors of a slave, art. 5. c. 6. parag.
2. Condign merit denied by some Catholics, but differently from Protestants,
art. 5. c. 6. parag. 10. Condign merit of man not absolute but conditional,
art. 5. c. 3 parag. 5. Condign merit of man not arithmetically equal, but
proportionate to the reward, art. 5. c. 3. parag. 5. Condign merit rises not
merely of Gods acceptance, art. 5. c. 3. parag. 5. Condignity rises partly of
our work, as it is the fruit of the holy Ghost, art. 5. c. 3. parag. 5.
Condign merit honorable to God and to Christ's merits, art. 5. c. 3. parag. 7.
8. Co^digne merit only true merit, a. 5. c. 3. par. 6. Coniugal copulatio^ may
be meritorious, and give grace, art. 3. c. 1. parag. 9. Copulation rather
Ministerish then Popish art. 3. c. 1. parag. 7. Consciences timorous fear
little sins as great, art. 8. c. 4. parag. 5. Constantins departure from Rome
no step to the Popes primacy, art. 1. c. 8. parag. 3. Constantin honored the
Pope, a. 1. c. 6 par. 6. Constantins humility in the Nicen Council, art. 7. c.
13. parag. 5. Consumption may be without killing, art. 2. c. 3. parag. 6. Curse
of the law pronounced only against heinous crimes, art. 8. c. 3. parag. 2.
D.
DAnger in not crediting Roman Traditions, art. 7 c. 10. parag. 11. Dealing
with heretics we must have other help beside Scripture, and why, art. 7. c. 5.
parag. 1. 2. Denial of the commandments to be possible injurious to Gods
grace, a. 8. c. 2. par. 4. Deposition of Princes first decreed by S. Gregory
the great, art. 2. c. 5. parag. 4. Difference of the doctrine in pulpit, and
school, art. 7. c. 7. parag. 9. Dilemma about the Popes superiority over
Emperors, art. 1. c. 6. parag. 3. Dilemma for Bell, art. 1. c. 9. parag. 21.
Disagrement of Authors about time and circumstances disproueth not the fact,
art. 1. c. 9. parag. 17. Disagreement of school men far different from that of
Protestants, a. 4. c. 4. par. 7. Differences between S. Chrisostom and
Protestants about reading Scripture, art. 7. c. 7. parag. 5.
E.
EAst Empire when it began to decay, art. 1. c. 9. parag. 1. Eckins foiled
Luther, art. 5. c. 6. parag. 4. Emperors called the Popes arbitrament
celestial, art. 1. c. 9. parag. 28. Emperors have confessed the Popes
superiority over them, art. 1. c. 6. parag. 4. Emperors subject to Bishops
according to S. Gregory Nazianz. art. 7. c. 13 parag. 5. Emperors subject to
the sea of Rome, according to S. Gregory the great, a. 1. c. 5. par. 2.
Emperors who have humbled them selfs to Popes, named, art. 1. c. 6. parag. 6.
7. Emperors of the East why offended with Charles creation, art. 1. c. 9.
parag. 19. England named feasts of the Mass, art. 2. c. 3. parag. 5. English
bybles al hitherto il translated, art. 7. c. 8. parag. 1. English bybles
contain untrue and seditions notes, art. 1, c. 3. parag. 7. S. Epiphanius and
S. Cyril explicated, their reverence of Traditions, art. 7. chap. 4. parag. 10.
Epistles of S. Peter, S. Ihon, S. James, and S. Jude, written against
solifidian justice, art. 7. c. 6. parag. 2. Eternal life sower ways grace, and
yet true reward, art. 5. c. 4. parag. 2. Eternal life may signify
justification, art. 5. c. 4. parag. 6.
F.
FAith can not discern any thing clearly art. 7. c. 9. parag. 15. Faith in all
points not actually in Scripture, art. 7. c. 1. parag. 9. Faith in all points
not sufficiently, and immediately proved by Scripture, art. 7. c. 1. parag. 10.
Faith in all points vertually in Scripture two ways, art. 7. c. 1. parag. 7.
Faith why not so perfectly prescribed to Jews as ceremonies, art. 7. c. 2.
parag. 7. Faith in no point may be denied of any, art. 7. c. 1. parag. 1. Faith
in diverse points need not be actually believed of many, art. 7. c. 1. parag. 1.
Fathers proved consubstantiality by Tradition, art. 7. c. 12. parag. 2. Fale of
the western Empire no step to the Popes primacy, art. 1. c. 8. parag. 4. Figure
or represent one thing may it self, art. 2. c. 6. parag. 2. Figure what
inferior to the thing figured what not, art. 2. c. 6. parag. 1. Figurative
exposition usual shift of heretics, art* 2. c. 1. parag 9. 10. First
Protestants haunted of Devils, art. 2. c. 1. per ^ot. Formal object of faith,
art. 7. chap. 9. parag^. 24.
G.
GOds precepts both possible and easy to them that love him, art. 8. c. 1.
paragr. 10. God how he can put a great body into a little, how not, art. 2. c. 1
parag 13. 14. 1^. 16. God not imputing sin takes it away, art. 4. c. 3.
parag. 4. Gods word by it self can not be discerned as easily as light, art.
7 c. 9. parag. 13 Gods word how an explication of the two precepts of love,
art. 7. c. 1. parag. 8 Gods word why called a light and lanthern, art. 7. c.
9. parag. 17. Good gotten of Protestants by English bibles, art 7. c. 8. parag.
1. Good works are condign merit, art. 5. c. 3. parag. 2. 4. Good works
follow not every parson justified, art. 5 c. 2. parag. 1. Good works give no
security of salvation, art. 5. c. 2. parag. 3. Good works possible, and usual
mean to salvation, art. 8. c. 1. parag 7. Gods word not known at first to
Samuel Gedeon Manue, S. Peter, art. 7. c. 9. parag. 13. Ghospel a supply of the
old testament, art. 7. c. 2. parag. 3. S. Gregory a saint with Luther and
Calvin, a Papist with Bell, art. 1. c. 5. parag. 5. S. Gregory accounted Kings
subject to him, and how he called the Emperor lord, art. 1. c. 5. parag 2. 3.
S. Gregory first decreed deposition of Princes, art. 1. c. 5. parag. 4. S.
Gregory said Mass in honor of Martyrs, art 1. c. 5. parag. 5. S. Gregory
Nazianz. discommended common peoples reading Scripture, art. 7. c. 7. parag 19.
Greater authority may be contested by lesser, art. 7. c. 9. parag. 23.
H.
Heretics shift is to expound Scripturs figuratively, art. 2. c. 1. parag. 9.
Heretics reject Traditions, art. 7. c. 4. parag. 14. S. Hieroms high esteem of
the Popes definition, art. 7. c. 12. parag. 1. S. Hierom whom and how he
exhotteth to read Scripture, art. 7. c. 7. parag. 17. Hatred of Mass whence it
first rose, art. 2. c. 3. parag. 3.
I.
S. James epistle contemned by Luther, art. 7. c. 9. parag. 16. S. James c. 2.
v. 2. means of venial sins, art. 8. c. 3. parag. 1. Jews added signs and
words to the law according to Protestants, a. 7. c. 2. par. 2. Ignorance of it
self no holiness, art. 7. c. 7. parag. 18. Ignorance what better then what
knowledge, art. 7. c. 7. parag. 18. Ignorance of Scripture not the whole cause
of the Sadduces error, a. 7. c. 11. par. 3. S. Ihon what he bid us try, a. 7.
c. 11. parag. 5. S. Ihon c. 20. v. 30. means of miracles, art. 7. c. 3.
parag. ^. S. Ihon ep. 1. c. 3. v. 4. means of mortal sin, art. 6. c. 2.
parag. 2. Impossible to be guilty of sin, and to have sin forgiven, art. 4.
c. 1. parag. 15. Imputing of sin what with S. Austin, art. 4. c. 3. parag. 4.
not Imputation of Protestants mere contradiction, art. 6. c. 1. parag. 4.
Inclination to faith iustifyeth infants with Bell, art. 7. c. 1. parag. 6.
Iniquity and formal sin differ, a. 6. c. 2. par. 6. Iniquitas used in a
different sense, 1. Joan. a. 6. c. 2. parag. 5. Inuoluntary motions are not
voluntary in their origin from Adam, a. 4. c. 1. par. 11. Inuoluntary motions
though they were voluntary in their origin could be no sin, art. 4. c. 1.
parag. 12. S. Joseph called rather keeper then husband of our Lady, art. 3. c.
1. parag. 11. S. Ireney his high account of the Roman Church, art. 7. c. 10.
parag. 4. Italy not al possessed of Barbars from 471. til Carolus Magnus, art.
1. chap. 8. parag. 5. Justice of man how imperfect, art. 5. chap. 5. parag. 3.
K.
KEepers of the commandments avouched more then twenty times in one psalm,
art. 8. c. 1. parag. 5. Kings of Lombardy called Kings of Italy, art. 1. c. 9.
parag. 7. Kings not so much as ministerial heads of the Church with
Protestants, a. 1. c. 2. par. 1.
L.
Our Ladies conception without sin no point of faith, art. 7. c. 10. par. 10.
Latin sermons not readde to common people, art. 7. c. 8. parag. 4. Law of the
Ghospel includes law of nature, art. 8. c. 1. parag. 10. Law fulfilled by not
consenting to Concupiscence, art. 4. c. 3. parag. 6. Lay men when and how
forbidden to dispute of faith, art. 7. c. 8. parag 4. Lent an Apostolical
Tradition, art. 7. c. 10. parag. 5. 6. Lent fast lawfully broken in diverse
cases, art. 7. c. 10. parag. 6. Love of God as we ought, possible to men, art.
8. c. 1. parag. 10. Love of God how imperfectly kept according to S. Thomas,
art. 8. c. 2. parag. 3. Luther begun Protestantisme, art. 7. c. 1. parag. 16.
Luther instructed of a Devil by his own confession, art. 2. c. 1. parag. 2.
Luther hated the word homousion, art. 7. c. 1. parag. 5. Luther convinced by
Scripture to confess the real presence, art. 2. c. 2. parag. 1. Lutherans
opinions of the Caluinists, art. 2. c. 1 parag. 10.
M.
Marriage broken for six causes, amongst Protestants, art 3. c. 1. parag. 3.
Marriage contracted why it can not be broken by the parties, art. 3. c. 1.
parag. 10. Marriage a sacrament before consummatio^, art. 3. c. 1. parag. 8.
Marriage contracted is d^^ure diuino and of the continuance th^reof, a. 3. ^. 1
parag. 6. Marriage perfected by consummation, art. 2. c. 1. parag. 8. Mass^
honored in the whole world, art. 2. c. 3. parag. 5. Mass said of the Apostles,
and Saints, art. ^. c. 2. parag. 4. M^n rather do not, then do* what is against
their will, art. 4 ^. 2. parag. 4. Men al sinners but not deadly, a 8 c. ^. par.
4. Men can be without crime not without sin, ar^. 8. c. 1. parag. 2. Merit
far different from impetration, art. 5. c. 3. parag. 2. M^rit no more injurious
to C^rists merit then prayer to his prayer, a 5 c 3 parag. 8. Merit why no
sin out of S. Austin, art. 4. c ^. parag. 4. Merit in resisting
Concupiscence, art 4 c. 1. parag 13. Ministers subscribe against their
conscience, art. 1 c. 2. parag. 2. More required to formal sin then to evil,
art. 4. c. ^. parag. 4. Mortal, and venial sins such of their own nature, art.
6. c. 1. parag. ^.
N.
NIcholas 1 words of earthly and heavenly empire expounded, a. ^. c. 9. par.
34. Not only predestinate do good, art: 5 c. 2. parag. 3. None ought to deny
any point of faith, art. 7 c 1 parag. 1. Not to perfect good is not to si^n^,
art. 4. c. 3. parag. 5.
O.
O^d Roman religion Catholic, sound and pure, art. 6. c. 2. parag. 8.
Omission, or alteration what does hinder consecration, art. 2. c 6 parag 8
Original justice what it is, a. 4. c. 1. parag. 2. Original sin what, art. 4.
c. 1. parag. 2. Original lust made actual oy Bell, art. 4. c. 3. parag. 7.
P.
S. Paul how he understood the word (beside) Galat 11. v. 2. a 7 c. 11. parag.
5. S Paul loc. cit. meant of his preaching not of Scripture, art. 7 c. 1. parag
6 S. Paul might have called glory a stipend, ar^. 5. ^. 4. parag 2. S Paul Romans
7 explicated. a. 4 c. 2 per tot. S. Paul Rom 8 explicated, a. ^. c. 4. par. 10.
Pelagians thought knowledge of Scripture necessary to every one, art. 7. c. 1
par. 3. Pelagians licenced women to be skil^ul in Scripture and to sing with
them, a 7. c. 7. parag 13. Peoples owing no obed^e^^^ to evil Princes no
doctrine of Catholics, art. 1. c. 9. par. 4. S. Policarps account of the Popes
sentence art. 7. c. 10. parag. 4. Popes accounted loyal excommunicated
Emperors, art. 1. c. 5. parag. 4. Pope as Pope challenges no royal right to
either sword, art. 1. c. 9. parag. 22. Pope can not depose Princes ordinarily
even for just causes, art. 1. c. 1. par. 5. 6. Pope can not depose princes for
his pleasure, art. 1 c. 1. parag. 5. Popes and Protestants proceedings in
deposing Princes compared, a. 1. c. 9. par. 26. Pope cold not become Antichrist
by the acceptance of the Exarchate, a. 1. c. 9. par. 4. Pope as Pope has no
temporal jurisdiction at al, art. 1. c. 1. parag. 4. Popes confirmation by
Emperors when it began, and when it left, a. 1. c. 8. par. 8. Pope has
censured all that molest our King art. 1. c. 4. parag. 6. Pope did never
challeng power proper or equal to God, art. 1. c. 7. parag. 3. Pope how he is
said to have more then humain power, art 1. c. 7 parag. 3. Pope how he may be
called King of Kings, art. 1. c. 7. parag. 6. Pope how he may he King now
though he were not in Pepins time, art 1. c. 9 par 8. Pope highly esteemed by
S. Bernard, art. 1. chap. 7. parag. 6. Popes sentence highly esteemed by S.
Hierom, art. 7. c. 12. parag. 1. and by others* ibid. c. 10. parag. 4. Popes
definitive sentence a rule of faith in S. Cyprians time, art. 7. c. 12. parag.
1. Pope never dispensed to mary a full sister, art. 3. c. 1. parag. 13. Pope in
Council as King in parliament, art. 7. c. 13. parag. 8. Popes have given three
Kingdoms to England, art. 1. c. 9. parag. 17. Popes liberality to Christian
Princes, art. 1. c. 9. parag. 37. Popes most cruelly handled by Christian
princes, art. 1. c. 9. parag. 27. Popes might have apostatated from faith and
yet not taught heresy, art. 7. c. 10. par. 9. Popes name ever from the Apostles
time, art. 1. c. 5. parag. 6. Popes never apostated in heart, a. 7. c. 10. par.
9. Popes not proud in mainteining their dignity, art. 7. c. 13. parag. 5.
Popes or princes of what nothing they can make something, art. 1 c. 9. parag.
29. Popes or princes of what things they can alter the nature, art. 1. c. 9
parag. 28. Popes true step to his primacy, a. 1. c. 9. par. 32. Pope nether
spiritual nor temporal superior to al princes on earth, a. 1. c. 1. par. ^. 4.
Popes primacy acknowledged by Gretian Emperors, Councels, and Patriarchs, art.
7. c. 13. parag. 6. Popes private doctrine may be examined but not his judicial
sentence of faith, art. 7. c. 14. parag. 2. Popes present in most Councels of
the west art. 7. c. 13. parag 8. Popes taught always the doctrine of S. Peter,
art. 7. c. 10. parag. 8. Pope translated the Empire, and appointed the
Electors, art. 1. c. 6. parag. 3. 4. Popery confessed to have been with in 200.
years after Christ, art. 7. c. 10. parag. 2. Prayers in an unknown tongue
commended by S. Paul, art. 7. c. 8 parag. 2. Princes absolute have no temporal
superior, art. 1. c. 1. parag 4. Princes deposed by Prophets, a. 1. c 5. par.
3. Protestants admit Tradition, a. 7. c. 9. par. 11. Protestants have no reason
to admit one tradition, and no more, art. 7. c. 9. par. 11. Protestants
arrogate more power and authority then the Pope, a. 1 c. 7* par. 3. Protestants
call Catholics Papists and Popish of the Pope yet will not call him Pope, art.
1. c. 5. parag. 5. Protestants censure of the communion book, art. ^. c. 6
parag. 10. Protestants contradictions about the Eucharist, art. 2. c. 6. parag.
11. Protestants innumerable explication, of four words, art. 2. c. 6. parag.
7. Protestants judgment of Fathers when they are against them, art. 5* c. 4
parag. 5. Protestants dissentions touched in the late conference, art. 4. c. 4
parag. 7. Protestants enemity to good works by word and deed, art. 5. c 1.
parag 2. 3. Protestants friendship to evil works, Ibid. parag. 3. Protestants
had the bible from Catholics and how, art. 7. c. 9. parag. 9. Protestants in
70. years have attempted to depose to. princes, art. 1. c. 4. parag 6.
Protestants have murdered diverse princes, art. 1. c. 4. parag. 6. Protestants
have burnt two Kings bodies, Ibid. Protestants abuse princes, art. 1. c. 9.
par. 3^. Protestants make and unmake Emperors as they list, art. 1. c. 6 parag.
3. Protestants opinion of deposing princes, art. 1. c. 3 per tot. Protestants
and the Popes deposing princes compared, art. 1. c. 4. parag 6. Protestants
opinion of princes supremacy, art. 1. c. 2. parag. 1. 2. Protestants and
Catholics opinion about supremacy compared, ibid. parag. 3. Protestants make
their professed enemies papists, art. 7. c. 1. parag. 13. Protestants manner of
answering Catholics, art. 1. c. 6. parag. 1. Protestants new light, art. 1.
c. 6. parag. 9. Protestants overthrow their own arguments against. Tradition,
art. 7. c. 9. par. 11. Protestants persuade to read Scripture as the serpent to
eat the apple, art. 7. c. 7. parag. 2. Protestants good by english bibles,
art. 7. c. 8. parag. 1. Protestants promise with Manichees undoubted truth for
to overthrow authority, art. 7. c. 9. parag. 23. Protestants teach doctrine of
Devils, art. 2. c. 1. parag. 1. 2. 3. Protestants try divine truth, a. 7. c.
12. par. 4. Protestant women preached publikly in Germany, art. 7. c. 13.
Puritans subscribe to the communion book only in respect of time, art. 1. c. 2.
par. 2. Puritans urge the supremacy only for policy, art. 1. c. 2. parag. 2.
Q.
Q. Elizabeth's affiance in Catholics fidelity, art. 1. c. 4. parag. 4.
R.
REading of Scripture not debarred from the godly, art. 7. c. 7. parag. 3.
Reading or hearing Gods word without understanding, of great effect, ibid.
Reading of Scripture not necessary nor expedient to al, art. 7. c. 7. parag. 1.
2. Real presence proved out of Scripture and Fathers, art. 2. c. 1. parag 7. 8.
Reason not to be sought in Gods works, art. 2. c. 1. parag. 11. Remaining of
sin what it is, a. 4. c. 1. p. 16. Reprobats not al positiuely damned for
original sin, art. 4. c. 2. parag. 6. Reprobats how may be said to be damned
for original sin, art. 4. c. 2 parag. 6. Reinolds proof against him self,
art 7. c. 3. parag. 3. Royal power far inferior to Pontifical, art. 1. c. 9.
parag. 31. Rome the top of high preisthood, art. 7. c. 13. parag. 6. Roman
religion above a thousand years ago out of Bell, art. 7. c. 10. parag. 9.
Roman Church always kept the Apostles Traditions. Rule of trying truth
prescribed by the Council of Trent, art. 7. c. 12. parag. 4.
S.
SAbbath translation not warrented by Scripture, art. 7. c. ^. parag. 9.
Sabbath translation warrented by Tradition, art. 7. c. 9. parag. 4. Sacrament
of Eucharist improperly called Christ's body, art. 2. c. 4. parag. 14. B*
Sacrament both a sacrifice and a testament, art. 2 c. 4. parag. 6. Sacrifice
requires not killing a. 2. c. 3 par. 8. Sacrificing of flesh by Priests hands
allowed by Bell, art. 2 c. 4. parag 13. no Sacrilege to dispute o^ the Popes
power, art 1 c 9 parag. 34. Sadduces erred for ignorance both of Scripture and
Gods power, art. 7 c. 11. par 3. Sal^mon deposed not Abiathar, art. 1. c. 5.
parag. 10. Samuel cold not discern Gods word from man's word but by Hely his
teach^ng, ar^. 7. c. 9. parag. 13. Saints honor, an Apostolical Tradition, art.
7. c. to parag 11. Satisfaction supposes remission of sins, art. 5. c. 6.
parag. 5. Search the Scrip^urs explicated, art. 7. c. 11. parag. 3. Scripturs,
and the Churches authority differ, art. 7. c. 9. parag. 23. Scripture believed
both for Gods, and the Churches testimony, art. 7. c. 9. par. 18. Scripture how
of it self worthy of credit, art. 7. c. 9. parag. 18. Scripture the storehouse
of truth, art. 7. c. 5. parag. 1. Scripture has al points actually to be
believed of every one, art. 7. c 1. parag 2. Scripture contains virtually not
actu^lly al points of Christian faith, art. 7. c. 1. parag. 7. 9. Scripture can
not sufficiently and immediately prove al points of faith, a. 7. c 1. par. 10.
Scripture how able to make men wise to salvation, art. 7. ^. 3 parag. 8.
Scripture no poison but food of li^e, art. 7. c. 7. parag. 18. Scripture easy
in things necess^ry to every ones salvation, art 7. c. 6. parag. 1. Scripture
absolutely hard, ibid. Scripture more in sense then in words, art. 7. c 9.
parag. 14 Scripture not so clearly discerned as light from darkness, art. 7. c.
9. parag. 15. Scripture why called a lantherne or light, art. 7. c. 9. parag.
17. Scripturs vulgar reading, what monsters it has bred in England, art. 7. c.
7. parag 2. Service of God in the old law some time nether heard nor seen of
the people, art. 7. c. 8. parag. 3. Service in an unknown tongue discommended
only of idiots, and infidels, art. 7. c. 8. parag 2. Sin habitual what it is,
art 4 c. ^. parag. 3. Sin some of it nature breaks friendship with God, some
not, art 6. c. 1 par. 6. Sin ordinarily taken only for mortal, art. 6. c. 2.
parag. 1. Socrates his error, art. 7. c. 10 parag. 5. S. Steeuen P. defined not
the controversy about rebaptization, art. 7. c. 12. parag. 1. Superior and
inferior not contradictions but relatiues, and may be verifyed of the same
thing, art. ^. c. 6. parag. 2.
T.
S. Thomas how he called our keeping the commandments imperfect, art. 8. c. 2.
parag. 3. Traditions of three kinds, art. 7. chap. 9. parag. 1. Traditions
which impugned by Bell, ibid. which defended in this book, ibid. Traditions
there are containing things necessary to salvation, art. 7. c. 9. par. 1.
Traditions how they are explications of the law, art. 7. c. 2. parag. 4.
Tradition admitted by Bell, art. 7. chap. 9. parag. 8. Traditions how they are
additions to Scripture how not, art. 7. c 2. parag. 3. 4. Traditions
apostolical, certain and undoubted, art. 7. c. 10. parag. 1. Traditions
Apostolical not to be examined by Scripture, art. 7. c. 11. parag. 1.
Traditions how they may be examined by the Church, art. 7. c. 11. parag. 1.
Traditions how to be examined out of Tertullian, art. 7. c. 11. parag. 1.
Traditions avouched by the Fathers, art. 7. c. 4. per tot. Traditions defended
by S. Paul, and S. Ihon art. 7. c. 9. parag. 1. 2. Traditions in S. Cyprians
days sufficient proof of doctrine, art. 7. c. 12. parag. 1. Tradition of
Easter certain, a. 7. c. 10. par. 3. Tradition of as equal force to piety as
Scripture, art. 7. c. 4 parag. 13. 14. Tradition rejected by old heretics, art.
7. c. 4. parag. 1. Treason disannulleth not the gift, art. 1. c. 6 parag. 3.
Truth evidently known, to be preferred before authority, art. 7. c. 9. parag.
23. Truth what and how to be tried, art. 7. c. 12. parag. 4.
V.
Value of the Mass, art. 2. c. 4. parag. 9. Variety of fasting lent rose of
ignorance or negligence, art. 7. c. 10. par. 5. Venial sins admitted by Bell,
art. 6. chap. 1. parag. 1. Venial sin why not against the law, art. 6. c. 1.
parag. 8. Venial sin such of his nature, art. 6. c. 1. parag. 2. Voluntary in
the origin what it is, art. 4. c. 1. parag. 11. Voluntary motion of evil why
expressly forbidden in the tenth commandment, art. 4. c. 3. parag. 10. Use and
abuse of a thing to be distinguished, art. 7. c. 10. parag. 11.
W.
VVItnesses sufficient of Gods truth by what made, art. 7. chap. 9. parag. 6.
Women ought to be instructed of men, art. 7. c. 7. paragr. 5. Women may teach
in case of necessity* or particular inspiration, art. 7. chap. 7. parag 13.
Words of consecration when and how they work their effect, a. 2. c. 6. parag.
5. Worshipping an unconsecrated host upon ignorance no offense, art. 2. c. 6.
par. 8. Wiats rebellion defended and praised by Protestants, art. 1. c. 3.
parag. 6.
X.
XArisma well translated by grace, art. 5. c. 4. parag. 4.
FINIS.

