IH^S

FOUR SERMONS PREACHED BY MASTER HENRY SMITH.

And published by a more perfect copy then heretofore.

ET VSQVE AD NVBES VERITAS TVA
printer's or publisher's device

AT LONDON Printed by P. S. for Cutbert Burby. 1599.

PS



The contents,
1 The trumpet of the soul. 2 The sinful man's search. 3 Mary's choice. 4
Noah's drunkenness.
THE TRVMPET OF THE SOVLE SOVNDING TO IVDGEMENT.
By Henry Smith.
Ecclesiastes. 11. Chap. 9. verse. The text.

Rejoice O young man in thy youth: and let thy heart be merry in thy young days:
follow the ways ofthine own heart, and the lusts ofthine eyes: But remember
for all these things thou must come to judgment.


WHen I should have Preached under the cross, I mused what text to take in
hand to please all, and to keep my self out of danger: and musing, I could
not find any text in the scripture that did not reprove sin, unless it
were in the Apocrypha, which is not of the scripture: this text bids them that
be voluptuous, be voluptuous still: let them that be vain glorious, be vain
glorious still: let them that be covetous, be covetous still: let them that be
drunkards, be drunkards still: let them that be swearers, be swearers still:
let them that be wantons, be wantons still: let them that be careless prelates,
be careless still: let them that be usurers, be usurers still: but says Solomon,
Remember thy end, that thou shall be called to judgment at the last for
altogether. This is the counsel of Salomo^ the wisest then living: what a
counsel is this for a wise man, such a one as was Solomon?

In the beginning of his book he says, All is vanity, and in the end he
says, Fear God and keep his commandments, in the 12. Chapter he says,
Remember thy maker in the days of thy youth. But here he says, Rejoice O
young man in thy youth. Here he speaks like an epicure, which says, Eat,
drink, and be merry: here he counsels, and here he mockes: yet not after
the manner of scorners, although they deserved it in showing their foolishnes,
as it is in the first of the Proverbs, He laughed at the wicked in derision:
As in the 2. Psalm, God seeing us follow our own ways. For when he bids us
pray, we play: and when he bids us run, we stand still: and when he bids
us fast, we feast: and send for vanities to make us sport: then he laughes at
our destruction. Therefore when Solomon gives a sharp reproof, and makes
you ashamed in a word, he scoffinglie bids you do it again, like a
Schoolmaster which beats his Scholar for playing the truant, he bids him
play the truant again. O this is the bitterest reproof of all. But least any
Libertine should misconster Solomon, and say that he bids us be merry and make
much of our selves, therefore he shuts it up with a watchword, and sets a
bridle before his lips, and reprooueth it as he speaks it before he goes
any further, and says, But remember that for all these things, thou must come
to judgment. But if we will understand his meaning, he means when he
says, Rejoice, O young man, Repent, O young man in thy youth; and when he
says, Let thy heart cheer thee, let thy sins grieve thee: for he means
other-wise then he speaks: he speaks like Michal in the book of Kings 2.
Chap. Go up and prosper, or like as Ezechiell, Go up and serve other Gods, or
as Saint John speaks in the Revelation, Let them that he wicked, be wicked
still. But if there were no judgment day, that were a merrye world: therefore
says Solomon, When thou art in thy pleasures flaunting in the fields, and in
thy brave ruffes and amongst thy lovers, with thy smyling looks, thy wanto^
talk and merry iestes, with thy pleasant games and lofty looks; Remember for all these things thou shall come to judgment.

Whilst the thief steals, the hemp grows, and the hook is covered
within the bait: we sit down to eat, and rise up to play, and from play to
sleep, and a hundredth years is counted little enough to sin in: but how many
sins thou have set on the score, so many kinds of punishments shall be
provided for thee. How many years of pleasure thou have taken, so many
years of pain: how many drams of delight, so many pounds of dolor: when
iniquity has played her part, vengeance leapes upon the stage, the comedy is
short, but the tragedy is longer: the black guarde shall attend upon you,
you shall eat at the table ofsorrowe, and the crown of death shall be upon
your heads, many glistring faces looking on you, and this is the fear of
sinners: when the devil has entised them to sin, he presumes like the
old Prophet in the book of Kings, who when he had entised the young Prophet
contrary to the commandment of God, to turn home with him and to eat and
drink, he cursed him for his labor, because he disobeyed the commandment
of the Lord, and so a Lion devoured him by the way. The foolish virgins think
that their oil will never be spent: so Dina stragled abroad, whilst she was
defloured: what a thing is this to say rejoice, and then repent? What a blanke
to say, take thy pleasure, and then thou shall come to judgment? It is as if
he should say, steal and be hanged, steal and thou dare, strangle sin in
the cradle, for all the wisdom in the world will not help thee else: but thou
shall be in admiration like dreamers which dream strange things, and know
not how they come. He says, Remember judgment: if thou remember always, then
thou shall have little list to sin: if thou remember this, then thou shall
have little list to fall down to the devil, though he would give thee all
the world, and the glory thereof. Solomon says, the weed grows from a
weed to a cockle, from a cockle to a bramble, from a bramble to a brier, from
a brier to a thorn: Lying breeds perjury, perjury breeds hautines of heart:
hautines of heart breeds contempt: contempt breeds obstinacy and brings forth
much evil. And this is the whole progress of sin, he grows from a liar to
a thief, from a thief to a murderer, and never leaves until he have
searched all the rooms in hell, and yet he is never satisfied, the more he
sins, the more he searches to sin: when he has deceived, nay he has
not deceived thee: as soon as he has that he desires, he has not that he
desires: when he has left fighting, he goes to fighting again: yet a
little and a little more, and so we flit from one sin to another. While I
preach, you hear iniquity engender within you, and will break forth as soon
as you are gone. So Christ wept, Jerusalem laughed: Adam brake one, and we
break ten, like children which laugh and cry, so as if we kept a shop of
vices, now this sin, and then that, from one sin to another. O Remember thy
end says Solomon, and that thou must come to judgment. What shall become of
them that have tried them most? be condemned most: Rejoice O young man in thy
youth. But if thou mark Solomon, he harpes upon one string, he doubles it
again and again, to show us things of his own experience, because we are
so forgetful thereof in our selves, like the dreamer, that forgets his
dream, and the swearer his swearing. So we beg of every unclean spirit,
until we have bumbasted our selves up to the throat, filling every corner of
our hearts with all uncleanness, and then we are like the dog that comes
out of the sink, and makes every one as foul as himself: therefore says
Solomon, If any one will learn the way to hell, let him take his pleasure.
Methinke I see the dialogue between the flesh and the spirit, the worst
speaks first, and the flesh says, Soul, take thine ease, eat, drink, and
go brave, lie soft, what else should you do but take your pleasure, thou
know what a pleasant fellow I have been unto thee, thou know what
delight thou have had by my means: but the soul comes in, burdened with
that which has been spoken before, and says, I pray thee remember judgment,
thou must give account for all these things, for unless you repent, you shall
surely perish: no says the flesh, Talk not of such grave matters, but tell me
of fine matters, of soft beds and pleasant things, and talk me of brave
pastimes, Apes, Bears and Puppits, for I tell thee the forbidden fruit is
sweetest of all fruits, for I do not like of your telling me of judgment:
but take thou thy jewels, thy instrument, and all the stringes of vanity will
strike at once, for the flesh loves to be brave, and tread upon corkes, it
cannot tell what fashion to be of, and yet to be of the new fashion. Rejoice O
young man in thy youth.


O this goes brave, for while wickedness has cast his rubs, and vengeance
castes his spurs and his foot, and thus she reeles and now she tumbles,
and then she falls, therefore this progress is ended.

Pleasure is but a spur, riches but a thorn, glory but a blast, beauty but
a flower, sin is but an hypocrite, honey in thy mouth, and poison in thy
stomach: therefore let us come again and ask of Solomon in good sooth,
whether he means in good earnest, when he spoke these words, O (says
Solomon) it is the best life in the world to go brave, lie soft, and live
merely, if therewere no judgment. But this judgment mars all, it is like a
dampe that puts out all the light, and like a box that marreth all the
ointment: for if this be true, we have spunne a fair thread, that we must
answer for all, that are not able to answer for one: why Solomon makes us
fools, and gives us gawdes to play withal: what then, shall we not rejoice
at all? yes, there is a godly mirth and if we could hit on it, which is called,
Be merry and wise: Sara laughed, and was reproved: Abraham laughed, and was
not reproved. And thus much for the first part.

But remember that for all these things thou shall come to judgment.

This verse is as it were a dialogue betwixt the flesh and the spirit, as the
two counselors: the woorst is first, and the flesh speaks proudly, but the
spirit comes in burdened with that which has beenespoken. The flesh goes
laughing and singing to hell, but the spirit casts rubs in his way, and puts
him in mind of judgment, that for all these things: now ends rejoice, and
here comes in but: if this but were not, we might rejoice still, if young men
must for all the sportes of youth, what then shall old men do, being as they
are now? surely if Solomon lived to see our old men live now, as here he
says of young men, so high as sin rages, yet vengeance fits above it, as
high as high Babell. Me thinks I see a sword hang in the air by a twine
thread, and all the sons of men labor to burst it in sunder. There is a
place in hell where the covetous judge sits, the greedy Lawyer, the griping
Landlord, the careless Bishop, the lusty youth, the wanton dames, the thief,
the robbers of the commonwealth, they are punished in this life because they
ever sin as long as they could, while mercy was offered unto them, therefore
because they would not be washed, they shall be drowned. Now put together
rejoice and remember: thou have learned to be merry, now learn to be wise:
now therefore turn over a new leaf, and take a new lesson: for now Solomon
mocketh not as he did before, therefore a check to thy ruffes, a check to thy
cuffes, a check to thy robes, a check to thy gold, a check to your riches, a
check to your beauty, a check to your mucke, a check to your graves: woe from
above, woe from below, woe to all the stringes of vanity: do thou not now
marvel that thou had not a feeling of sin? for now thou see Solomon
says true, thine own heart can tell that it is wicked, but it cannot amend:
therefore it is high time to amend: as Nathan comes to David after Beelzebub,
so comes accusing conscience after sin. Me thinks that every one should
have a feeling of sin, though this day be like yesterdaie, and to morrow
like to day, yet one day will come for all, and then woe, woe, woe, and
nothing but darkness: and though God came; not to Adam until the evening,
yet he came: although the fire came: not upon Sodom until the evening, yet
it came and so comes the Judge although he be not yet come, though he have
leaden feet, he has iron hands: the arrow staieth and is not yet fallen so
is his wrath: the pit is dug, the fire kindled, and all things are made
ready and prepared against that day, only the small sentence is to come,
which will not long tarry. You may not think to be like to the thief that
steals and is not seen: nothing can be hid from him, and the Judge follows
thee at the heels: and therefore whatsoever thou art look about thee, and do
nothing but that thou would do openly, for all things are opened unto
him: Sara may not think to laugh and not be seen: Geheza may not think to
lie and not be known: they that will not come to the banquet, must stand at
the door. What, do you think that God does not remember our sins which we
do not regard? for while we sin, the score runs on, and the Judge sets
down all in the table of remembrance, and his scrole reaches up to heaven.

Item for lending to Usury. Item, for racking of rents. Item, for deceiving thy
brethren. Item for falsehood in wares. Item, for starching thy ruffes. Item, for
curling thy hair. Item, for painting thy face. Item, for selling of benefices.
Item, for staruing of souls. Item, for playing at cards. Item, for sleeping
in the church. Item, for profaning the Sabbath day. With a number more has
God to call to account, for every one must answer for himself. The fornicator
for taking of filthy pleasure, O son, remember thou have taken thy pleasure,
take thy punishment. The careless Prelate for murdering so many thousand
souls. The Landlorde for getting money from his poor Tenants by racking of
his rentes: see the rest, all they shall come like a very sheep, when the
Trumpet shall sound, and the heaven and earth sh^l come to judgment against
them: when the heavens shall vanish like a scrole, and the earth shall consume
like fire, and all the creatures standing against them: The rocks shall cleave
a sunder, and the mountains shake, and the foundation of the earth shall
tremble, and they shall say to the mountains, cover us, fall upon us and hide
us from the presence of his anger and wrath, whom we have not cared for to
offend: but they shall not be covered and hid: but then they shall go the
black way, to the snakes and serpents, to be tormented of devils for ever: O
pain unspeakable! and yet the more I express it, the more horrible it is,
when you think of a torment passing all torments, and yet a torment passing
all that: yet this torment is greater then them, and passing them all.

Imagine you see a sinner going to hell, and his somner gape at him, his
acquaintance look at him, the Angels shoute at him, and the Saints laugh at
him, and the devils rail at him, and many look him in the face: and they that
said they would live and die with him, forsake him, and leave him to pay all
the scores. Then Judas would restore his bribes. Esau would cast up his
pottage. Achan would cast down his gold, and Gehezi would refuse his
gifts. Nabuchadnezzar would be humbler. Balam would be faithful, and the
Prodigal son would be tame.

Me thinks I see Achan running about, where shall I hide my gold that I have
stolen, that it might not be seen nor stand to appear for a witness against me?

And Judas running to the high Priests, saying: hold, take again your money, I
will none of it, I have betrayed the innocent blood.

And Esau crying for the blessing when it is too late, having sold his
birthright for a mess of pottage.

Woe, woe, woe, that ever we were borne. O where is that Dives that would
believe this, before he felt the fire in hell, or that would believe the
poorest Lazarus in the world, to be better then himself, before that
dreadful day come when they cannot help it, if they would never so feign,
when repentance is too late? Herod shall then wish that he were John Baptist.
Pharaoh would wish that he were Moses, and Saul would wish that he had
been David. Nabuchadnezzar, that he had been Daniel. Hammon to have been
Mardocheus. Esau would wish to be Jacob, and Balam would wish he might die
the death of the righteous: then he will say, I will give more then Ezekias:
cry more then Esau: fast more then Moses: pray more then Daniell: weep more
then Mary Magdalen: suffer more stripes then Paul: abide more imprisonment then
Michai: abide more cruelty then any mortal man would do, that it migh be,
Ite, go ye cursed, might become ye blessed. Yea, I would give all the goods
in the world, that I might escape this dreadful day of wrath and judgment,
and that I might not stand amongst the go. O that I might live a beggar al my
life, and a Leaper. O that I might endure all plagues and sores from the top of
the head, to the sole of the foot, sustain all sickness and griefs, that I
might escape this judgment.

The guilty conscience cannot abide this day. The silly sheep when she is
taken will not bleate, but you may carry her and do what you will with her,
and she will be subject: but the swine, if she be once taken, she will roar
and cry, and thinks she is never taken but to be slain. So of all things,
the guilty conscience cannot abide to hear of this day, for they know that
when they hear of it, they hear of their own condemnation. I think if there
were a general collection made through the whole world, that there might be
no judgment day, then God would be so rich, that all the world would go a
begging, and be as a waste wilderness. Then the covetous Judge would bring
forth his bribes, then the crafty Lawyer would fetch out his bags: the
Usurer would give his gain, and the idle servant would dig up his talent
again, and make a double thereof. But all the money in the world vvil not serve
for one sin, but the Judge must answer for his bribes, he that has money,
must answer how he came by it, and just condemnation must come upon every
soul of them, then shall the sinner be ever dying and never dead, like the
Salamander that is ever in the fire and never consumed.

But if you come there, you may say as the Queen of Saba said of King Solomon,
I believed the report that I heard of thee in mine own country, but the one
half of thy wisdom was not told me. If you came there to see what is done,
you may say, Now I believe the report that was told me in mine own country
concerning this place, but the one half as now I feel, I have not heard of:
now choose you whether you will rejoice, or remember: whether you will stand
amongst you blessed, or amongst you cursed: whether you will enter while the
gate is open, or knock in vain when the gate is shut: whether you will seek
the Lord whilst he may be found, or be found of him when you would not be
sought, being run into the bushes with Adam to hide your selves: whether you
will take your heaven now here, or your hell then there: or through tribulation
to enter into the kingdom of God, and thus to take your hell now here, or your
heaven then there in the life to come with the blessed Saints and Angels, so
that hereafter you may lead a new life, putting on Jesus Christ and his
righteousness.

FINIS.
THE SINFVLL MAN'S SEARCH.
Job. 8. 5. 6. 7. 5 If thou will early seek unto God, and pray unto the
Almighty:

6 If thou be pure and upright: then surely he will awake unto thee, and make
the habitation of thy righteousness prosperous.

7 And though thy beginning be but small: yet thy latter end shall greatly
increase.


IN a sick and evil affected body (dearly beloved) we usually see
preparatiues ministered, that the maladies may be made more fit and pliable to
receive wholesome medicines. The like, yea, and greater regard ought we to have
of our souls which being not crasie only, or light ly affected with sin,
but sick even unto death, had need to be prepared with threats and
exhortations, comforts and consolatio^s, one way or other, that they may be
made fit, not to receive the preparatiue, but the perfection of happy
salvation. And for this cause have I made choice of this part of Scripture, as
of a light to shine unto us in darkness, a direction to our steps, and a
lantern to our paths, while we wander through the boistrous waves of this
wicked world. The text is plain, and object to every man's capacity,
naturally budding unto blossoms: The first containing our duty which we are
to perform toward God. The second, Gods promises, if we perform this duty.

Our duty toward God, is implied in these three conditions. First, If thou will early seek unto God. Secondly, If thou will pray unto the Almighty.
Thirdly, If thou be pure and upright: so that the whole consists on these
three points. First, what it is that God requires, namely a diligent Division.
and speedy search, in these words. If thou will seek early. Secondly, how
thy search is to be made in prayer, in these words: If thou will pray to the
Almighty. Thirdly, what effect these things ought to work in us, a purity
and sincerity of life, in these words, If thou be pure and upright.

As our duty toward God consists in three points: so Gods blessinge toward
us, is also threefold answerable to the same. First, for seeking, he
promises, he will awake unto thee. Secondly, for praying unto him, he will
make the habitations of thy righteousness prosperous. Thirdly, for being pure
and upright, he will make thy latter end increase exceedingly: yea, though thy
beginning be but small.

First therefore concerning the search, it is a work both Concerning the
search. Psalm 107 Matthew 6
in desire and labor to be joined to God. In the Psalm this stands for the
burden of the song: They called upon the Lord in the time of their trouble,
and he delivered them. It is but, Ask and have, seek and find, knock and it
shall be opened unto you. Saving that here these things are to be regarded,
to wit, how, by whom, and when we must seek the Lord. How? First, faithfully,
for if ye have but as much as a grain of mustard-seede, and say unto this
mountain, Remove, Mat 17. 20 Eccle 35
it shall remove, and nothing shall be impossible unto you. Then next humbly,
for it is the humble petition that pearceth the skies, and that showed the
Publican to depart home to his house more justified then the boasting Pharisie:
and they alone that be humble and meek, find rest for their souls. And last
of all, continually, for we must not faint in well doing because the reward is
not promised to him that does, but to him that contiuneth to do. Gal. 6 1.
These. 6


But we may long seek and never find, except we seek the Father by the
Son: For no man knows the Father, 1. Tim. 2
but the son, and he to whom the Son shall disclose him: he is the way,
the truth, and the life, and no man comes to the Father but by him. There is
one God and one mediator betwixt God and man, the man Christ Jesus. So that if
we sin, we have an advocate, Jesus Christ the just, and he is the
propitiation for our sins: only let us seek the Lord while he may be found.

And to this end the word Seeking is used in this place, that we may learn,
that as the heavens and the planets, and the whole frame of nature were
ordained to finish their course by motions and operation: so man, as he was
ordained to a most blessed and happy end, should attain thereunto, not by
sloth and idleness, but by an earnest seeking of the same. The kingdom of
heaven is like a treasure, Matt. 13. 14
which cannot be found without seeking and digging. It is like the precious
pearl, for which the wise Merchant was content not only to seek, but to sell
all that he had, to buy it. God has placed us here in this world as
husbandmen, to plough up the fallowe of our hearts: as laborers to work in
his vineyarde: as travelers to seek a country: as soldiers to fight the
battle of the Lord against the flesh, the world, and the devil. And for this
purpose has he proposed unto us an untilled land, a vineyarde, a triple
enemy to fight against: that we might remember, that we must till the
ground, if we will reap the fruit: that we must prune the vine, if we will
drink of the grape: that we must fight if we will overcome. He that tilleth
the land (says the wise man) shall be satisfied with bread, but he that
follows Prouer. 28
idleness, shall be filled with poverty, Idleness is a moath or canker of the
mind, and the fruits thereof are wicked cogitations, evil affections, and
worse actions: corrupt trees without fruit, twice dead, and plucked up by the
roots, engendering Judge. 1 Prou. 24.
in the mind a loathing of God and godliness.

Eschew therefore idleness, I beseech ye, and by the want ye find in others,
learn instructions for your selves. Be not forgetful how busy your enemy
is, if he find ye idle: first he puts ye in mind of some vanity: then
offers opportunity to practice: then he craves consent; and if ye grant
him that, he triumphs by adding practice: he leaves no means unattempted,
whereby he may subvert and bring ye to perdition. To one (as to Eua) he
promises the Genesis 3
knowledge of good and evil. Another he seduceth with lying speeches, as he did
Pharao the king, whom he deceived Exodus 7. 22 1. Kings 13 1 Cor. 2. 1
by false Prophets. To the Jews he pretended the temple of the Lord. To the
heathen he showed universalities and antiquities. And to omit particulars, he
leaves no men unattempted, whereby he may entangle the souls of the simple,
and wrap them in the snares of death. Fly idlenesle therefore, and seek
virtue, and the way thereof: seek learning, as for a iwell, make diligent
search and inquisition after her: seek early, and seek late in the morning
sow thy seed, and in the evening let not thy hand rest: seek him in the day
of trouble, and he will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify him. Seek him,
there is the commandment: he will deliver thee, there is the promise: and
thou shall glorify him, there is the condition. To disobey the commandment
is rebellion: to distrust the promise, is infidelity: to refuse the condition,
is vile ingratitude. Wherefore let us seek, and seek earnestly, with a
fervent spirit, and humbleness of heart, and let us persuade ourselves that
there is no seeking without finding, no opening without knocking.

The second circumstance to be considered in this point, is to whom we must
seek for these things. Our direction 2.
is made unto God, For every good and perfect gift is from above, descending
from the father of lights. And as for many James. 1. 27
causes we are to seek God, and to God alone, so especially for these four.

First, because we have nothing of our selves, nor of any other creature, but
whatsoever we have, we have it of God: for what have thou that thou have not
received? in him we live, we move, and have our being. Art thou wise in thine
own conceit? O remember that the wisdom of the world is foolishness with
God. O consider that the natural man understands not the things of God.
These things are hid 1. Cor. 2 Romans 1
from the wise and prudent, and are revealed to babes and sucklings. Alas what
were manif he were once left to himself? A map of misery, and a sink of
calamity. Alas, how were he able to resist the fiery darts of the
adversary, who 2. Pet. 2 Reave. 2
continually goes about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour? Here
ye may note first his malice, for he daily accuses us before the chief Judge
of the kings bench: when he cannot prevail in this court, but sees his
bills of accusation repelled, then he remooueth the matter to the court of
our own consciences where on the one side he lays the books of the law,
and statutes made against sin: on the other side the bills of accusation
brought in against us out of the books of the Law, alleging these strict
places against us: The soul that sins shall die the death: Cursed is he
that abides not in every point of the law, to do it. On the other side, he
brings in our consciences to witness against us, and then infers this
hard conclusion: Therefore there is no hope in salvation.

Then if he see that we appeal from justice to mercy, and say: At what time
soever a sinner repents, the Judge puts all his wickedness out of his
remembrance, he deals with us, as crafty worldlinges deal in matters of
law, who when they see their matters pass against them in higher Courts,
bring down their case into the country, to be decided by the neighbors:
who, either for their simplicity cannot, or for their favor dare not judge of
the truth of the matter.

So our adversary, though God himself do discharge us, though our conscience
does testify our innocence: yet he accuses in the third court before men,
where he is bold to power out his whole venom and poison of his malice
against us, and to forge what lies, and slanders, and lybels he list, because
he knows they shall be received as true. Thus he accused Christ Jesus our
blessed Lord and Savior before Pontius Pilate, and caused diverse false and
untrue witnesses to come in against him.

But if he were malicious only to vvish our destruction, and not mighty to
vvreake his malice, we should have little cause to fear: but he is mighty,
therefore he is termed alyon, the power of darkness, a great dragon, which
drew to the earth the third part of the stars of heaven: Luke. 11. Ephe 6.
Reu. 12.
that is, with earthly temptation to have overthrown them, which seemed to
shine in the church of God as Lamps, and Stars. O then how easy is our
overthrow, if the Lord did not hold us up, which shine not as stars in
heaven, but creep like worms on earth?

3 Yet if he were but malicious and mighty, it were better with us; but he is
fierce, and therefore called a roaring Lion, who laying wait for the blood of
the godly, stirs up bloud-thirstie persecutors, to make themselves drunk
with the blood of the saints: as most grieuoussy he did from the time of John
Baptist, to the reign of Maxentius, the space of 294. years, flaying some by
the sword, burning other with fire, hanging some on the gallows, drowning
some in rivers, stabbing some with forkes of iron, pressing others unto death
with stones, devouring many thousands of the tender lambs of Christ's flock.

4 To this malice, might and rage, is added his subtle policy, which he uses
in circumuenting the faithful, he does not pitch his tents in any one place,
but walks about from place to place to spy out his best advantage, in the
night John. 1
he sows Tares, and in the day he hinders the growth thereof.

5 He proceeds after further, and adds to his policy industry, he
considers our natures and dispositions, and to what sins we do most
incline: and thereunto he applies himself, sometimes by flattery, sometimes
by fear, sometimes by feeding our humors he subtly entiseth us, sometimes
by violence he goes about to enforce us, sometime by changing himself into an
Angel of light, he endeavors to betray our souls into his hands, and in
whatsoever estate he finds us, he thereby takes occasion to lay siege to
our souls.

Thus ye see noted in a word, the force of our adversary: examine now your
selves, whether ye have any thing in yourselues, and you shall find nothing
but weakness and corruption. It is God that gives strength to the mighty,
wisdom to the prudent, and knowledge to the understanding: he teaches David's
hand to fight, and his fingers to Psalm. 144.
battle he gives strength to his arms to break a bow, even a bow of
steel: wherefore let neither the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the
strong man in his strength: but let him that glories, glory only in the Lord.

Secondly, we are to seek unto God alone, because none 2
is so present as he for God, because he is almighty, and with his power
fills both heaven and earth, is present always with them that fear him, and
ready to succor them in distress. The Lord is near to all that call upon
him in truth, he hears our gronings and sighs, and knows what things are
necessary for us before we ask.

The third reason why we must seek unto God is, none 3
is so able to help us as he: but of this I shall have particular occasion to
speak when I come to this point, And pray to the Almighty.

The fourth reason why we must seek Christ alone is, because there is none
so willing to help us as he. It is a great 4
courage to us to make suit, when we are persuaded of the willignesse of him
to whom we make suit: and I pray ye, who was ever more careful for our
salvation, and more vvatchfull over us than the Lord? who ever put his trust
in him, and was confounded? In this respect he is called a Father, because, as
the father tendreth his son, so the Lord does al those that put their trust
in him. Can there be any more willing to help us than Christ, whose whole
head was sick, and whose heart was heavy for our sakes? yea, in whose body,
from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head, was nothing but wounds
and swellings, and sores? But alas, this was nothing to that he suffered for
our sakes. He was compassed about with fears and horrors, till his sweat was
drops of blood, and his bones bruised in the flesh, he was whipped and
scourged, and chastised with sorrows, till he cried out in the bitterness of
his soul, O Lord, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me. The heavy
hand of God was so grievous upon him, that he bruised his very bones, and
rent his raines asunder: he could find no health in his flesh, but was
wounded, yea wounded to the death, even the most bitter death upon the Cross.
His tender fingers were nailed to the cross, his face was wrinkled with
weeping and wailing, his sides imbrued and gored with his own blood, spurting
and gushing fresh from his ribs, the shadow of death was upon his eyes.

O what grief could be like to this, or what condemnation could be so heavy,
since there was no wickedness in his hands? since he was the brightness of his
fathers glory, and the sun of righteousness that shined in the world, as to
see his days at an end, to see such throbbing sighs and careful thoughts
without cause of his, so deeply engraven in the tables of his breast. But was
this all? no, my brethren, since his excellency was such above al creatures,
that the world was not worthy to give him breath, it was a greater grief unto
him, to see himself made a worm, and not a man, a shame of men, and contempt
of the people: to see his life shut up in shame and reproaches, how could it
but shake his bones out of joint, and make his heart melt in the midst of his
bowels? who was ever so full of woe, and brought so low in the dust of death?
upon whom did the malice of Satan ever get so great a conquest?

This though it were exceeding, yet it was not all, no, it was but a taste of
grief in comparison of the rest: behold therefore (if your weary eyes will
suffer you to behold) the depth of all miseries yet behind: the sin that he
hated, he must take upon his own body, and bear the wrath of his father
powered out against it. This is the fullness of al pains that compassed him
round about, which no tongue is able to utter, or heart conceive: the anger of
the father burns in him, even to the bottom of hell, and deep sink of
confusion: it wrapped him in the chains of eternal death: it crucified him,
and threw him down into the bottomless pit of calamity, and made his soul by
weeping and vvailing to melt into these bitter tears trickling from his eyes:
O God my God, why have thou for saken me?

O that my head were a well of waters, and a fountain of tears, that I might
weep day and night at the remembrance hereof: but least I linger too long about
one flower, while I have many to gather, I will conclude this point thus in a
word: Since Christ has suffered these, and an infinite number such like
torments for our sakes, it is blasphemous once to dream or imagine any to be
more willing to help us than he: nay, he is more ready to hear our prayers,
than we to offer them unto him, insomuch as he complayneth by the Prophet Esaias:
I have been found of them which sought Esaias. 65.
me not, all the day long have I stretched out my hand unto a rebellious people,
which walked in away that was not good even after their own imaginations. And
unto Jerusalem he Math. 25
says, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thee together,
as the hen gathers her chickens, but you would not. Wherefore to end this
point: Seek for knowledge, as for a treasure, and for wisdom, as for the
wedge of gold of Ophir: No mention shall be made in comparison of it, of
Coral, Gabish, or that precious Onix: For Job. 28.
wisdom is more precious then pearls. But above al things, seek it where it
may be found, and where is the place of understanding? Surely, man knows not
the path thereof: the deep says, It is not in me: the sea says, It is not in
me: death and destruction say, We have heard the same thereof with our ears:
all creatures say, it is not with us: but God understands the way thereof:
and unto man he says, The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and
to depart Pro. 9.
from evil is understanding.

The third circumstance is, when we must seek unto God: and holy David
answers, Early, even in a time when Psalm. 32
he may be found. Let us redeem the day, which we have foreslowed so many
days, wherein we have so long hardened our hearts: let us take up this day,
and make it the day of our repentance: let us make it a day of newnes of
life, as it is the first day of the new year: let even this moment be the
last of a sinful life, and the first day to godliness. And as the wise man
says: Make no long tarrying to turn unto the Eccle. 5
Lord, and put not off from day to day, for suddenly shall the Lords wrath
break, and in thy security thou shall be destroyed, and shall perish in the
time of vengeance.

Art thou a Magistrate, placed in high room and authority, and seated in the
throne of dignity? then use not this thy might to wrong and oppression, grind
not the faces of the poor, swell not with pride, despising his low estate:
Sell not thy righteousness for silver, preferring the merchants of Babylon
before the citizens of Jerusalem. Amos. 8


Art thou a private laboring man? Do thy duty truly, 1. Pet. 3
be subject, and live in dread to displease the good magistrate. Art thou old,
and have consumed the flower of thy youth in wantonness? break off thy
course, and frame thy self to sobriety: give the water no passage, no not a
little: for if it have never so little issue, it will ouerflowe thee: and if
thou do slack the raines never so little, thy sins will carry thee (like a
wild horse) through brambles and bushes, and will leave no soundnes in thy
flesh: work this reformation in thy self betimes, even to day, even this
first day of the new year: If you will hear my voice, harden not your hearts.

Art thou young, and do begin to flourish like the young palm tree? O
consider, that the only way to retain the blossoms of thy beauty, and to
keep thy flower from withering, and thy leaf from fading away, is to seek
early unto God, and to apply thy mind to understanding, to prevent the morning
watches, and to give thy body to be moistened of the morning dew! For beside
the good hours that are well employed in some good study and holy exercise,
early rising brings health to thy body, and increases the number of thy
days.

Seek therefore, and seek early, consecrate your selves Nazarites unto the
Lord, touch no unclean thing, give no provocation to the flesh, Strive with
the cock in watchfulness, Eccle 12
and rise with the chirping of the birds: sacrifice your body a sweet
smelling sacrifice unto the Lord. This sacrifice is like a sacrifice of fine
flower: it is like the fat taken from the peace offering: yea, it is better than
any sacrifice, it is like the flower of roses in the spring of the year, and
as the lillies in the springs of water, and as the branches of Frankincense in
the Eccle. 32 47. 50.
time of Summer: and as a vessel of masty gold beset with rich stones, as a
fair Olive that is fruitful, and as the tree that grows up to the clouds.
Having spoken of the Search, it follows that I speak of the manner how it is
to be made. In prayer, by these words, If thou pray unto the Almighty.

I showed ye before, the force of our adversary, receive now a shield against
his force, even the shield of prayer. He is not to be resisted by ringing an
hallowed bell, nor by sprinkling of holy water, nor by the relikes of Saints,
nor by our own works and merits, for these are weapons of his own making,
but by an earnest seeking to God, which search and seeking must be made by
prayer, against which his poisoned venom takes no effect.

It is his malice that accuses: prayer pleadeththy case before God, and
repelleth all his accusations: for all the Prophets do witness, that
whatsoever we ask in prayer, if Mat. 2.
we believe, we shall receive it. It is his rage and fury that should
terrify us; nay that prayer that strengthened Sampson to rent a young Lion, as
one should have rent a kid, having nothing in his hand, shall smite and shut up
the mouth of this Lion. As for his policy and walking up and down, seeking to
devour us, it cannot prevail; For the prayer of James 5. 15
the faithful shall save them; and the Lord shall raise them up, and if they
have committed sin it shall be forgiven them, and after this conflict ended,
they shall triumph for ever with Jesus Christ our Savior. But in any case see
you unite to your prayer knowledge, that you be not seduced to offer your
petitions to strange gods, as Saints, stocks or stones. Then consent that we
ask only in ye name of Christ John 16
Jesus, not for any desert of our own: for whosoever believes in Christ,
shall have remission of sins, he shall not perish, but have life everlasting,
he shall not come into judgment, Act. 15, 10
but shall pass from death to life. Lastly, a confidence, which is a certain
persuasion of Gods mercy toward us: this is that prayer, of which the lamb
testifies, That whatsoever we ask by prayer, it shall given us by God the
father. A thing (dearly beloved) so precious, that nothing is more accepted in
heaven, nothing more grateful to God: a service commanded of God himself,
taught by Christ our Savior, and frequented by the Angels: a thing of more
force with God, than any oration of the eloquent.

Have thou not heard how the Sun stood still in the firmament, and was not
suffered to run his course? Joshua and Josh 6 2. King 20 Dan. 6.
Ezechias prayed, and the Sun stood still. Have thou not heard of the
stopping of the Lions mouths? Daniell prayed and his prayer stopped the Lions
greedy and devouring throats. Have thou not heard of the dividing of the red
sea? the Israelites prayed, and the waters of Jordan were dried up: yea, the
Israelites prayed, and the waters stood about Exodus 14
them like to a wall. Have thou not heard how the fiery furnace lost his
heat? the three children prayed, and the fire Dan. 3
lost his heat. Have thou not heard how the heavens were opened and shut?
Elias prayed, and the heavens were shut up three ye ares: Elias prayed, and the
clouds powered down 1 King. 8
rain from heaven.

O sure fortress, more forcible than any engine, and stronger than the gates
of hell, and to conclude, the sum and substance of all in few words: the
only thing whereby mortal men have the clouds, and the stars, and the
Angels, and all the powers of heaven at commandment. For as Deborah sung in
her song: They fought from heaven, even the Judge. 4
stars in their courses fought against Sisera: for all creatures have been
subject to the prayers of the faithful, to revenge the Lords quarrel, to
help the Lord, to help the Lord against the mighty. Prayer has ever bin the
cognizance, and the victory, and the triumph of the faithful: for as the
soul gives life to the body, so prayer gives life to the soul.

O that I could engraue the love of it in your hearts, as with a Diamond, and
so instill your minds, that my words might be pricks to your consciences,
and thereby give ye occasion to pray often. It is a wonderful matter to be
able to persuade men, but if prayer be able to persuade the living God, o how
great is the force thereof! it goes through the clouds, and cease not till
it come near, and will not depart till the most high have respect thereunto. O
that you would therefore pray often, and learn of Christ (the most absolute
pattern of our life) to pray continually. He prayed in Luke 6 Luke 6 Luke 6
John 11 Math 26 John 18 Luke 22 Luke 23 Math 19 Psalm 40 Rom 8
his baptism, in the wilderness, in preaching, in working of miracles, in his
passion, on the mount, in the garden, in his last supper, in commending his
spirit to God at all times, and in all places, that he might leave unto us an
example of the same. It follows. And pray to the Almighty, to those three
former reasons which I brought, why we must seek and pray to God alone, I
added this as a fourth: because there is none so able to help us as the Lord.
He that trusts in the Lord shall be as mount Sion. If God be on our side,
who can be against us? It is God that justifies, who condemns? The Lord
destroys the counsel of the heathen, he 2. Tim 4.
makes their devises to be of no effect. Christ is the Angel of great
counsel, wisdom, and understanding, and there is Psalm 83 Esaias 9 Prou 2.
no devise against the Lord. The world notwithstanding is come to that frame,
that every man has got him a strange kind of belief. Some believe not the
Law, but the prophets: some be persuaded in the supremacy, but not in the
sacrament: some in free will, but not in merit: some in invocation on saints,
but not in purgatory: some in pilgramages and pardons, but not in images: some
like the doctrine well enough, but not the preachers: the most believe little,
yet many believe somewhat, few believe all: therefore to deal plainly,
because plain dealing is best, you must not believe by the halfes: I mean you
must not repose some trust in God, and some in Saints, but all in the Lord.
The gods of the Gentiles they have mouths and speak not; eyes and see not,
Psalm 105
ears and hear not: then what can be looked for at their hands? But the
Lord is strong and mighty, a merciful God: and therefore through the
Scriptures, he is called a Rock, a Psalm 18
Fortress, a strong Tower, a Shield, a horn of salvation, a refuge, the
Lord of hosts, with other such like appellations, that we might be assured,
that our help and deliverance comes from the Lord.

Put test thou any trust in man, whose breath is in his nostrils? Cursed is he
that makes man his strength and flesh his arm. Surely Pharaoh, and all
princes are a broken staff, on which Iere. 7. 7 1. King. 16
if a man lean, it will strike into his hand and pearce it, and lay him
groueling in the dust: It is better therefore to trust in the Psalm. 18
Lord, tha^ to put any confidence in Princes. Think thou that Angels, or
Saints, or Images can help thee? O foolish and impious piety, to at tribute
more unto the Angels, than they dare arrogate unto themselves. The Angel in the
revelation, Reave. 19
forbids John to worship him. As for the image, we read that to turn the
glory of the incorruptible God, into the Rom 1
similitude of a corruptible creature is idolatry. Well may I then affirm
with Moses, Cursed be the Image and the Image Deuteronomy. 27
maker. The conclusion therefore of this point is this, that we seek the Lord
and his strength evermore, that we pray unto God in humility and sincerity,
and in full assurance of faith continually, who without end is to be sought,
because without end he is to be beloved.

The third thing contained in our duty is, what effect this seeking and
praying ought to work in us, comprehended in these words: If thou be pure and
upright: if the clouds be full, they will power forth rain upon the earth: and
impossible it is, that a man that seeks after God and prays unto the
Almighty, should not bring forth the fruits of a godly life, for if the tree be
good, the fruits cannot be bad: and if the head of ye water be pure, it will
send forth pure waters into the cesterns. Wherefore as good motions are stirred
up by prayer, so must they be fostred by practice of life, according to that
of the Apostle: Quench not the spirit, nor grieve the holy one of God, 1. These.
6
by whom ye are sealed to the day of redemption.

He quenches, dearly beloved, the spirit, which being once Ephesians. 4
lightened with the sparkles of faith, and felt Gods motions in his heart, does
neglect to increase the one to a flame, and the other to good works in his
life, but with the dog turns to his vomit and with the Sow that was washed,
to her wallowing again in the mire. Therefore (beloved) love and seek the
Lord, pray to the almighty, be pure and upright in conversation, fly from
sin as from a serpent; for if thou come near, it will bite thee. The teeth
thereof are as the teeth of a Lion, to slay the souls of men, and all
iniquity is as a two edged sword, the wounds that it gives cannot be healed.
I dare not stand as I would upon these points, fearing tediousnes: wherefore
let this suffice for the former general part, concerning the duty we owe unto
God.

Now Gods promises for the performance hereof, yield unto us most plentiful
matter of doctrine and consolation. First, of his justice, that as he will
suffer no sin unpunished: so he will leave no good work unrewarded, but gives
to every several actio^ his several hire, and just recompense of reward. Shall
the hour come, in which all that are in their graves, shall hear a voice, and
come forth, they that have done well, to the resurrection of life, they that
have done evil, to the resurrection of condemnation? Shall the Lord search
Jerusalem with Lanthornes? Shall all foul corners be swept, and all pleites
and vvrinckles be unfolded? Shall the sea, grave, death, and hell, give up all that is in them? and shall all the dead (both great and small) stand before
God, when the books are opened? and shall every man have praise of God
according unto his deserving? Shall we then discern between the vessels of
honor and of wrath, between sheep and gotes, the just and unjust? Finally,
shall there be an infallible general, and incorrupt judgment, wherein the
book of all our offenses shall be laid wide open? Now God be merciful unto
us; 1. The. 5
be favorable O Lord, be favorable. But to proceed, it is thy nature O Lord,
to gather up the wheat, and burn the tares, to cut down all fruitles trees,
and cast them into the fire, Ephesians. 4
yea, into a fiery furnace, that never shall be quenched, into an utter
darkness, where is weeping, wailing and gnashing of teeth; then be favorable O
Lord, be favorable.

Does not the Lord spare David, a king and a Prophet for murder? does he not
spare the Sichemites for adultery? nor Absalom for treason? nor Saul for
tyranny? nor Eli for negligence, nor Achab, Jeroboam, nor Iezabell for
cruelty? nor Herod, Nabuchadnezzar, and Lucifer for pride; nor Pharaoh for
incredulity: then be favorable O Lord, be favorable to us, in whom almost
every one of these sins do dwell and remain. Did the Lord for corruption
ouerflow the world with water? did he burn Sodom for her villainy? did he
cast Adam and Eve out of Paradise, for eating of the forbidden fruit? did he
stone a poor wretch to death, for gathering chips on the Sabbath day? then be
favorable O Lord, be favorable unto us. But does not the Lord spare the Cedar
tree for his height? nor the Oak for his strength? nor the Poplar for his
smoothness? nor the Laurel for his greennes? No verily, from the Cedar that is
in Lybanon, even to ye hysop that grows out of the wall, yea, every one that
brings not forth good fruit, is hewne down and cast into the fire: it is a
righteous thing with God, to render vengeance to those that disobey him, and to
destroy such as have forsaken the law by everlasting perdition.

Behold, the Lord shall come in the great and latter day of judgment, when none
shall escape his judgment seat, with Reave. 1. 7 2. Cor. 5
clouds shall he come, and every eye shall see him, even they which pierced
him through, shall also wail before him, being su^moned al to appear most
fearfully before his imperial throne of majesty: the^ be favorable O Lord, be
favorable. A las, with what eyes shall we miserable sinners behold him, so
gloriously sitting in his royal kingdom, with all his mighty and holy
angels, and whole number of saints sounding with the voice of the archangell,
and trumpet of God, causing the heavens to pass away with a noise, and the
elements to melt like wax, and the earth to burn with the works thereof? yea,
with what eyes shall we behold him, when we see the Sun darkened, the Moon
eclipsed, and the stars fall down from heaven? But alas, when he takes the
furbished blade into his hand, when he is ready to throw the fiery thunderbolts
of his wrath, when he summoneth before him the worm that never dies, the
fire that never shall be quenched, to revenge upon the wicked: into what a
plight are they then driven? then leave they off; be favorable O Lord, be
favorable, and say to the hills; O ye mountains, come and cover us, O ye waters
come and ouerwhelme us: woe, woe, woe, how great is this darkness? The godly on
the other side are bathed in such streams of bliss, and advanced to such
happiness, as neither tongue can utter, nor heart conceive.

The second thing we have to note in his promises is his mercy which exceeds
al his works. For God, though he have given a curse of the law against
sinners, yet seeing Christ for the penitent has borne the curse, whereby his
justice is not impaired: he is content to accept our weakness as our strength,
to recompense our imperfection with reward of greatest perfection, and that
which we can perform but in small part he is content to accept as whole, not
for any desert of ours, but in the satisfaction of his son, who paid with the
seal of his own blood, the ransom for our sins, he has cancelled the hand
writing that was against us. Wherefore we are to pray unto God, that whenever
our sins shall come in question before him, that he would look upon Christ
Jesus the true looking glass, in whom he shall find us most pure and innocent,
and to shine most clearly in the righteousness which he had given us by
faith: so that we appear not in our own righteousness, but in the
righteousness of the lamb, who having taken away the sins of the world, and
having made us as white as snow, though we were as red as crimson, says, he
will be merciful to our iniquities, and will remember our sins no more. Of
him do all the Prophets be are witness, that through his name all that believe
shall receive remission of their sins. Again, Drink ye all of this, for this
is my blood which is shed for the remission of sins. Christ gave himself for
our sins, that he might deliver us from the curse of the law, even according
to the will of the father. Christ bare our sins in his own body on the tree,
that we being delivered from sin, might live in righteousness, by whose stripes
we are healed, for we were as sheep going astray, but are now returned to the
shepherd and bishop of our souls. It is no more but believe, and be saved:
believe, and receive remission: believe, and lay off thine own righteousness,
and inuest thy self with the righteousness of the unspotted lamb.

David was young, and after was old, yet in all his days he never saw the
righteous forsaken. Sometimes he scourges his children, but like a loving
father he lays no more upon them tha^ they are able to be are, for he
afflicts the^ for his own justice, because they are sinners: for his
wisdom, to exercise their faith: for his mercy, to cause the^ to repent, but
this is the end of al, he helps the^ in their distresses, he reuengeth
himself upon his enemies, and gives to his people rest and quietness. O that
we would therefore praise the Lord, and forget not al other his singular
benefits: O that we would confess, that his mercy endures for ever.

The third thing to note in his promises, is his bou^tiful kindness, in
requiting so small a thing, with so great and liberal blessings: and binds
himself by obligation (as it were) that as sure as we perform the one, so he
will not fail to accomplish the other.

The fourth is his patience and long suffering, which is not slacknes, as some
men account slacknes: but is patience, because willingly he would have no man
to pertsh, but gladly would have all men to come to repentance. He is content
to stay our leisure, till we seek and pray unto him: and never smites, til
there be no hope of redress.

The fifth, is his love, in that he is content to stir us up to holy exercises,
and purity of life, and to allure us with fair promises of aid, and prosperous
increase of al his blessings in this world. The particular examination of these
blessings would require a larger discourse, tha^ (fearing tediousnes) I dare
presume to trouble ye withal: wherefore a word of each, and so I end.

Touching the first, where it is said, God will awake up unto thee, it is a
greater benefit than the words import: for it signifies, not only that he will
hear thee, but that he will also do what thou desire, and satisfy thy
request. As long as the sinner sleeps, the Lord is said to be asleep: but
as soon as the sinner awaketh from sin, God will arise (says David) Psalm. 78
and his enemies shall be scattered, and they that hate him, shall fly before
him: as the smoke vanishes before the wind, and as the wax melts before the
fire, even so shall the wicked perish at the presence of God. Wherefore as Paul
exhorted the Ephesians, so I exhort you, Awake thou that sleep, Ephe. 5.
stand up from the dead, and christ shall give thee light: awake unto God, and
God will awake unto thee, and Christ even the son of God, the bright morning
star, shall give thee the light of life.

In the second, he promises abundance of worldly blessings, in recompense of
prayer, for it is said, He will make the habitations Reu. 22. 2 Psalm. 1. 12
of thy righteousness prosperous, that is, the Lord will make peace within thy
walls, and prosperity within thy palaces: he will command his blessings to be
with thee in thy store Pro. 28
house, and in all thou set thy hand unto: he will open unto thee his good
treasures, even the heavens to give rain on thy land in due season. Thou shall
lay up gold, as the dust, and the gold of Ophir, as the flint of the river:
thou shall wash thy paths with butter, and thy rocks shall power out rivers of
Job. 22
oil: thou shall call salvation thy wall, and praise shall be in thy gates. Lo,
thus shall the man be blessed that fears God. Psalm. 128.


Lastly, for being pure and upright, he will make thy latter end greatly
increase, and that thou may the less mistrust his promise, he will do it,
though thy beginning be but small.

Here (brethren) ye see what a sea of matter is offered me, whereunto if I
would commit my self, I might discourse unto ye, what strange events (by Gods
providence) have happened in the world, what great kings and potentates have bin
plucked down from their thrones, and what contemptible persons in the eye of
the world, have been advanced to their rooms How Mardocheus a stranger was
exalted into Hamons place: how Joseph and Daniel, the one a bondman in Hest.
8. Genesis 30. Dan. 6
Egypt, the other a captive in Babylon, were made Princes in those kingdoms
But because I will not overmuch transgress the bonds of modesty, or hold ye
longer than in this place I have been accustomed: only remember what the
Prophet says; He raises the needy out of the dust, and lifts the poor out
of the mire that he might set him with the princes, even with the princes of
the world. Psalm. 113.


Remember the example of David, whom the Lord chose and took from the Ewes
great with young: that he might Psalm. 78
feed his people in Jacob, and his inheritance in Israel. Remember the example
of Job, how the Lord turned the captivity Job. 42
of Job, as the rivers in the south, how he blessed the last days of Job more
than the first, how he gave him sheep and camels and oxen, and she asses, in
more abundance than he had before, how he increased him with sons and
daughters, even to the fourth generation, so yt he died being old and full of
days. Remember even our own estate, for whom the Lord has don great things
already: as created us, and redeemed us, and sanctified Psalm. 126.
us, and not long since delivered us from the gaping jaws of those that sought
to suck our blood. Upon some he Psalm. 41
has bestowed humility, whereby their minds are adorned with virtue: honor
upon others, whereby their persons are invested with majesty: upon others
comlines, whereby the other two are graced: upon others orchards, which they
planted not, or at least unto which they gave no increase: upon others increase
of virtuous children, whereby their posterity is preserved: upon others, the
free passage of his word, which a long time had been obscured by ignorance,
the mother of devotion, as the shauelings call it, but under a stepdame of
destruction, as we perceive it: and though he bestow but some one or two of his
blessings upon us, yet how much are we bound for these blessings, to sing
praise, and honor, and glory, unto him that sits upon the throne, and unto
the Lamb for ever. But upon whom he has bestowed all these blessings, O how
strictly by good cause are they bound to magnify the Lord, and to rejoice in
God their Savior. Examine then your own consciences, I beseech ye, whether
God has bestowed all these blessings upon you or no: and if he have, O what
great cause have ye to come before his face with praise, to sing loud unto
him with Psalms, to Psalm. 99. Psalm. 96
worship and to fall down before him, to give unto the Lord the glory of his
name, to bring an offering of thanksgiving, and to enter into his courts with
praise. And yet who knows whether the Lord has greater blessings for ye in
store? ye may be sure he will pull down the mighty from their seat, and
exalt the humble and meek. Surely, the Lord does use virtue as a mean to
bring us to honor, and whosoever you shall see endued with the virtues of this
text, I mean, with seeking unto God, with prayer and purity of life: ye
maybee sure there is a blessing reserved for him of the Lord, yea, such a
blessing, as though his beginning be but small, yet his latter end shall
greatly increase.

God increase the love of these things in our hearts, and make us worthy of
Christ's blessings, which he has plentifully in store for us: that after he
has heaped temporal blessings upon us, he would give us the blessing of all
blessings, even the life of the world to come.

FINIS.
MARY'S CHOICE.
Luke 10. 38. 39, etc. 38 Now it came to pass as they went, that he entered
into a certain town, and a certain woman named Martha, received him into her
house.

39 And she had a sister called Mary, which also sat at Jesus feet, and heard
his preaching.

40 But Martha was cumbred about much serving and came to him and said,
Master, do thou not care, that my sister has left me to serve alone? bid
her therefore that she help me.

41 And Jesus answered, and said unto her, Martha, Martha, thou carest and art
troubled about many things.

42 But one thing is needful, Mary has chosen the good part, which shall not
be taken away from her.


AS Christ had showed himself loving unto Lazarus and his sisters, in raising
him from John 11
the death of the body, and then from the death of the soul: so do they
here show their thankful minds to Christ again, the one by receiving him
into her house, and the other by entertaining him into her heart. As he was
God, he was received of Mary: as he was man, he was received of Martha. They
both desired to entertain our Savior, as Jacob Genesis 27
and Esau desired to please their aged father: but Mary made choice of the
better part, and was preferred before her sister, as Jacob sped soonest of most
dainty venison, and prevented his brother of the blessing. And although the
care of Martha in entertaining of Christ be not to be misliked, yet Mary's
diligence in hearing his doctrine, is of purpose preferred, to teach us, that
it is much better with Marie to study in the word, and first to seek the
kingdom of God, than with Martha to labor in the world, and to neglect that
Matthew. 6. 35
heavenly kingdom. And yet notwithstanding, such is the corruption of this
rusty age, that our greatest care is to provide for this present life, as the
rich man, Luke. 12. that enlarged his barnes wherein to put his store for many
years: but we never or very late remember to provide for the life to come,
like that other rich man, Luke. 16. that never thought of heaven, till he was
tormented in the flames of hell.

In the 11. of John, Christ is said to love the whole family, and here he is
said to come unto them. For whom he loves he cannot choose but visit,
like the friends of Job that came to comfort him in his great adversity: yea,
and the greater love he bears unto any, the oftener he will resort Job. 2.
unto them, yea, he will come and dwell with them, Ioh. 14. 23. Like Jacob that
came down into Egypt, to his beloved son Joseph, and dwelt in Goshen. But
Christ is yet Genesis 47
more kind then Jacob was, for he came not till he was sent for with horses
and Chariots: but Christ came of his own Genes. 45
accord to this beloved family.

Thus does he always prevent us with his blessings: before he was desired he
came into the world, he called his Apostles before they came to him, and before
he was requested he came unto this noble house. O happy house that
entertained such a guest, but thrice happy inhabitants to whom such a guest
would vouchsafe to come! When he came to the swinish Gadarens, they desired
him to depart out of their coasts, preferring their swine above their
Savior: Luke. 8
but this godly family received them into their house, preferring their God
before their gold, and the health of their souls before their worldly
wealth. They received him into their house, who had not a house wherein to put
his head. Wherein their hospitality is commended, and Matthew. 8. 19.
shall certainly be rewarded at the dreadful day: for with this and such like
works of mercy, the Lord shall answer the sentence of judgment, which is to
be denounced against the wicked, that never exercised those works of mercy

Let us learn by their example to be harborous, and given to hospitality,
which is so often commended unto us in the Scripture, and shall be so richly
rewarded at the last day. Those godly Fathers, Abraham and Lot, entertained
Angels in the habit of staungers: so we may daily entertayne Genesis 18 Genesis 19
Christ Jesus in the habit of a poor man, of a blind man, of a lame man, and
whatsoever is done unto any of these that are his members, he accounts and
accepts as done unto himself.

Now as the virtue of hospitality is commendable in all sorts of men: so is
it more especially commended to the Ministers, who are expreslie commanded by
the Apostle among other things, to be given to hospitality. 1. Tim 3. 2
Unto the Levites in the time of the law, the Lord appointed cities of refuge,
to signify that the Ministers house should Number. 35
be the poor man's harbor, and his store their treasury: but the true
Ministers of our days have no cities of refuge for others, for they have none
for themselves: they have not where with to relieve the wants of others, for
they have not to relieve their own.

When Martha had thus entertained Christ as he was man, into her house, Marie
began to entertayne him as he was GOD into her heart, she sat at his feet to
hear his preaching, for no sooner was Christ come into the house but that he
took occasion to teach and instruct the family, and instead of bodily food,
which they bestowed upon him, to give unto them the food of the soul. Thus
does he always show himself a thankful guest, into what house soever he
enters, he leaves better things behind him than he finds, he loves not to
be in Zachees debt for his dinner, Luke. 15
for instead thereof he brings salvation to his house neither does he leave
his suppervnpaid for here, for in stead thereof he bestows upon them an
heavenly sermon. This should be the exercise of faithful Ministers, when they
are invited to great feasts, that as they are called the salt of the Math 5. 13
earth, which serves to season the meats, to make them sauorie, and preserve
them from putrefaction, so they should season the table talk with some godly
conference, to minister grace unto the hearers Ephe. 4. 29.

These sisters were godly women, and both earnest favorers of Jesus Christ, and
yet in the manner of their devotion there is such difference, that the worldly
affection of the one, may in some sort be misliked, in respect of the godly
exercise and practice of the other: Martha is sore encumbered with much serving,
where a little service had bin sufficient, but Mary is attentive to hear the
word of God, which never can be heard sufficiently.

Mary sits to hear the word, as Christ used to sit when Math. 5 Luke. 4
John. 8
he preached the word, to show that the word is to be preached and heard with a
quiet mind. In a still night every voice is heard, and when the body is
quiet the mind most commonly is quiet also. But Martha is troubled with other
affairs, and therefore unfit to hear the word: as the ground that is
surcharged with stones, or ouergrowne with weeds Math. 5. 13.
and thorns, is unfit to receive the seed, or yield any fruit to him that
tilleth it. As often therefore as we come to hear the word of God, we must not
come with distracted minds, we must not trouble our selves with the cares of
this life, which (as our Savior says) are thorns to choke the word, and to
make it unfruitful. For Moses was unfit to Luke. 8. 14 Exodus 3 Mark. 10
talk with God till he had put off his shoes, and the blind man unfit to come
to Christ, till he had thrown away his cloak: so we must think our selves
unfit to hear the word, and unapt for every heavenly exercise, till we have
put off our shoes, that is, our worldly cogitations and affections, and till
we have cast away our cloak, that is, all lets and impediments which might
hinder us from profiting in our profession.

When our minds are quiet, we are fit to deal with heavenly matters,
therefore the Doctors conferred sitting in the Temple: and God delights to
deal with us when we are most private: he appeared to Abraham sitting in the
door Genesis 18 Acts. 2
of his Tent. The holy Ghost came down upon the Apostles, and filled all the
house where they were sitting. The Eunuch sitting in his chariot, was called
and converted by Acts. 8
Philips preaching.

Marie sat at Jesus feet, yet sat she not sleeping, as many sit at the
Preachers feet, but she sat at Christ his feet, and heard his word. As Paul
was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, and was perfectly instructed in the
law of the fathers. Acts 22


Her humility is commended, in that she sat at Jesus feet, to show that the
word is to be heard with all humility: her diligence and earnestnes appears,
in that she would not depart to help her sister, to signify that the
hearing of the word must be preferred before all worldly business.

Her diligence and humility serves to condemn our negligence and contempt of
Christ and his word: we do not sit at Christ his feet, nay we rather set
Christ at our feet, when we are so negligent in hearing of his word.

We are as slow to come to the Church: as the Raven was to come to the Arc,
and as loath to spend any time in Genesis 8
the service of God, as Pharaoli was loath to let the Israelites go to serve
the Lord. If a commodity were to be seen Exodus 8. 32
whereout some profit might arise, how careful would we be to procure it?
what pains would we take to get it? Absolon was not more desirous of a
kingdom, than the rich 2. Sam. 15.
men of our time are desirous of golden gain. But if it be a matter of cost
or trouble, if they cannot hear the word preached without some hindera^ce to
their worldly business, and some extraordinary charge to their purse, then like
the Gadarenes, they are content to take their leave of Christ and his word,
and had rather lose that heavenly pearl, than Luke. 8 Math. 13. 40.
they would part from their worldly pelf.

Thus in Christ we have the pattern of a good pastor, and in Marie the
pattern of a good hearer: Let ministers learn by his example, to take all
occasions to preach the 2. Tim. 4. 2
word, to be instant in season and out of season, and let Christians learn by
her example, first to seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and then
to provide for Math. 6
the things of this life.

While Marie was careful for the food of the soul, Martha was curious to
provide food for the body, her greatest care was to entertain Christ, and to
make him good cheer, to testify her thankful mind unto him that had done
so great things for them, he had raised her brother Lazarus from death to
life, therefore he was worthy to be well entertained.

If Elias deserved to be well dealt withal at the hand of his hostess,
whose son he had restored to life: or Elisa 1. King. 17 2. King. 4
deserved such entertainment for her sons reviving: then surely our Savior
Christ was worthy to be welcome hither, where he had raised Lazarus out of
his grave, wherein he had lien by the space of four days before. It was well
done therefore of Martha to show her thankful mind unto Christ, but it was
not well done at that time to show her John 11
self thankful in that manner, it was then time to hear the word: for at
that time Christ preached the word, it was no time for her to spend that time
in other affairs, and to neglect the greatest affair, the means of her own
salvation.

It was not unlawful for Martha to labor, no more than it was unlawful for
Peter to sleep: but when Christ was preaching, it was no time for her to be
so busy in serving, no more than it was time for Peter to sleep, when Christ
Math. 25
willed him so earnestly to watch and pray. When Christ preached out of Simons
ship to the people that stood Luke, 5
upon the shore, it was no time for Peter to play the Fisherman. But when
Christ had left speaking, and commanded him to lanch into the deep, then it
was time for Peter to let down the net. There is a time wherein we ought to
labor in our vocation, and a time wherein we ought to hear the word, and as
we may not utterly neglect our lawful callinges, to follow Sermons: so must we
not bestow the Sabbath, which is consecrated to the service of God, in
following the works of our vocation. All things have their appointed time
(says the wise man) Eccle. 3. and every thing is seemly in his convenient
season, but when things are done preposterously and out of order, there
follows confusion.

Although Martha did not hear Christ, yet did she labor for Christ: many in
our days will neither labor for Christ, nor hear of Christ: but as the
Israelites were weary of their Number. 21
journey in the wilderness, and lothed that heavenly Manna; so these men are
weary of every godly exercise, and are soon cloyed with the word of God.

The five foolish Virgins wasted their oil to no purpose, and while they went
to buy, were excluded the marriage: Mat. 25
and these foolish men spend this time of grace vaynely and wantonly, as
though after this life there were no time of justice and vengeance to be
feared. The day serves for their pride or profit, the night is spent in
sport and pleasure, and no time is left to hear the word. When we are
praying, they are playing: when we are preaching, they are eating and drinking,
like the old world, that ate and drank, that married wives, and gave in
marriage, while Genesis 6
Noah was preparing the Arc for the saving of his householde. And as Baals
priests wounded themselves to serve Heb. 11 1. King. 18
their idol: so these men take dangerous courses, and strangely trouble
themselves to serve the devil.

Now Martha finds her self agrieued, and begins to envy her sisters
exercise, as Joseph's brethren envied him for Genesis 37 1. Sam. 17
his dreams: and the sons of Ishai, that disdayned their brother David, for
his forwardness in the combat with Goliath.

These two sisters, that in other things agreed so well together, in this do
differ so much, that Christ must have the hearing of the matter, and decide the
controversy, Martha plays the plaintiff, and accuses her sister. Mary the
defendant answers by her advocate, and Christ himself that took upon him
the office of an Advocate, is become the Judge, and gives sentence on Mary's
side: Martha complains of her sisters slothfulness, and seems after a
sort to blame our Savior for winking at it, requiring him to see the matter
redressed speedily. But Christ first reprooueth Marthaes curiosity, and then
excuses, yea, and commends Mary's care. In Martha it appears how willing
we are to please our selves in our own conceits, and how ready to conceive
amiss of others doings, yea, sometimes to prefer our own defects, before
the perfections of other men. If David chasten his soul with fasting, it shall
be turned to his reproof. If he put on sackcloth, to testify his contrition,
Psalm. 69
they jest at him, and the drunkardes make songs of him. If John Baptist be
temperate in his apparel and diet, Luke. 7. 33
they will say he has a devil. If Paul answer discretlie for himself, he
shall be charged to be mad with overmuch Acts. 26 Luke. 7. 34
learning; yea, if our Savior Christ himself frequent the company of sinners,
to reclaim them from sin, they will not stick to call him a friend and
companion of Publicans and sinners. Amongst us, if there be any that be more
forward in religion than the rest, and more diligent to hear the word, as
Marie was, there shall not want some or other to censure them at their
pleasure, yea, to find fault, and to condemn the^ for so doing, yet are not
the godly to be discouraged herewith, or to desist from their godly exercises:
for as the Lord answered for Marie, when she held her peace: so the Lord
will defend their cause, and take their part against their adversaries. The
Lord cannot abide to hear his servants ill spoken of, but is always ready to
maintain their right, and to answer for them. He will not suffer Lab an to
speak an ill word to his servant Jacob. And if Aaron and Miriam murmr Genesis
3. 24 Number. 12
against Moses, the Lord will punish it with leprosy. What a comfortable thing
is this to the gadly, that ye king of kings will take their parts, and will
not suffer them to sustain any wrong? He is a most sure and trusty friend,
that will not abide his friends to be backbited or ill spoken of, but either he
vvil answer in their defense, or he will find some means to stop their
mouths, and restrain the slanderous tongues of their enemies, as sometime he
stopped Balaams passage, Number. 22.
when he went to curse his people, and caused the dumb beast to speak, and to
reprove the madness of the Prophet, 2. Pet. 2. 1^.
rather then he would have his people to be cursed.

The repetition of Marthaes name argues the vehemency and earnestness of
this admonition. The Lord is feign to be very earnest and importunate with us,
before he can reclaim us. So when God spoke unto Abraham, he called Genesis 2^.
him twice by name: Christ called Peter thrice by name, John 21. to cause him
make his three-folde confession, to make amends for his three-folde denial.
And when the Lord spoke unto Samuel, he called him 4. several times by 1.
Sam. 3
name, before he answered: for such is the great mercy of God, that he is
content to admonish us often of our duty, and such is the dulnes and
peruersenes of our crooked nature, that we cannot be gained by the first
admonition: but the Lord must call us often and earnestly, before we will hearke^
unto him.

There are two things in this speech of Christ to be observed. The first is,
his modest reprehension of Marthaes immoderate care: the other is, his friendly
defense of Mary's choice. Though Martha was very careful to entertain Christ
in the best manner, yet if he perceive any thing in her worthy of
reprehension, he will not stick to tell her of it: he will not soothe her in
her saying, nor smooth her in her own conceit, for all the trouble and cost
that she bestows upon him. If we be often invited to some man's table, and
kindly entertained, it would be unkindly taken, if we should find fault with
any disorder: but for as much as all Christ his actions are the instructions of
Christians, therefore every Christian, but especially preachers, whom it more
specially concerns, must learn by this example how to behave themselves,
when they are invited to great feasts, namely, to speak their conscience
freely when they see a fault. The best requital that we can make for our good
cheer, is to give good counsel and wholesome admonition to them that inuit
us. When Christ dined with the Pharisie, Luke 11. and was misliked for not
washing before dinner, he took occasion to reprove their hypocrisy, their
outward show of holiness, Luke. 14
which was the sin of the Pharisees: and at another time he notes them, for
pressing to the chief places at banquets, and shows what modesty is to be
observed in sitting down to meat, and what guests should be bidde^ to our
table. So should Preachers behave themselves toward those that inuit them to
great feasts, when they see perhaps some fault or disorder, either in the
master of the house, or in some other of the guests, to say unto them thus, or
otherwise as the case requires: I will warn you of one thing that will do
you good, that you would leave your usury and extortion, your covetousness and
oppression, that you would leave your swearing and blaspheming the name of God,
that you would forbear to profane the Lords Sabbath, that you would leave
your pride and excess in your diet and apparel, that you would forbear to
speak ill of any behind their backs, or to bear any malice or hatred to any
of your neighbors.

These are the faults which are easy to be espied almost in every place, and
these are the faults which the faithful minister of Christ Jesus should not
leave unreproved wheresoever he comes. But as Elias told Ahab of his
Idolatry, 1. King. 18 Math. 14 Mark. 6. 20
though he were his king, and John Baptist told Herod of his adultery,
though he did many things for him, and heard him gladly: so should the
Preachers reprove the people for their notorious offenses, notwithstanding
some favors and courtesies received from them

If Christ had cause to find fault with Martha for her too much diligence in
his entertainment, it seems he was not curious of his diet, but would have
been content with simple cates, he was no delicate or dainty guest, he did
not affect or delight in sumptuous banquets, or costhe fare, he rather
requires a religious heart, a constant faith, a willing mind to hear the
word, with an earnest care to live thereafter These are the things wherein the
Lord delights, these are the iuncates which he desires, and which he
prefers before all earthly cheer.

Thus is Martha reprehended for her curiosity: now let us see how Marie is
excused and commended for her godly care. One thing is necessary (says
Christ;) and what is that one thing? Even to hear the word preached, which is
the power of God to salvation, to every one that believes. A man may better
want all things, than that one needful thing, and yet we desire al other
things, and neglect that one thing, which is so needful.

This one thing has Marie chosen, and therefore has chosen the better part.
Marthaes part is good, because it provides for this present life: but Mary's
part is better, because it leads to eternal life. It is good to be occupied
about our calling, to get our living: but it is better to be occupied in
hearing the word, which is able to save our souls. As the head and the foot
are both needful in the body, so Mary and Martha are both needful in a
Commonwealth: man has two vocations, the one earthly, by his labor, the
other heavenly by his prayer. There is he active life, which consists in
practicing the affairs of this life, wherein man shows himself to be like
himself, and there is the contemplative life, which consists in the
meditation of divine and heavenly things, wherein man shows himself to be
like the Angels: for they which labor in their temporal vocations, do live
like men, but they which labor in spiritual matters, live like Angels. When
they hear the word, God speaks unto them: when they pray, they speak unto
God, so that there is a continual conference between God and them, because
they are continually exercised in hearing and praying.

Christ loved Martha for her hospitality, as Isaac loved Esau for his venison.
So did he love Marie for her diligence Genesis 25. 28
in hearing his word, as Rebecca loved Jacob, for harkening to her voice. A
nurse which has her breast full of milk, does love the child that sucks it
from her: and Christ which has his breast full of heavenly milk, is glad when
he has children to suck the same. Let us therefore (as the Apostle wills
us. 1. Pet. 2. 12.) laying aside all maliciousnes, and all guile, and
disimulation, and envy, and all evil speaking, as newborn babes desire the
sincere milk of the word, that we may grow thereby to be perfect men in
Christ Jesus: let us breath after the fountain of the living water, which
springs up unto eternal life, as the faintie Heart desires the water brook
to quench his thirst: and for as much as Psalm. 42. 1
many things are so troublesome, and one thing is so needeful, let us seek
that one needful thing, the end of all things, even to fear God and keep his
commandementes, which we learn by hearing the word of God, whereby faith
(without Eccle. 12. 13 Heb. 11. 6 Romans 10. 17.
the which it is impossible to please God) is begotten and nourished in the
hearts of men.

This is that good part which Mary has chosen, by so much better than her
sisters choice, because it concerns a better life, and has the fruition of
this present life. Marie has a double portion: she heard the word, and ate of
the meat which her sister dressed, for godliness has the promise 1. Tim. 4. 8
of this life, and of the life to come. As for all other things, whether they
be honors, promotions, pleasures, and what not? They serve only for the
maintenance of this present life, which is so short and subject to mutabilitie:
but the word of God is the food of the soul, the bread of life, 1. Pet. 1. 13
that immortal seed which brings forth fruit unto eternal life. Let the
word of God therefore be precious unto Luke. 21. 33
us, because it is so permanent: for heaven and earth must pass, but the word
of God endures for ever. If we make 1. Pet. 1. 25
choice of any thing beside, it must be taken from us, or we shall be taken
from it: but if we make choice of this one thing, it shall never be taken from
us, neither in this world nor in the world to come. The Lord grant that we
be not only hearers, but doers of the word, that it may be truly said of us,
as Christ said of his Disciples that heard his preaching, James. 1. 22
Behold my brother, my sister and mother: or as he answered the woman that
commended his carnal kindred, Blessed Math. 12. 50 Luke. 11. 28
are they that hear the word of God, and keep the same.

FINIS.
THE FIRST SERMON of Noah's drunkenness.
Genesis 9. 20. 21. Noah also began to be a husbandman and planted a vineyard. And
he drank of the wine and was drunken, and was uncovered in the midst of his
tent.
FIrst we are to speak of Noah, then of Cham his wicked son, and after of
Shem and Iapheth his good sons: In Noah, first of that which he did well,
and then of his sin. In Cham, first of his sin, and then of his curse. In
his brethren, first of their reverence, and then of their blessing.

Now we will speak of the Father, and after of his children. Then (says
Moses) Noah began to be a husbandman. This is the first name which is given to
Noah after the flood, he is called an husbandman; and the first work which is
mentioned, was the planting of a vineyard: one would think when all men were
drowned with the flood, and none left alive to possess the earth but Noah and
his sons, that he should have found himself something else to do, then to
plant vineyardes: and that the holy Ghost should have entitled him King of
the world, and not an husbandman of the earth, seeing there be no such men as
Noah was, which has more in his hand, then any King has in the world or
shall have to the worlds end: but hereby the holy Ghost would show, that God
does not respect kings for their titles, nor men for their riches as we do, and
therefore he names Noah after the work which he did, not after the possessions
which he had, an husbandman. It seems that there was great diversity
between this age and ours. For if we should see now a king go to plough, a
nobleman to drive the teame, a gentleman keep sheep, he should be scorned
for his labor more then Noah was for his drunkenness: yet when we read how
this Monarch of the world thought no scorn to play the husbandman, we
consider not his princely calling, nor his ancient years, nor his large
possessions to commend his industry, or modesty, or lowly mind therein.
Which may teach us humility, though we learn to disdain husbandry. Of whom
will we learn to be humble, if Kings give examples, and the son of God
humbles himself from heaven to earth, and yet we contemn the example of the
Kings of the earth, and the example of the king of heaven?

The time was when Adam dug and delued, when David kept sheep, and all the
house of Jacob were called men occupied about cattle: but as they for this
were abominable to the Egyptians (as Moses says in the same verse) so they
which do like them are abhorred of their brethren: and they which live by
them, scorn them for their work, which would be chastned themselves, because
they work not. There was no art nor science which was so much set by in
former times, and is now profitable to the Commonwealth; bringing less profit
unto her self, that may so justly complain of her fall without cause, and
her despite from them which live by her, as this painful science of
husbandry: that it is marvel that any man will take pain for the rest, to be
contemned for his labor, and be a scorn for the rest, which might hunger and
starve, if he did not labor for them more then they do themselves. No marvel
then though many in the poor Countries murmr and complain, that other
cannot live by them, and they cannot live themselves: but it is marvel if
their complaint do not grow in time to rebellion, and pull others as low as
themselves: for why should the greatest pain yield the less profit? yet this
is their case; for if you mark, you shall see that the husbandman does bate
the price of his fruits so soon as the dearth is past, though he raises it
a little while the dearth lasts: but they which raise the price of their
wares with him, seldom fall again, but make men pay as dear when the dearth
is past, as if it were a dearth still. Thus a plentiful year does damage him,
and a hard year does vantage them. So this painful man is feign to live
poorly, fare meanly, go barely, house homely, rise early, labor daily, sell
cheap, and buy dear, that I may truly say, that no man deserves his living
better, no man fulfilleth the law nearer: that is, thou shall get thy living
in the sweat of thy brows; then this poor son of Adam, which pickes his
crumbs out of the earth. Therefore he should not be mocked for his labor,
which has vexation enough though all men speak well of him: and in my
opinion, if any deserve to be loved for his innocence, or for his truth, or
his pain, or the good which he brings to the Commonwealth, this Realm is
not so much beholding to any sort of men (but those that feed the soul) as
those which feed the body, that is, those that labor the earth: yet you see
how they live like drudges, as though they were your servants to provide food
for you, and after to bring it to your doors: as the beasts serve them, so
they serve you, as though you were another kind of men. I can not think upon
their misery but my thoughts tell me, that it is a great part of our
unthankfulness, that we never consider what an easy life and living God has
given unto us, in respect of them.

If the Apostles rule were kept, they which do not work should not eat: but
now they which do not work, eat most: and the husbandmen which work, eat
not, but are like Bees, which prepare food for other and pinch themselves. Let
us consider this, for they had not one law and we another: but the same curse
which was denounced upon Adam, was denounced upon all his children, that
every man should get his living in the sweat of his brows. Although I know
there be diverse works, and diverse gifts, and diverse callings to work in: yet
always provided, they which do not work should not eat, for in the sweat of
thy brows, that is, in labor and travel, thou king, and thou Judge, and
thouprelate, and thoulandlorde, and thou gentleman, shall get thy living as
Ada^thy father did, or else thou do avoid the curse, and a greater curse
shall follow, that is, they which will not sweat in earth, shall sweat in hell.

Adam had food as well as thou, and so had Noah, and more then thou, unless
thou had all, for they had all, and yet they might not be idle, because their
hands were not given them for nothing: some work with their pen, some with
their tongues, some with their fingers: as nature has made nothing idle, so
God would have no man idle, but that he which is a Magistrate, should do the
work of a Magistrate: he which is a judge, should do the work of a judge: he
which is a captain, should do the work of a captain, he which is a
minister, should do the work of a minister: as when Noah was called an
husbaudman, he did the work of an husbandman. This contempt of the country,
does threaten danger to the land as much as anything else in our days,
unless their burden be eased, and their estimation qualified in some part to
their pains. Thinking that you have not heard of his the ame before, seeing
the words of my Text did lie for it, thus much I have spoken to put you in
mind how easily you live in respect of them: and to certify our minds toward
our poor brethren, which indeed seem too base in our eyes, and are scorned
for their labors, as much as we should be for our idleness.

Then (says Moses) Noah began to be a husbandman. In that it is here said that
Noah began, it does not disprooue that he gave not himself to husbandry
before, but it imports: that Noah began to set up husbandry again after the
flood before any other: so this good man recomforted with the experience of
Gods favor (which had exempted him and his seed out of all the world) and
rejoicing to see the face of the earth again after the waters were gone,
though an old man, and weak then he was; yet he returns to his labor
afresh, and scorned not to till and plant for all his possessions, as though he
were an husbandman: such a lowlines is always joined with the fear of God,
that they yt are humbled with religion, do not think themselves too good to do
any good thing. Here note by the way that none of Noah's sons are said to
begin this work, but Noah himself, the old man, the hoary head and careful
Father begins to teach the rest, and shows his sons the way how they should
provide for their sons; and how all the world after should live by labor
and travel, till they return to dust: so the old man whom age dispenceth
with all to take his ease, is more willing to provide for the wantes of his
children, then they are which are bound to labor for themselves and their
parens too, as the Storke does feed the dam when she is old, because the
dam fed her when she was young. What a shame is this to Shem and Iapheth, that
is, to us which are young and strong, that the Father should be called a
laborer when the sons stand by? Now, the ground was barren because of the
flood, and could not bring forth fruit of it self, because of the curse:
therefore it pitied Noah to see the desolation and barrennes, and slime upon
the face of the earth, which he had seen so glorious and sweet, and fertile,
with all manner of herbs and fruits, and flowers before. Therefore he sets
himself to manure it, which waited for nothing now, but a painful labourer
to till and dress it, that it might bring forth delights and profits for
sinful man, as it did before. By this we may learn to use all means for the
obtaining of Gods blessings, and not to lose any thing which we might have or
save for want of pains, for that is sin. As Solomon notes in the 24. of Pro.
when he reprooueth yt slouthful husbandma^, because his field brought forth
Nettles and Thistles in stead of grapes, not because the ground would not
bear Grapes, but because the slothful man would not set them. Shall God
command the earth and all his creatures to increase for us, and shall not we
further their increase for our selves? as we increase and multiply our
selves, so we are bound to join hand and help, that all creatures may
increase and multiply too, or else the Fathers should eat the childrens
portion, and in time there should be nothing left for them that come after:
this regard Noah seems to have unto his posterity, and therefore h e gave
himself unto husbandry, which is commended in him unto this day, and shall
be recorded of him so long as this book is read: whereby we are warned, that
he which lives only to himself, is not to be remembered of them which live
after: But as David cared how the realm should be governed after his death,
as well as he did during his life: so though we die and depart this world, yet
we should leave that example, or those books, or those works, behind us,
which may profit the Church and Common-wealthe when we are dead and buried, as
much as we did when we lived among them. Even as Noah planted a vineyard, not
for himself, but for the ages to come after.

Some do think that Noah planted the first vineyarde, and drunk the first
wine, and that there was no use of grapes before: which opinion they are led
unto, that they might excuse Noah and mittigate his fault; if he did sup too
deep of that cup, the strength and operation whereof was not known unto him
nor unto any man before. But it is not like, that the excellent liquor and
wholesome juice of the Grape did lie hid from the world so many hundredth
years, and no doubt but there were vines from the beginning, created with
other trees: for how could Noah plant a vineyard, unless he had slippes of
other vines or grapes that grew before, seeing he did not create fruits but
plant fruits as we do? for this is principally to be noted, that so soon
as he had opportunity to do good, he omitted no time, but presently after
the flood was gone, and that the earth began to dry, he plied it with seeds,
and wrought it till he saw the fruits of his labor. By this we learn, to
omit no occasion to do good, but whenever we may do good, to count it
sin if we do it not.

But if we be so exercised, then all our works shall prosper like the vineyard
of Noah, because the fruit of the vine does cheer the countenance and glad
the heart of man. Therefore some have gathered upon the planting of this
vineyard, a signification of gladness and thankefulnes in Noah for his late
deliverance, as the Jews by their solemn feasts did celebrate the memorial
of some great benefit: but I rather Judge, that God would have us see in this
example, what men did in those days, and how we are degenerate from our
parents, that we may prepare against the fire, as Noah prepared against the
water.

This is worthy to be noted to, that God did not so regard his husbandry, but
that he had an eye to his drunkenness, and speaks of his fault as well as his
virtue; whereby we are warned, that though God bless us now while we remember
him, yet he will chasten us so soon as we forget him: though we be in a good
name now, infamy will rise in an hour: though we be rich at this present,
poverty may come suddenly: though we be well while we are here, yet we may
fall sick before night, even as Noah is praised in one verse, and dispraised
in an other: even now God commends him for his lowlines, and now discommendes
him for his drunkenness: as though he had forgot all his righteousness so
soon as he sinned, and would call in his praise again.

This was to show; that Noah was not saved from the flood, because he
deserved to be saved, but because God had a favor unto him for he which was
not drowned with water, was drowned after with wine. As the Pharisees when they
had done well were proud of it, and lost their reward: so when Noah had done a
good work, he spotted it with sin, and was dispraised where he was praised,
as though God repented him that he commended him. He planted well, but he
drunk not well: therefore that which was good did him hurt: then seeing he
was trapped with a good work, whatsoever we do, we may remember how easy
it is to sin, if we miss in the matter, or in the manner, or time, or the
place, or the measure, as Noah did. He which planteth the vineyarde, is worthy
to taste of the grape, but if thou have found honey (says Solomon) eat not too
much least thou surfeit: So if thou have found wine, drink not too much least
thou surfeit. A little wine is better then a great deal, and if thou will
follow the Apostles counsel, thou must drink it but for thy stomachs sake,
least that happen to thee, which thou shall hear of this noble Patriarch.
Though he were never so righteous before God and men, though he escaped the
destruction, which lighted upon all the world, though he had all the fowls of
the air and beasts of the land at his command, though he passed the
pilgrimage of man nine hundredth years, yet Noah was but a man: so ancient, so
righteous, so mighty, so happy: Noah showed himself but a man, for drinking
the wine which himself had planted, he was drunken. This is Noah's fault, he
was drunken with his own wine, as Lot was defiled with his own daughters. If
Cham his son had taken too much, and stripped himself as his father did, the
holy ghost would scarce have spoken of it, because he was a man of no note;
but when the father forgate himself and gave this offense, mark the manner of
the holy Ghost, as though he would show you a wonder: he displaieth Noah's
drunkenness, as Cham displaied his nakedness: as if he would say, come and
see the strength of man. He which was counted so righteous; he which believed
the threatening like Lot when the rest mocked, he to whom all the fowls of
the air, and the beasts of the earth flocked in couples as they came to Adam:
he which was reserved to declare the judgments of God, and to begin the
world again: Noah the example of sobriety, the example of moderation is
overcome with drink, as if he had never been the man. How easy, how
quickly the just, the wise, the prudent, has lost his sense, his memory, his
reason as though he had never been the man.

And how hard is it to avoid sin, when occasion is at hand, and pleasant
opportunity tempts to sin? it is easier for the bird to go by the net
then to break the net: so it is easier for a man to avoid temptations then to
overcome temptations: therefore God forbad Balaam, not only to curse the
people as Balacke would have him, but he forbad him to go with Balackes
servants, knowing that if he went with them and saw the pomp of the
Court, and heard the King himself speak unto him, and felt the tickling
reward, it would strain his conscience, and make him doubt whether he
should curse or bless.

Peter but vvarming himself at Cayphas fire, was overcome by a silly Damsel
to do that which he never thought, even to forswear his Lord God: therefore
Daniell would not eat of the kings meat, least he should be tempted to
the kings will, showing us that there is no way to escape sin, but to avoid
occasion. Therefore David prays, Turn away mine eyes from vanity: as though
his eyes would draw his heart as the bait tilleth on the hook. Noah thought
to drink, he thought not to be drunk: but as he which comes to the field
to sound the trumpet is slain as soon as he which comes to fight: so the
same wine distempereth Noah which has distempered so many since. Where he
thought to take his reward, and taste the fruit of his own hands, God set
an everlasting blot upon him, which sticks fast till this day, like a bar
in his arms, so long as the name of Noah is spoken of, that we cannot read
of his virtue but we must read of his sin, whereby every man is warned to
receive the gifts of God reverently, to use them soberlie, and to sanctify
himself, before he reach forth his hand unto them, that they may comfort and
profit us, with that secret blessing which God has hid in them, or else every
thing, the best gifts of God may hurt us: as the pleasant wine stained and
confounded the great Patriarch, when he delighted too much in it, which he
might have drunk as Christ did at his last Supper, and this disgrace had never
been written in his story, but God would have a fearful example like the
pillar of salt, to stand before those beasts, whose only strife is to make
trial, who can quaffe deepest and show all their valiantness in wine.

Because there is such warning before us, now we have the drunkarde in
schooling, I will spend the time that is left, to show you the deformity of
this sin. If any hear me which have been overtaken with it, let them not
marvel why he cannot love his enemies, which loves such an enemy as this,
which leads till he reeleth, dulles him til he be a fool, and steals
away his sense, his wit, his memory, his health, his credit, his friends:
and when she has stripped him as bare as Noah, then she exposes him like
Noah to Cham, and all that see him do mock him: it is a wonder almost, that
any man should be drunk that has seen a drunkard before, swelling and
puffing, and foming, and spuing, and groueling like a beast; for who would be
like a beast for all the world? Look upon the drunkarde when his eyes stare,
his mouth driuels, his tongue faulters, his face flames, his hands tremble, his
feet reele: how ugly, how monstrous, how loathsome does he seem to thee?
so loathsome do thou seem to others when thou art in the like taking.

And how loathsome then do thou seem to God? Therefore the first law
which Adam received of God was abstinence, which if he had kept, he had kept
all virtues beside, but intemperancie lost all. In abstinence the law came to
Moses, and he fasted when he received it, to show that they which receive the
word of God, receive it soberlie. A temperate man seldom sins, because the
flesh which does tempt is mortified, least it should tempt: but when the
handmayd is above the mistress, and a man has lost the image of God, and scarce
retayneth the image of man; all his thoughts and speeches and actions, must
needs be sin, and nothing but sin, because the band of virtue sobriety is
broken, which kept all together: when did thou want discretion to consider?
when did thou want patience to forgive? when did thou want continency to
refrain? when did thou want heart to pray, but when sobriety was fled
away, and intemperancie filled her room? if shame let to sin, it casts
out sin: if fear let to sin, it casts out fear: if love let to sin,
it expulseth love: if knowledge let to sin, it expulseth knowledge, like a
covetous Landlord, which would have all to himself and dwell alone.

There is no sin, but has some show of virtue, only the sin of
drunkenness is like nothing but sin: there is no sin but although it hurt
the Soul, it beautifieth the body, or promises profit, or pleasure, or
glory, or something to his servants: only drunkenness is so impudent, that
it descrieth itself: so unthankful that it makes no recompense: so noisome
that it comsumeth the body, which many sinners spare, least they should
appear to besinnes. Every sin defiles a man, but drunkenness makes him
like a beast: every sin defaceth a man, but drunkenness takes away the
image of a man: every sin robs a man of some virtue, but drunkenness
steals away all virtues at once: every sin deserves punishment, but
drunkenness vpraides a man, while the wine is in the stomach, and though he
would dissemble his drunkenness, yet he is not able to set a countenance of
it, but the child descrieth him, the fool knows that he is drunk, because
his face bewraieth him, like the leprosy which brast out of the forehead: so
worthily has he lost the opinion of sobriety, which has lost it self. His
son thinks himself more master now then his father: his servant makes him a
fool: his children lead him like a child, his wife uses him like a
servant, and although his drunkenness leaves him when he has slept, yet no
man seeks to him for counsel after, no man regardes his word, no man reckens
of his judgment, no man is persuaded by his counsel, no man accountes of his
learning, no man has any glory to accompany with him, but so soon as
drunkenness has made him like a beast, every man abhors him like a beast,
as they did Nabuchadnezar, the spirit flies from him least he should grieve
it, his friends go away least he should shame them, and no virtues dare come
near least he should defile them.

How many things fly out when wine goes in? how is it then that he which
loves himself, can be so cruel to himself, that he should love his life
and shorten his life? that he should love his health, and destroy his health?
that he should love his strength, and weaken his strength? that he should
love his wealth, and consume his wealth? that he should love his credit, and
crack his credit? that he should love his understanding, and ouerturne his
understanding? that he should love his beauty, and deforme his beauty? The
Poets need faining no more, that men are transformed into beasts for if they
were living now, they should see men like beasts: some like Lions, some like
wolves, some like foxes, some like bears, some like swine: who is the beast
when the beasts satisfy nature and man satisfy appetite? when the beasts
keep measure and man exceeds measure? when the beasts are found laboring, and
man found surfeiting? who is the beast? I have read of a bird which has the
face of a man, but is so cruel of nature, that sometime for hunger she will
set upon a man and slay him: after when she comes for thirst unto the water to
drink, seeing the face in the water like the face of him whom she devoured,
for grief that she has killed one like herself, takes such sorrow, that she
never eats nor drinks after, but beats, and frets, and pines her self to
death. What will thou do then which have not slain one like thy self, but
thy self, thy very self with a cup of wine, and murderest so many virtues and
graces in one hour?

As Esau sold his land and living for a mess of pottage, so the drunkard
sells his sense, and wit, and memory, and credit for a cup of wine. Thou
have not murdered thy brother like Caine, but thou have murdered thy self
like Judas: as the Rechabites abstaining from wine, as Ionadab bad the^,
obtained the blessing which God had appointed to the Israelites: so let us take
heed, least they which we account Idolaters, whilst they fast and watch,
obtain the blessing which God has appointed for us (get away the blessing)
while we sit down to eat, and rise to play. Therefore, as Christ said,
remember lots wife, so I say, remember Lot: one hour of drunkenness did him
more hurt then all his enemies in Sodom: remember Noah one hour of drunkenness
discovered that which was hid six hundred years. Ten times more might be said
against this vice: but I have said enough to make you abhor it, I have said as
much as I would

Some go about to accuse Noah because he was an old man, and therefore might
soon be taken cupshot: some because the wines were hotter in those countries,
then they are with us; some because of his change of drinks, which had not
woonted himself to wine before: some because as most men delight in that which
by great labor they have brought to pass of themselves.

So no marvel though Noah had a longing to his own grapes; following herein
the example of a curious Cook, which does sup and sup his broth to taste
whether it be well seasoned, that he may mend it if he can, or mende the next:
but as the Fly by often dallying with the candle, at last scorcheth her wings
with the flame, so taking he was taken, and at last was drunk: yet this is
imputed to him for his fault, that he was drunk, as the punishment which
follows does witness. Such is the providence of God, that his mercy might be
glorified in all, he has concluded all under sin, and suffered the best to
fall, that no man might trust in his own strength, and that we seeing their
repentance, may learn to rise again how grievous soever our sins be. If we
have been Idolaters, if adulterers, if persecutors, if murmurers, if
murderers, if blasphemers, if drunkards: Aaron, and Moses, and Lot, and
Abraham, and David, and Solomon, and Peter, and Paul, and Noah, have been the
like; who reign now in the kingdom of Christ with his angels, and so may we,
if we repent like them. These examples says Paul, are not written for our
imitation, but for our admonition.

Thus you have seen Noah sober, and Noah drunken, Whereby we may see that a
man may be drunk with his own wine, he may surfeit with his own meats, he
may lust with his own wife, he may offend with his own gifts, his own honor
may make him proud, his own riches may make him covetous, his own strength
may make him venturous, his own wit may make him contentious: therefore, as
the child pluckes out the sting before he takes the honey, so let every man,
before he receaues the gifts of God, sit down, and look what baits, what
snares, what temptations satan has hid in them, and when he has taken out
the sting, then eat the honey, and he shall use the blessings of Christ as
Christ did himself.

FINIS.
IH^S

TWO SERMONS preached by master Henry Smith, with three prayers thereunto
adjoined.

And published by a more perfect copy then heretofore.

ET VSQVE AD NVBES VERITAS TVA
printer's or publisher's device

AT LONDON Printed by P. S. for William Leake. 1599.

PS



The contents,
1 The sinners conversion. 2 The sinners confession. 1 A prayer for the
Morning. 2 A prayer to be said at all times. 3 Another zealous prayer.
THE SINNERS CONVERSION. The Text.
Luke 29. verses. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 1. Now when Jesus entered and passed through
Jericho.

2. Behold there was a man named Zaccheus, which was the chief receiver of the
tribute, and he was rich:

3. And he sought to see Jesus, who he should be, and could not for the prease,
because he was of a low stature.

4. Wherefore he ran before and climed up into a wild fig tree, that he might
see him for he should come that way.

5. And when Jesus came to the place, he looked up, and saw him, and said unto
him, Zaccheus, come down at once: for to day I must abide at thine house.


IN the end of the chapter before going, we may see how Christ healed a man,
blind in his bodily sight, namely Bartimeus, whereby he shows himself to be
the Physician of the body: Here we shall see how he cured one blind in
mind, namely Zaccheus, whereby the shows himself to Ephe. 5. 23
be the Physician of the soul, and therefore the Savior of the whole man.

In speaking of Zaccheus and his conversion, we will observe four
circumstances. First, the place where he was called, which was Jericho
Secondly, the person that was called Zaccheus the Publican. Thirdly, by whom
and how he was called, by the voice of Christ And lastly, the effect and fruit
of his calling, his good confession.

The first circumstance.
First therefore for the place where he was converted, it appears to be
Jericho, a City not far distant from Jerusalem. It was sometime a notable
City, till it was subverted and ruinated by the Lords Champion Joshua. Iosu.
6.
It was builded again in the days of Ahab, by Hiell the Bethelite, and
remains at this day with the rest of that 1 Reg. 16. 34
holy land, under the Turkish Empire. Unto this Jericho, the Lord of heaven
and earth vouchsafes to come in the likeness of a servant. And as Joshua
compassed Jericho seven times minding to destroy it, so Christ the true Joshua,
resorted oftentimes to Jericho, minding to save it. But as in the destruction
of Jericho, Joshua spared none but Rahab the harlot: so Jesus in his journey to
Jericho, converted none but Zaccheus the Publican. When Joshua had conquered and
rased Jericho, he sowed salt in it to make it barren, and cursed him that
should attempt to build it up: yet in this barren soil Christ has his
spiritual harvest, and in this cursed City he has a holy Temple, a blessed
building. Samaria that wicked City affourdeth many that believe in Christ.
Ioh. 4. 39. And out of Galile, from whence they thought no good thing might
come, John 1. verse 46. Christ called diverse of his Apostles, and even in
Jericho this cursed City, Christ John. 7. 52
has a rich man that is to be saved. In every place Christ has his chosen.
There is neither Jew nor Gentile, Barbarian nor Seythian, bond nor free, but
Christ is all in all, to all that call upon him, Romans 10. 12.

The second circumstance.
Now follows the description of Zaccheus, which is most plainly and fully
set forth unto us. The holy Ghost speaking of Zaccheus and his conversion,
comes in with an Ecce, Behold, as if it were a wonder that Zaccheus should be
converted. Zaccheus was a Gentile, a Publican, and a rich man, and therefore
behold a miracle, as if in the conversion of Zaccheus, these three should be
converted at once.

Zaccheus was a Gentile, a marvel to see a Gentile become Math. 19. 28
a Jew: that is, to believe in Christ. He was a principal Publican. A strange
thing to see a chief Customer to give over his office: and he was rich also:
a rare matter to see a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God: and therefore
Romans 2. 28
behold a miracle, as if at this day, the Turk, the Pope, and the King of
Spain, were at once persuaded to forsake their idolatry and superstition.
Christ going to Jerusalem, conuerteth a Gentile, to signify the calling of the
Gentiles: he conuerteth a Publican, to show that notorious sinners may hope to
be saved, if they repent and amend, as Zaccheus did. He conuerteth a rich man,
to show that all rich men are not excluded from the kingdom of heaven.

He was called Zaccheus before his conversion, but he was never truly called
Zaccheus till Christ called him so. His name signifying, simple, pure, honest;
but his life was subtle, impure, and most detestable. Thus many are called by
honest names, whose deeds bewray their dishonest natures, and vices oftentimes
are shrouded in the habites of virtue, like Esops Ass, masking in the Lions
skin, till his long ears detect his folly, or like the Crow that is decked
in other plumes, till every bird do pluck his feather.

Zaccheus by his profession was a Publican, and therefore much detested of the
Jews: for Publicans were the Roman Officers, appointed to gather and receive
public custom or tribute of the Jews, who were at that time in subjection
unto the Romans. And amongst these Officers, Zaccheus was the chief, and (as
it seems) Ouer-seer of the rest that were in Jericho, and therefore in chief
hatred among the Jews, as one that chiefly favored the Romans tyranny, and
served to abridge their country liberty, which ought not to be subject to any
nation.

Besides, he contemned the ceremonies of the Jews, and regarded not their
religion, nor lived after their law, and therefore with the rest of the
Heathen Publicanes, was excommunicate out of their Synagogue, Math. 18.

Thus was he hated for his profession, because h^e was a Publican, and for his
religion, because he was a Heathen. Yet was he beloved for his wealth, for
rich men have many friends. Prou. 14. 20. And though they do never so wickedly,
yet have they some to take their parts. If they speak never so proudely, yet
are there some to praise their aying, Eccle. 13. 23. 24.

Zaccheus was a Publican, and therefore rich: for Publicans must needs be rich,
and Usurers will be wealthy. But rich Publicans make poor princes, and
wealthy Usurers make many beggars. In every province there were many Publicans
and therefore much poor people in every place: for where there be many
Caterpillars, the fruit is soon consumed, and where there be many
extortioners, beggars must needs abound.

By the Law of GOD, there might be no beggars in Israel, but when so many
Publicans were suffered to receive Deuteronomy. 15
tribute of the Jews contrary to Gods Law, no marvel though so many sat
and begged, contrary to Gods Law. Luke 18. John 9. Acts 3. By the Law of God,
There ought to be no beggars among christians, Psalm. 32. 25. but when so many
usurers are tolerated in a christian Commonwealth, contrary to the Law of
Christ, Luke 6 35. no marvel though we have so many beggars, contrary to
the mind Leuit. 35. 36. 37 Mark. 14. 7
of Christ. The poor (says Christ) ye shall have always with you, but when
you will you may do them good: and we shall be sure to have the poor amongst
us always, but we must make such good provision for them, that they be not
feign Psalm 37.
to beg their bread.

Thus was Zaccheus rich to himself, for he was a Publican, but he was rich
toward God also, for he had a desire to Luke. 12. 21.
see Christ. Almighty God, who is rich in mercy, Ehp. 2. has so inspired his
heart with the desire of heavenly riches, that whereas before his whole delight
was in seeking of worldly wealth, now his greatest care is to seek for
heavenly treasure. He now forgets what his profession is, and begins to be
of a new profession: and he whose heart was wholly set upon earthly profit,
is now like old Simeon, most desirous to see his Savior. The Tetrarch Herod
desired to see Christ, and despised him when he saw him. Luke 23. ^. 11. but
Zaccheus the Publican, desired to see Christ, and reioiced when he saw him,
like Abraham that desired to see the day of Christ, John. 8. 56. and therefore
of the servant of Satan, Zaccheus is now become the child of Abraham, which
rejoiced to see the day of Christ. Happy were hi^ eyes that saw so blessed
a sight, for many Prophets and righteous men have desired to see and to hear
those things Luke. 10
that Zaccheus both saw and heard, and could not see nor hear the same. If
Jacob thought himself happy, if that he might but see his son Joseph before
his death, then surely Genesis 45
thrice happy Zaccheus whose hap it was not only to see (as Jacob did) but to
rejoice (as Mary did) in christ his Savior

As Zaccheus was desirous to see christ in earth, so I would have the rich men
of our time, desirous to see Christ in heaven. For although with the eyes of
our body we cannot see Christ as Zaccheus did, yet with the eyes of our faith
we may behold him as Stephen did, Acts. 7. But if our faith be so weak
sighted that we cannot see Christ, yet let us have a desire to hear Christ in
his word, whereby our faith may be increased, for faith comes by hearing the
word of God. Rom 10 1. Reg. 10
And as the Queen of the South desired to hear the wisdom of Solomon, so
let us be desirous to hear the wisdom of Christ our Savior.

King Solomon left some books in writing, wherein is seen some part of his
wisdom, and Christ our King, has left unto us his most sacred word, as it
were a taste of his John. 20. 32
wisdom, sufficient matter for our salvation, this is that heavenly food,
Math, 4. 4. whereby our souls are fed unto eternal life, let us therefore
labor for that heavenly food: and as the Israelites were careful to gather
Manna to sustain Exodus 19
their bodies, so let us be as careful to hear the word to feed our
souls. The people in the time of Christ, John 6. 24. took great pains to
follow Christ both by land and sea, and many now a days (I confess) are very
forward to follow his faithful ministers, but as they followed Christ so fast
to fill their bellies, so these frequent sermons for fashion John. 6. 26
to serve the time.

Zaccheus is desirous to see Christ, a godly care, but ye he could not obtain
his purpose: a thing common; for every one that has any good motion, has
always some hinderance to cross the same, and Zaccheus has a double
impediment to hinder his honest enterprise: The prease of the Two impediments.
people, and his little stature. Whereof the former, that is, the multitude, is
always wont to be an enemy to those that would come to Christ. This hindered
the blind man from receiving his sight, Luke. 18. for the people rebuked him
that he should hold his peace, till Christ called him and opened his eyes. This
hindered them that brought the man sick of the Paulsie, Mark. 2. for they could
not come at Christ for the prease, till they uncovered the roof of the house
and let down the bed wherein the sick of the Palsy lay.

This hindered the healing of the deaf and dumb, Mark. 7. till Christ took
him aside out of the multitude, and cured him. This hindered the raising of the
Rulers daughter, Mat. 9. till Christ had thrust out the Minstrels and the
multitude, and then restored the may de to life. Finally, this hindered
Zaccheus here from coming unto Christ, till Christ vouchsafed to call him to
himself. Thus always a multitude that is prone to evil, does withdraw and
hinder us from approaching unto Christ: and therefore we must not follow a
multitude to do evil, nor decline after many to overthrow the truth. Exodus
23.

The second impediment that hinders Zaccheus from seeing Christ, is his
little stature. He was so low of stature, that he could not see Christ above
the multitude: but Christ was above the multitude, and therefore could see
Zaccheus though he were so low of stature. For God looks not on the
countenance, nor on the height of a man's stature, 2. Sam. 16. 7 3. Sa^. 16. 12
but the Lord beholds the heart, and preferred little David before Eliab his
eldest brother, because he finds in him a better heart to serve the Lord.
And Zaccheus in his little body, has a heart and mind prepared to seek and
see the Lord. Zaccheus was so low that he could not see Christ, but many
amongst us are so high that they will not see Christ. The common people in time
of Christ, were so desirous to follow Christ, that neither lamenesse, nor
blindness, nor sickness, could stay them from coming to him; but the common
people in our time, are more ready to follow their sport and pastime, then to
come to the church to hear of Christ. And as for our rich men, who sees not
that they will make great haste to see a commodity, but will scarce come out
of doors to hear a Sermon?

They come to Church, as Nichodemus came to Christ John. 3. 2
by night, as if they were ashamed to come to Church: but they run after
profit to get riches, as Geheziran after Naaman 2. King. 5
the Syrian to get a bribe.

Thus has Zaccheus two lets: that he could not see Christ, the one in the
people, the other in himself: and we have many lets to withdraw us from
Christ, some are external, and without us, as the inticements of the world,
and some are internal and within us, as the lusts of our own flesh. The
prease of the people hinders Zaccheus from seeing Christ Esa. 59(...)
in his humility, and the multitude of our sins do press us down, that we
cannot see Christ in glory. Zaccheus was a man of little stature, and that
hindered him from seeing Christ in earth, and we are men of little faith, and
that is the cause we cannot behold Christ in heaven.

Though Zaccheus was a man of little stature, yet it appears that he was not
a man of little wit: For when he could not come to the sight of Christ for the
multitude, he had the wit to run before, and to clime up into a tree to
obtain his purpose. And for the most part it falls out, that men of low
stature, are men of high conceit, and the shortest bodies, have the sharpest
wits, God so providing, that the defects of their bodies might be supplied with
the gifts of their mind. Now Zaccheus, that before was loath to move his foot
from the custom house for losing his profit, begins to run after Christ
for fear of a greater loss, like Elisa that left his plowing, and ran after
Elias to follow his new vocation. But Zaccheus does not only run, 1. Reg. 1^
but also climb up into a tree to see Christ: A strange thing that Zaccheus a
rich man, and a cheer customer, should behave himself so childishly in the
sight of so great a multitude; but the desire he had to see Christ, made him
forget himself: and to commit such things as were not fitting for his state
and credit. So they that will follow Christ, Romans 12
must make account to do many things contrary to the fashion of the world,
and their own liking. If Christ himself were content to leave the glory
which he had with his father to come down to us, shall not we be content to
leave the reputation which we have with men to go up to him?

But alas, where is there any almost, that prefers not the fruitio^ of this
earthly prison, before the possession of that heavenly mansion: and had rather
hazard the hope which they have of eternal glory, then leese the present
enjoying of their fading pleasure.

The ambitious man hunteth after honor, and will not leese an inch of his
estimation. The covetous man seeks after profit, and countes (like Judas) all
lost that comes not to his John 12. 6
bags. And the voluptuous man bestows his time in pleasure, and thinks
that his chief felicity. Thus every man makes his heaven of that wherein he
most delights, and is content to take great pains to accomplish his fond
desires. But here Zaccheus is as an other mind, for being a Public officer,
he climbes into a tree, which stood not with his gravity: and being a rich man,
he runs to see Christ, which was not for his worldly profit; yea he takes
great pains to see Christ, not respecting his case or pleasure.

Thus must we be affected if we desire to come to Christ, that neither honors
nor preferments, nor profit, nor pleasure, nor kindred, nor friends, be able
to hold us back: We must be ready not only to run, but also to climb
(if need require) as Zaccheus did: that is, to take some pain Matthew. 3. 22
Luke. 14. 29 1. King. 10.
and travail to have a sight of Christ.

The Queen of the South, undertook a great and tedious journey to hear the
wisdom of Solomon, but we are loath to take any pain to he are one that is
greater then Solomon.

The people in David's time brought so much treasure, and so many gifts to the
building of Gods Temple, that the priests 1. Chr. 29. 9
were feign to bid them cease, but a great part of the people in our time, are
so sparing of their pains and cost, that they think that very time misspent
which is employed in the service of God: and that money ill bestowed, which is
given to the maintenance of his ministers.

When Zaccheus could not see Christ for the multitude, he climbes into a tree,
that grows in the way where he was to pass, that from a tree he might
behold him, which was to suffer on a tree for man's salvation. So when we
cannot draw near to Christ by reason of our sins that press us down, we
will climb up by a lively faith, which is the tree of life, that grows in the
way to eternal life, that so with the eyes of our faith, we may behold him
that died for our sins upon a tree.

It was a wild fig tree that Zaccheus climbed, but not Math. 21. 19
like that unfruitful one which our Savior cursed: for this bare most
precious fruit, even such as Christ himself vouchsafed to pluck. A happy
tree that bare such precious fruit as Zaccheus was, but thrice happy
Zaccheus, that so happily climbed on that happy tree.

This tree grew in the way that Christ was to pass, for else Zaccheus might
have climbed to no purpose: So if we desire to find Christ, we must seek him
in the way where he has promised to show himself unto us, that is, in his
holy Temple, where his word is duly preached, and his sacraments reverently
administered, for where two or three are Mat. 18. 20
so gathered together, he has promised to be present amongst them,

The third circumstance.
When Christ came to the place, he looked up and saw Zaccheus As Zaccheus ran
before to see Christ, so Christ followed after to see Zaccheus. Satan for his
part went about 1. Pet. 58 John. 10
like a roaring Lion, seeking to devour him, but Christ for his part goes
about like a good shepherd, minding to save him. And although Satan a strong
armed man, had Luke. 11. 21
taken some possession in the heart of Zaccheus, yet Christ a stronger then he
comes unarmed, and takes from him his harness wherein he trusted, and
rescueth the spoil.

Christ comes to the place where Zaccheus was, because otherwise it had been
impossible for Zaccheus to come to his presence: for unless the Lord
vouchsafe to come unto us, we cannot attain to the presence of God. As no man
might have any access to King Assuerus, except he stretched out his golden
Scepter: so no man may come to Christ, Hester. 4
unless he be called by the golden Scepter of his sacred word.

Christ looked up and saw Zaccheus, before Zaccheus could look down to behold
him. Thus does the Lord prevent us with his mercy, whom he might cast off in
his justice: and if he perceive in us a willing mind to come unto him, he is
content to come first unto us. And like that good Father, Luke 15. to behold us
while we are yet a great way off, and to have compassion on us.

When Jobs three friends that came to visit him in his great calamity, lift
up their eyes a far off, they knew not Job. 2. 12
Job, because he was so sore afflicted. But Christ who is the mirror of true
friendship, cannot so soon forget his friends, howsoever they be disguised. He
knows his own sheep wheresoever he sees them, Ioh. 10. whether they be
under the fig tree as Nathaniel was, or upon the fig tree as Zaccheus was, he
has respect unto them. And if they have a desire John. 1
to seek, they shall be sure to find, Math. 7. And if they labor and are
heavy laden, he will refresh them, Matthew. 11. Christ is now come to the place
where Zaccheus is to be called; and as Abraham, Gene, 22. lift up his eyes and
saw in the bush a Ram that was to be sacrificed, so Christ lifting up his
eyes, saw in the tree Zaccheus the sinner that was to be converted. And now
begins the conversion of Zaccheus, for now Christ begins to speak unto him.

Zaccheus desired only to see Christ, but now Christ calls him by name, and
offers his own self unto him. This was more then Zaccheus expected, and yet
no more than Christ vouchsafes, namely, to give more than is desired. The
sick of the Palsy that asked health, obtained also forgiveness Luke. 5 1.
King. 3 12. 13 Genesis 28. 30
of sins. Solomon desired wisdom, and the Lord gave him wisdom and
abundance of wealth beside. Jacob asked but meat and clothing, and God made him
a great rich man. And Zaccheus desired only to have a sight of Christ, and was
so happy as to entertain him into his house.

Thus the Lord that is rich in mercy to all that call upon Romans 10. 12 Ephe.
2. 4 Ierem. 29
him, uses oftentimes to give more then we ask: and he that is always
found of them that seek him with their whole heart, is found also sometime of
Gentiles that knew not God, Esaias. 65. 1. Let us therefore that were sometime
sinners of the Gentiles, seek the lord as Zaccheus did, while Romans 10. 20 Esaias.
55
he may be found, and call upon him while he is nigh. He will be found of
them that seek him heartily, and is nigh to all them that call upon him
faithfully, Psalm. 145. 18.

Zaccheus come down at once. Now Christ begins to call Zaccheus from the tree
to be converted, as God called Adam from among the trees of the garden to be
cursed, Genesis 3. Before, Zaccheus was too low, and therefore was feign to
climb, but now he is too high, and therefore he must come down. And we (for
the most part) are either too high, or too low, too hot, or too cold, too
quick, or too slothful in the Lords business. Sometime we flock together to
hear a Sermon, like the people, Luke 5. that pressed upon Christ to hear the
word: and anon we run to see some pleasant pastime, like the Athenians,
whose ears always itched to hear some news. Who make more show of
conscience Acts 17
and religion, then they that show themselves most irreligious and
unconscionable? Who seemed more confident and virtuous in Christ his cause then
Peter? and not long after, Math. 26
who more traiterous and faint hearted?

Many can say with Peter, that they will not stick to die before they will
deny Christ, but when it comes to the trial, they are ready to abjure Christ
and his religion, before they will hazard either life or living.

He that will come to Christ, must come at once, without delay, for delays
(specially in the matter of our salvation) are most dangerous, and repentance
may not be deferred. We must make no tarrying to turn unto the Lord, nor put
off from day to day, least the wrath of the Lord breakeforth suddenly Eccle.
5. 7.
and we be destroyed in our security, and perish in the time of vengeance.
When the Lord is minded to do us good, he will have us come quickly like Joseph.
Genesis 45. 9. that in the time offamine, would have his father Jacob to come
down quickly unto him, to soiourne in Egypt, where there was some plenty of
food.

As the children of this world are very nimble to work wickedness, so the
children of light should be as nimble to follow goodness. Judas was nimble to
betray Christ, John 13. 27. and the bad debtors, Luke 16. could sit down
quickly to misreckon their creditor: so let us come quickly to hear of
Christ, that Christ may accept of us quickly; let us be nimble to make our
account before, that we do not (like the foolish builder) come short of our
reckoning. Luke, 14. 28


But why must Zaccheus come down so hastily? even to entertain Christ into
his house. For to day (says Christ) I must abide with thee. This was joyful
news to little Zaccheus. Not long before, he wanted means to see Christ, but
now he has opportunity to entertain him into his house. There was more
humanity in Christ then in Zaccheus: for if Christ had not bidden himself to
dinner, he had not been bidden for Zaccheus. So if Christ do not offer
himself unto us in his afflicted members, he may go long Math. 35. 40
enough before we will offer him any entertainment. As often as the poor
craves any relief at our hands, let us imagine that Christ asks something
of us: but as Zaccheus must entertain him presently without delay, so let us
be ready to help them presently, because they stand in need of present
help. And as he must receive Christ into his house, so we must make account
to receive his needy members into our houses. And as the unjust steward
procures Luke. 16
himself friends with his masters goods, so let us make the poor to be our
friends, by our beneficence and bounty toward them, that so receiving them
(when they have need) into our earthly houses, they may receive us when we
stand in greatest need, into everlasting habitations.

They that were invited to the marriage, Matthew. 22. refused to come; but Christ
is content to come to Zaccheus house before he was invited. Wherein also he
shows his great humility, in coming before he was requested, as they
bewraied their great arrogance, in refusing to come being solemnly bidden. It
was a part of great humility, that he that was most free from sin, would
vouchsafe to come into a sinners house: but it was a sign of great humility,
that he would bewray his great necessity, and seek for succor at a sinners
hand.

Alas poor humble Savior, who though thou be Lord of heaven and earth, as
thou art the son of God, yet as thou art the son of man, have not whereon
to lay thy head, Matthew. 8. How justly did thy Prophet Jeremy wonder at thy
humble poverty, saying, O thou hope of Israel, the Savior thereof in the time
of trouble, why art thou as a stranger Ierem. 14
in the land, or as one that passes by to tarry for a night? The son of God
vouchsafes to come, and that unrequested, to a sinful man's house; a special
favor: but he disdaineth not to make his necessity known unto him; O
strange humility! Here therefore appears the singular humanity and great
humility of Christ to sinful men; he offers himself to be their guest, if
he find them willing to entertain him for their guest. And Zaccheus no doubt
was willing to entertain him, for although Christ heard not the voice, yet he
heard the affection of Zaccheus inuiting him to dinner. As therefore Zaccheus
was willing to receive Christ into his house, so let us be ready to receive him
into our hearts. For as Christ said to Zacheus: This day I must abide at thy
house, so he says to every one of us: This day I must abide in your hearts.
Wherefore, as the Prophet David says, Open your Psalm. 24
gates that the King of glory may come in: so I say unto you, Open your hearts
that the word of God may enter in. This day the word of God may abide in your
hearts, for this day the word is preached unto you; and who knows whether he
shall live to hear it the next Sabbath; To day therefore if ye will hear his
voice, haraen not your hearts: as did the Israelites, psalm. 95
least if you harden your hearts, his voice be heard no more amongst you. This
day you may gather this heavenly Manna, as the Israelites might gather their
Manna six days Exodus 16
together, but tomorrow (perhaps) and six days after, you may not gather it,
as on the seventh day Manna might not be found. The Lord grant that you may
gather sufficient food for the sustentatio^ of your souls, that as Elias the
prophet iournied in the strength of the meat that the Angel brought him, even
unto Horeb the mount of God, so you in 1. Reg. 19
the strength of this spiritual meat which here I bring you, may be able to
pass through the dangerous ways of this troublesome world, unto Gods holy
Mountain, the haven of all happiness, whither he bring us that has deerly
bought us with his precious blood, even Christ Jesus the righteous: to whom
with the Father and the holy Ghost, three persons and one God, be given all
glory and majesty, world without end,

Amen.
FINIS.
THE SINNERS CONFESSION. The Text.
Luke chap. 19. verses. 6. 7. 8. 9. 6 Then he came down hastily, and received
him joyfully.

7 And when all they saw it, they murmured saying, that he was gone into lodge
with a sinful man.

8 And Zaccheus stood forth, and said unto the Lord, Behold, Lord the half
of my goods I give to the poor: and if I have taken from any man by forged
cauillation, I restore him four fold.

9 Then Jesus said unto him, This day is salvation come unto this house,
forasmuch as he is also become the son of Abraham.


YOu heard the last Sabbath, how Zacheus the Publican was called to be a
christian: now you shall hear the fruit of his conversion. No sooner had
Christ called him from the tree, but that he came down hastily, and received
him joyfully.

This was the fruit which it had in the heart of Zaccheus, namely, obedience to
the voice of Christ: a fruit more precious and acceptable unto God, than the
most pleasant fruits which Eden yielded, and a sacrifice more sweet and
acceptable unto him than all the sacrifices which the Law required. This is the
sacrifice wherewith the Lord is pleased, even when his voice is obeyed, 1. Sam.
15. 22. The voice of the Lord is a glorious voice, and mighty in operation,
dividing Psalm. 29
the flames of fire, and shaking the Cedar trees. So the voice of Christ is a
glorious voice, his voice is mighty in Heb. 4. 12
operation, dividing the soul and the spirit, and shaking Zaccheus from the
wild fig tree, whereinto he had climed.

The same God, to whose command, the winds, the sea, Math. ^
the devils and death it self obey, here commands Zaccheus to come down at
once, and he comes down hastily to receive him into his house, and he
receives him ioifully. As Zaccheus could not come at Christ till he was
called, so no man can come to Christ except the Father draw John. 6. 44
him: and as Zaccheus could not choose but come, when he was called by the voice
of Christ: so when any man is called effectually by the preaching of the
Gospel, he cannot choose but come to Christ: for where there is an effectual
calling, there is grace given also to obey the same To. 8. 30. The Lord is
feign sometime to call us often, because we know not the voice of him that
calls us, as he called Samuel three times, before he answered: because at
that time Samuel knew not the Lord, 1. Sam. 3. 7. But as soon as he understood
that it was the Lord that spoke unto him, he replied presently, Speak on
Lord, for thy servant hears. So when the Lord calls any man effectually by
the preaching of his word, all the parts and powers of his body do yield
their obedience, the ear listneth, the tongue confesses, the heart believes,
the head deuiseth, the hand performs, the foot runs, the eye directs,
and all concur to do thy will, O God, Psalm. 40. 7.

Such and so effectual is the voice of Christ in the hearts of his chosen,
that it makes Saul of a bloody persecutor to become Paul a painful preacher:
it causes Peter of a silly Acts. 9 Math. 4
Fisherman, to become a catcher of men: and Zaccheus here of a vile publican,
to become a zealous christian. And such also is the nature of the word
preached, wheresoever it pleases the Lord to give success and increase
thereto, that 1. Cor. 3. 7
it is able to transform the minds of men, to beget faith in the hearts of
Infidels, (and in a word) to save such as are ordained to eternal life, Acts
13. This is the power of the word of God, even to cause a consenting to the
truth thereof: and this is the property of the children of God, to yield all
obedience Romans 1
to the word of God. As Soon as Christ calls Zaccheus, he comes down
presently, like the light in the creatition, that was made as soon as God
said, Let there be light. Here therefore of Zaccheus that obeyed the voice of
Christ, let us learn obedience to the voice of Christ: for as Christ bids
Zaccheus to come down, because he was too high: so he says to every one of us,
come down, because we are too high minded. But with us the voice of Christ is
not so effectual, as it was with Zaccheus: for he was content to come down
at the first bidding: but we must be often bidden to beware of pride and
ambition, and yet we will still be climing. There are few so high that are
content with their calling, but as Haman was always aspiring till he came to
the gallows, so many amongst us are always climing, Hest. 7.
till they catch a fall.

Again, as Christ said to Zaccheus, To day I must abide at thy house: so
Christ says to us. To day my poor afflicted members should receive some
succor at your hands. But as the Priest and the Leuite, Luke. 10. passed by
the wounded man leaving him half dead: so we (for the most part) pass by our
needy brethren, leaving them vnreleeued. Thus are we every ^^y disobedient to
the voice of Christ. He teaches us to be humble as he himself is, Matthew. 11.
29. and we wax proud and insolent as Satan is. He wills us to be
merciful, as our heavenly father is, Luke. 6. 36. and we are cruel and
unmerciful, as the rich glutton was, Luke. 16. This is the cause why the earth
deceives and renders not her fruit, Esai. 24. 5. This is the cause why the
sword deuoureth abroad, and the pestilence destroys at home, Deuteronomy. 28. 15
Leuit 26. 24. 25. and in a word, this is the cause of all the mischiefs and
calamities that are threatened, even because we are obstinate and rebellious
against the Lord, we are undutiful and disobedient to the voice of Christ,
that calls us so lovingly to come unto him, Matthew. 11. 28.

Zaccheus was called but once, and he comes quickly: but we are called
oftentimes, and almost every day, and that by the voice of Christ himself,
For, he that hears you (says Christ, Luke 10. 16) hears me: and yet we
cannot find the way to Christ. The word of God, which is the Lantern unto our
feet, and the light unto our paths, Psalm. 119. has bin plainly and
plentifully preached amongst us these many years, and yet many amongst us have
not yet learned to come to Christ. Zaccheus comes quickly when Christ calls
him, let us therefore learn of Zaccheus to come quickly when Christ calls
us. We must be quick in the Lords business, for God cannot abide loyterers
standing all the day idle, Matthew. 20. and as he loves a cheerful giver, 2.
Cor. 9. 7. so he likes a cheerful follower.

It follows therefore that Zaccheus received him cheerfully. Still Zaccheus
is a receiver: before he was a receiver of custom, now he is a receiver of
Christ. Zaccheus received Christ two ways: first, into his heart when he
desired to see him: and then into his house when he gave him hospitality. Many
received Christ to house, but not into their hearts, and therefore received him
grudgingly: but Zaccheus received Christ first into his heart, and then into
his house, and therefore received him joyfully. Of Zaccheus his ioyfulnes, we
must learn to be joyful when we do any thing for the cause of Christ: we must
be glad to ha(...) Christ in his members, as Zaccheus was joyful to harbor
Christ himself. As before in coming down from the tree, Zaccheus showed his
obedience: so here in receiving Christ into his house, he shows the love that
he bare unto him. If Zaccheus had not loved Christ, he might have sent him to
some common Inn: But Zaccheus is content to receive Christ into his own
house, yea, he rejoices to have gotten so good a guest, like Abraham that used
to sit at the door of his tent, and reioiced to entertayne stangers that went
by the Genesis 18
way: and therefore though Zaccheus were a Gentile borne, yet herein he
shows himself the child of Abraham, because he does the works of Abraham,
John 8. verse. 39. So did Abraham, and so must we do, if we will show our
selves to be the children of Abraham.

When Abraham thought only to have entertained men, Abraham. Genesis 18 3
he received the Angels in the shape and likeness of men: and when Zaccheus
thought to entertayne the son of man, he receives the son of God himself.
Let us therefore (as the Apostle wills us Heb. 13. 2.) be mindful to
entertain strangers, for as much as thereby some have received Angels into
their houses unawares: and why should not we Lot. Genesis 19. 3
hope to entertain the like or better ghestes, if we be given to
hospitality, as those godly fathers were? For as the Angels came to them in
the likeness of men: so Christ himself comes to us in the likeness of a poor
man, of a lame man, and of a blind man: and when he comes, he comes hungry,
or thirsty, or naked, or harborlesse, or sick, or imprisoned, and happy are
they that feed, or cloth, or harbor, or visit him, when he comes thus
afflicted. When Abraham entertained the Angels, he was not only busy himself,
but his wife and al his household were careful to make provision for them, so
when Zaccheus received Christ into his house his whole family (no doubt) were
no less willing and careful to entertain Christ, then their master was: and
therefore not only to Zaccheus, but even to his whole house salvation is
promised, because the whole family rejoiced at Christ his coming. Let rich men
learn of Zaccheus, to entertain Christ in his needy members, and let rich
men's servant learn of Zaccheus family, to show themselves merciful like
their merciful masters, that they may receive the reward of mercy and
hospitality at the last day, Come ye blessed, for I was harborlesse, and ye
took me in. Generally, Mat. 25
as Zaccheus gladly received Christ: so let every one that is able, be glad to
distribute to the necessity of the poor Saints: if we have much, let us give
plentifully: if we have little, let us give gladly of that little: if we be
not able to give a penny, yet happily we may afford a morsel of bread: but if
not that, yet there is none so needy, that cannot give a cup of cold water,
and even so small a gift shall not lose his just reward. Matthew. 10. 41.
Zaccheus received Christ into his heart, but many amongst us are ready to
drive Christ out, and to receive Satan in stead of him: Zaccheus received
Christ into his house, but there are many richmen amongst us, that like Dives,
Luke 16. will not affoorde poor Lazarus the crummes that fall from their
table: but as the damsel, Acts 12. opened not the door for joy when she
heard Peter's voice: so by contrary, these men for very grief shut their gates
when they perceive a beggar there. Finally, Zaccheus was joyful when he
entertained Christ, but many amongst us are sorrowful when they should relieve
the poor: like churlish Nabal, 1. Sam. 25. that reviled David, when he should
have relieved him.

So long as Job prospered, he kept a worthy and a worshipful house, he
suffered not the stranger to lie in the streets, but opened his door to the
Trauailer that went by the way, Job. 31. 32. but now many gentlemen of the
country are content to suffer the stranger, the fatherless and the widow,
not only to lie, but even to starve and die in the streets with hunger and
cold, and never receive them to house or harbor, nor afford them any relief
or succor. But as the voice of Abels blood did cry from the earth to Genesis 4.
10.
God for vengeance against his brothers cruelty: so the voice of the poor and
their pitteous cries, shall enter into the ears of the Lord, and their guiltles
blood (which is powered forth in every place without all compassion) shall pull
down hasty and sudden vengeance from heaven upon the heads of these
unmerciful cormorants, unless while this time of mercy lasts, they show
mercy to their distressed neighbors.

Thus you have heard how Zaccheus behaved himself in entertaining of Christ:
now you shall see the behavior of the Pharisees in disdaining at Christ. When
all they saw it, they murmured, saying, that he was gnoe into lodge with a
sinful man. Before, they hated Zaccheus for his vices, because he was
covetous: now they envy him for his virtues, because he was given to
hospitality. For the wicked will always have something to find fault with in
the children of God, like the sons of Jacob, Genesis 37. that hated their
brother Joseph, because of his dreams: and like Saul that unhappy king, that
envied David for his happy victories, 1. Sam. 18. 29. Thus the wicked when
they cannot charge the godly with any grievous crime, they begin to grudge at
their well doing: and therefore not only Zaccheus is hated for receiving of
Christ, but Christ is hated also for being his guest. When they could not
accuse Christ for sin, they accuse him for companying with sinners: for they
must still be accusing some or other, for one thing or other, like their father
the devil, that both by name, Revel. 1 2. 10. and by nature, Job. 16. 7. is a
continual accuser of the brethren. It had been the duty of the Pharisees to
have received Christ, and made much of him as Zaccheus did: but they are so
far off from entertaining him themselves, that it grieueth them to see
Zaccheus give him entertainment. And surely, such is the perverse nature of the
wicked, that they will neither receive the grace of GOD when it is offered
them, nor willingly suffer any other to embrace the same: like the wicked
Jews, Acts. 13. 50. that would neither believe the doctrine which Paul
preached, nor could abide that the Gentiles should be brought to the faith of
Christ? The high priests thought themselves too high, to have poor humble
Christ amongst them: the Scribes and the Pharisees in their own conceit were
too good, too wise, and too holy to receive him into their company: and not
content to sequester and estraunge themselves from Christ, they disdayned also
that he should be conversant with Publicans and sinners, as though he were not
worthy to be conversant amongst men.

If it were the office of Christ to convert sinners, why Math. 9. 13
should the Pharisees be offended at him, if he were sometimes conversant with
sinners to work their conversion? If Christ were a Physician to cure the
sickness of the soul, Mat. 9. 13
that is, to save the people from their sins, why should the Pharisees
murmr at him for keeping of company with Zaccheus, that was sick in soul?
for as it is expedient for the Physician to visit his patients for their
better recouerye, so it was convenient Christ should visit sinners for their
speedier conversion. But as the Physician that resorteth to sick persons, is
not straight way infected: so the souls Physician that conuerseth with
sinners, is not thereby polluted. And therefore, as Christ performed his office
though the Pharisees murmured, so let the ministers of God learn by his
example, to perform their duties, though the wicked be offended. It was the
office of Christ to call sinners to repentance, yea he came to call Pharisie
sinners, as well as Publican sinners, if the Pharisees would have confessed
themselves to be sinners, as the Publicans did, but because they Luke. 18
stood so much upon their own righteousness, and despised others, therefore
Christ denounces so many woes against them, and prefers the penitent
Publican that trusted Math. 23
in the Lords mercy, before the proud Pharisie that trusted in his own
merits. Though Paul was a Pharisie, and Acts. 23. 6
the son of a Pharisie, yet he shameth not to confess himself one of the
chief sinners which Christ came to save. So if the Pharisees that murmured at
Zaccheus would have bin saved, they should have confessed themselves chief
sinners, as Paul did. They should not have accused Christ for keeping 1. Tim.
1. 15
company with sinners, but they should have accused themselves for not keeping
company with Christ. The just man (says Solomon, Prouer. 18.) is the first
accuser of himself: but the Pharisees are so far from accusing of
themselves, that they begin to accuse Zaccheus and Christ together. Thus the
Pharisees of our time, that make religion a cloak to cover their corrupt
dealing, have this property to think other men to be heinous sinners, and
themselves only to be righteous: in so much, as they will not stick to speak
like that proud people that was wont to say, Depart from me for I am holier
then thou. and like that presumptuous Pharisic. Luke 18. I thank God I am not
as others are, extortioners, usurers, adulterers, dru^kards, or such like. I
sanctify the Sabbath, which other me^ profane: I frequent sermons, which they
neglect: I reverence the name of God, which they blaspheme: I pay tith, which
others withold? and fast oftentimes, which they do seldom, or never. These
were the speeches of the Pharisees that lived in the time of Christ, whom he
Math. 15. 7 Luke. 11. 44 Luke. 11. 1 Acts 2 6 5 Math 23. 25. 27
so often calls hypocrites: and these are the speeches of the hypocrites of
our age, that seem to live after the straightest sect of our religion, Acts.
26. They wash the outside of the cup, and of the platter: that is, they
justify themselves, and seem maruailous holy in the sight of me^, which can
discern by the outward appearance only: but unto God that sees and searches
the secrets of the hearts and reins, they appear like painted tombs full of
dead men's bones, and al filthiness: that is, they have their inward parts full
of ravening, and all kind of wickedness. Wherefore, as Christ said to his
Disciples Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees, you cannot enter into the kingdom of Mat. 5. 20
heaven: so I say unto you, that except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of these pharisaicall hypocrites, ye cannot be saved. These holy
Pharisees did use to call the Publica^s, not usurers, nor extortioners, as they
themselves were: but by the general name of sinners, as though they themselves
were free from sin. Thus the papists at this day do use to call the most
sincere professors of the gospel, not Lutherans, Caluinists, Zuinglians, or
protestants, as they were wont to call them: but now they term us heretics,
a name more odious then any other, whereas in the mean season, they themselves
are of all others the greatest heretics. So the Atheists of our time, when
they cannot accuse the godly that are amongst us of usury, or briberie, or
extortion, or drunkenness, or any such notorious sin, they call them
hypocrites, which is the sum of all: when as in very truth, they themselves
do best deserve that name: but it makes no matter what they call us, neither
are we to be moved at their despiteful speeches: for as the bitter taunts of
these murmuring Pharisees could not hinder Zaccheus in his conversion, so the
slanders of these godless men must not discourage the servants of God from
their good profession. The Pharisees did Zaccheus great wrong for calling him
sinner, when he had repented of his sin: and the Atheists at this day do
greatly wrong the true professors, in calling them hypocrites, which have
truly repented of their former sins, and endeavor by all good means to lead
a godly life. Therefore as Zaccheus preferred his souls health before al their
murmuring: so it behooves us to look to our souls salvation, notwithstanding
all the reproaches and slanders that are devised against us. And as the
Pharisees might call Zaccheus sinner, but could not hinder his conversion: so
the malicious worldlings may take away our goods, our good names, yea and our
lives also, but cannot deprive us of our salvation. Wherefore as our Savior
said to his Apostles, Fear not the^ that can kill the body, and then can do
no more: so I say unto Math. 10
you. Fear not the frowns of the wicked, for they are not able to hurt your
better part: seek not to gain the favor of the world, for the whole world is
not able to save a soul, but fear to offend him that is able to destroy both
body and soul in hell, and seek to please him that is able to save them both
in heaven for ever.

Now follows another fruit of Zaccheus conversion: namely, his good
confession: for, as he believed with the heart unto righteousness, so he
confessed with the mouth Rom 10. 10.
unto salvation. When Zaccheus was mocked of the Pharisees, it seems that he
should stoop down for shame: but when he was thus reproved and reviled by
them, the Scripture says, that he stood up in sign of gladness. As the
Apostles Acts. 5
went away reioicing that they were counted worthy to suffer rebuke for the
name of Christ: so Zaccheus the Publican went forth rejoicing, that he was
reproched for the cause of Christ. Before Zaccheus was a Publican, and
therefore stood in sin very daungerously, like the house that is Luke. 6. 45.
builded upon the sand, ready to be ouerturned with every tempest: but now
Zaccheus is become a true Christian, and therefore stands in righteousness
very safely, like the house that is built upon a rock, free from any danger of
falling.

Behold Lord, the half of my goods, etc. There are two parts of this
confession. The first is his gift to the poor: the second is, the restitution
of his unjust gotten goods. Before, Zaccheus was an oppressor of the poor, now
he is a great benefactor to the poor: before he was an encrocher upon other
men's goods, now he is a distributer of his own goods: before, he was a
receiver and a taker, now he is a restorer and a giver: neither does he give
sparingly, but he gives liberally, laying up a good foundation against the
time to come Now has Zaccheus found that precious pearl, and for joy 1. Tim.
6. Math. 13.
thereof, he is content, not to sell, but to give all that he has to enjoy
the same. When the rich Ruler (in the former chapter) Luke. 18
was willed to sell all that he had, and to give it to the poor, he went away
very sorrowful, for he was very rich: but Zaccheus, perhaps as rich as he is
content of his own accord and unbidden, to bestow half his goods upon the
poor, and that with a cheerful mind. If Zaccheus had given only the third
part of his goods, no doubt but Christ would have accepted it, for he accepts
the widows farthing, because it was given with a willing mind: but if he had
given all his Luke. 21.
goods to feed the poor, as the Pharisees gave their alms to be seen of
men, yea, or his body to be burned, as some Romans 1. Cor. 13
have done to get renown, it should have been to no purpose, because it was
done to a wrong end. Now, as Zaccheus was rich in the goods of this life, so
was he rich in faith also; neither was it an idle or dead faith that Zaccheus
had, but it was a fruitful and a lively faith, a faith that works and Gal.
5. 6
labors by love, such as is required at the hands of Christians. Saint
James says, Show me thy faith by thy works: and here Zaccheus does show his
faith by his works. Before, he was exercised in ungodly works, which are the
fruits of infidelity: but now he is exercised in the works of mercy, which are
the fruits of a lively faith. Zaccheus is very liberal in relieuing the poor,
but he is liberal of that which is his own: so there are many now a days that
are very liberal, but it is of that which is none of theirs; for as Nahab and
Abihu offered strange fire unto the Lord, so these men offer strange goods
Leuit. 10
unto the Lord. There are some amongst us, that think to make amends for
their unjust dealing, by giving part of that to some good uses, which they have
gotten by bad means; if they have gotten a pound by usury and oppression, they
are content perhaps to give a penny to relieve the poor. But, as it was not
lawful for the Israelites to bring the price or the hire of a harlot into the
house of the Lord: so it is not lawful for us Deuteronomy. 23
to apply the gain of our ill gotten goods to the service of God. The half of
my goods I give, etc.


Zaccheus says not, I have given, as an vpbraider of God: or, I will give, as a
delayer, that means to give away his goods after his death, when he can keep
them no longer: but he says, I give, to signify that his will is his deed,
and that he means not to take any days of payment for the matter. For as
before he ran apace to see Christ, and came down hastily to entertain Christ
in his own person: so does he here give quickly to relieve Christ in his needy
members. This is Zaccheus last will and testament, that he makes before his
death, and sees the same proved and performed before his eyes. If therefore we
desire to do any good to any of our poor bre thren, let us learn of Zaccheus
to do it quickly, while we are alive, for time will prevent us, and death will
prevent us. I know there would be many that would be willing to give some part
of their goods to the poor before their death, as Zaccheus did: but that they
know not what need themselves may have there of before they die, and therefore
for the most part they will hardly forsake or leave their goods, till their
goods forsake and leave them. But herein they show themselves to doubt of Gods
providence, and as it were to distrust of his payment, who has promised to
repay whatsoever is given unto the poor, as it were lent unto himself, and yt
not secretly, though they did their alms never so secretly: but the Lord will
reward the^ openly, as our Savior speaks. Ma. 6. the wise preacher, Eccl. 11.
wills us to cast our bread Pro. 19. 17
upon the waters, that is, to be liberal to the poor, whose watery eyes bewray
their great necessity: or, as (others expound it) to hazard and adventure some
of our goods upon our nee die brethren, as Merchantes do adventure their goods
upon the seas: for although they may seem to be in great peril and danger of
perishing in the waters, yet commonly it falls out, that by ye blessing of
God they return with greater profit. So albeit the relief that is bestowed
upon our distressed neighbors may seem to be lost, yet as the wise man says,
after a time we shall find it again: and as the precious oil descended from
Aarons beard to the skirts of his clothing, so Psalm. 133
certainly the oil of mercy and charity which we power into the wounds of
our distressed brethren, shall descend Luke. 10 1. King. 17.
into our own souls, and as the widows oil was increased in the cruse,
because she relieved the Lords Prophet, so shall this precious oil bestowed
upon the poor, be returned upon our heads in great measure. Thus is Zaccheus
liberal, as you see: for he gives away half his goods, but he gives it not
to the rich, that might give to him again, but he gives it to the poor that
cannot require quite him: to teach us upon whom we should bestow our alms. As
God that is rich in mercy, gives all things unto us that cannot requite him:
so the rich men of this world (if they have any spark of mercy in them)
should give unto the poor that cannot requite them. But amongst us in every
place almost, it is far otherwise: for if any thing be to be given, not they
that are poorest and stand in greatest need, but they that can make best
friends are best preferred. Thus Dives is still enriched, and Lazarus is still
rejected. If we send to a great man, we Luke. 16.
send an ox for a present: but if we send to a poor man, Matthew. 12.
we send a crust for an alms. Therefore, as Christ said to the Jews, that the
Ninevites should rise in judgment against them, because they repented at Jonas
preaching: so it may be said unto us, that Zaccheus shall rise in judgment
against us and condemn us; for he showed great mercy upon the poor, but we
are void of al compassion.

Thus you have heard the first part of Zaccheus confession, wherein you see
his liberality to the poor. Now you shall hear the second part of his
confession, wherein he promises restitution of his unjust gotten goods.
Before, Zaccheus gave to the poor the half of that which was his own: now he
restores that which is none of his, to the right owners. And because he had
detained their goods so long, to their great loss and hinderance, therefore he
does not only restore the principal, which he had taken from them, but he
allows them their costs and da^mages they had sustained. As Ioram King of
Israel caused to be restored to the 2. King. ^
Shunamite her house and land, and all the fruits and profits of the same,
which were wrongfully kept from her seven years together: so Zaccheus the
customer restores to those that he had oppressed, their goods which he had
gotten from them by fradulent dealing, with all the fruits and profits that
might come thereof during the time of his unjust profession. So liberal was
Zaccheus to the poor, that he gave them half his goods: and so little got
Zaccheus by his usury and oppression, that for every penie he restored four.
If the Usurers and extortioners of our time would restore foure-folde for that
they have wrongfully gotten, I fear me they would have but a small half to
give to the poor, and but a little left to help themselves. There was no law
to compel Zacheus to make such restitution, except he will confess himself to
be a thief, because he was an Usurer, and then the law of God requires such
restitution. And surely Zaccheus seems after a sort to confess his theft,
because he promises fourfold restitutio^. If a man had stolen Exodus 22. 1 2.
Sam. 12.
a sheep, the law of God requires that he should restore four sheep for
one: and the ancient Romans had this law, that Usurers should forfeit four
times so much as they took for usury. If the same law were now to use
against our theeuish Usurers, as it was sometime among them, we should not
have such complaining of the poor both in prisons and streets. But if these
great thieves (I mean our biting Usurers) that rob and spoil without ceasing
when they have no need, might find no more favor, than those petty thieves
which rob and steal sometime, when they are driven thereto by extreme
necessity, then surely the Commonwealth would soon be disburdened of that
pestilent brood of Caterpillars wherewith it is pestered. I wish them betimes
to look to their own estate, and with Zaccheus to forsake their damnable
trade. If they have lived hitherto by the gain of usury, let them now lament
their sin, and call to God for mercy and forgiveness, let them make restitution
of that they have wrongfully taken, and grieve that they have so long detained
yt which is none of theirs. For as no sin is pardoned without repentance to
God, so usury is not pardoned without repentance to God: and as the sin of
theft is not removed, before restittution be made to men (if the party be
able,) so the sin of usury (which is a secret theft) is not remitted, before
restitution be made to those that are oppressed and spoiled by this secret
theft. Thus you have seen how Zaccheus that was once a hoorder of his goods,
as our rich men are, is now a liberal disposer of his goods, as I wish they
were. He that lately was a Camel laden with riches, and therefore unapt to go
through a needles eye, has now like the Camel cast off his rich lading, Matthew.
19.
and therefore may enter in at the narrow gate. Some rich men would rather have
lost their lives, than forgone Mat. 7
their goods, and for half that loss would have proved very pensive: but
this was the ioyfullest news that ever came to Zaccheus house, sweeter to him
than all his gold and silver: that where as before, he was in the state of
damnation, now salvation is promised to him and his house: and whereas before,
he was the servant of Satan, now he is become the child of Abraham: Now
Zaccheus house is become Gods house, and Zaccheus himself is the son of
Abraham, and therefore no cause why Christ should not refort to Zaccheus house.
As Christ said to the penitent thief, This day shall thou be with me in
paradise: so he says here Luke. 13
to the penitent Publican, This day salvation is come unto thy house, and this
day thou art become the child of Abraham. Christ loves not to be long in any
man's debt: for as he says to Zaccheus, To day I must abide at thy house: so
he says to the same Zaccheus. To day, and henceforth for ever, thou and thy
house must abide with me in heaven. Here is a happy change: in stead of a
little worldly treasure, sub-iect to loss by the eues, and to spoil by rust
and moths, to have all store of heavenly treasure, which neither thieves can
steal, nor cancker can corrupt: instead of an earthly house, subject to fire
and falling, to have a house given of Math. ^
God, not made with hands, but eternal in heaven, 2. Cor. 5. verse. 1. Who
would not rather choose with Zaccheus to give half his goods to the poor, that
he may be an heir of salvation, and the son of Abraham to rest in his
fathers bosom, than with Dives to keep all from the poor, and to be
tormented in those eternal flames? That rich glutton that denied the crummes
from his table, challenged Abraham for his father, but he was refused, because
he had not the Luke. 16
faith nor works of Abraham: but Zaccheus, though by nature John. 8. 39
he were not the child of Abraham, yet by grace he is become the child of
Abraham, because he walked in the steps of that faithful Father. Abraham
believed before he Romans 4. 12
was circumcised, so Zaccheus believed before he was circumcised. As Abraham
left his country and all that he had Genesis 32. 1 Acts. 7. 3
when God called him, so Zaccheus left his office and the most part of his
riches, when he was called by the son of God: and as Abraham desired to see
the day of Christ, and John. 8 56
saw it and rejoiced; so Zaccheus desired to see Christ, and he saw him and
rejoiced. Now is Zaccheus a Gentile become the child of Abraham, and not only
he, but his whole house also is become the house of Abraham; for when Zaccheus
is converted, his whole house is converted. As the master is, such are the
servants, if he be godly and religious, they prove godly and religious, if
he be an Atheist, they prove Atheists likewise. Therefore keep no company
Psalm. 18
with the wicked, for it is most pernicious: but associate thy self with those
that fear the Lord, that thou also may learn to fear the Lord: who for
his mercy grant that we may with Zaccheus be desirous to see Christ, joyful
to receive Christ, liberal to relieve the members of Christ, and ready to
make a mends when we have wronged any of our brethren, that so with Zaccheus
we may be heites of salvation, and the true sons of Abraham, to reign with
Christ in heaven for ever, by the means and merits of him, that dyed and rose
again for us. To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be all glory.

Amen.
FINIS.
A prayer for the Morning.
O Lord prepare our hearts to pray.
O Lord GOD our heavenly Father, we thy poor and wretched creatures, give
thee most humble and hearty thanks for our quiet and safe sleep, and for
raising us up from the same. We beseech thee for Jesus Christ's sake, to
prosper us this day in our labor and travel, that it may be to the
discharging of our duty in our vocations, principally to thy glory, next to
the profit of this Church and commonweal, and last of all to the benefit and
content of our masters, Grant dear father, that we may cheerfully and
conscionably do our business and labors, not as menpleasers, but as serving
thee our God, knowing thee to be the chief master of us, and that thou see
and beholdest us with thy fatherly eyes, who have promised reward to them that
faithfully and truly walk in their vocation, and threatened everlasting death
and damnation to them that deceitfully and wickedly do their works and labors.
We beseech thee O heavenly father, to give us the strength of thy spirit, that
godly and gladly we may overcome our labors, and that the tediousness of
their irksome labor which thou for our sins have powered upon all mankind,
may seem to us more delectable and sweet. Fulfill now O Lord these our
requests, for thy son our Saviors sake, in whose name we pray as he
himself has taught us. Our father, etc.

A godly prayer to be said at all times.
BEcause I have sinned, O Lord, and done wickedly in thy sight, and provoked
thee to anger by my abominable wickedness, making my body which thou have
ordained as a vessel for thine honor, an instrument to most detestable
filthiness, O Lord be merciful unto me, and pardon me this great wickedness:
look not upon me, good Father, with the eyes of justice, neither do thou
draw against me the sword of judgment, for then how shall I that am but
dust, stand in thy presence, when thy wrathful indignation comes forth as a
whirle wind, and thy heavy displeasure as a mighty tempest: seeing the earth
trembles, the depths are discovered, and the very heavens are shaken when thou
art angry? Exercise not therefore thy fury against me, that am but chafe
before the wind, and as stubble against a flaming fire: though I have sinned
grievously in thy sight, preferring my wicked desire, before thy holy
commandment: esteeming the pleasure of a moment, before eternal and
everlasting joys: nay, which is worse, making more account of vileness and
vanity, and extreme folly and madness, then of the glory and majesty of the
most excellent, wonderful, and blessed God, nothing dreading his displeasure,
whose wrath makes the devils to quake, and burns unquenchable unto the
bottomless pit of hell; whose might is so great, that by the breath of his
nosthrils he can in the twinkling of an eye destroy a thousand worlds: yet am I
bold, prostrating my self before the throne of thy majesty, heartily to
beseech, and humbly to entreat thee, that thou will not deal with me
according to my merits, for I have deserved yt thoushouldest rain down fire
and brimstone from out of heaven upon me to devour me, or to open the earth
under me, to swallow me up quick unto hell: but thou art gracious and full of
compassion, and rich in mercies, therefore do men put their trust under the
shadow of thy wings. I have none in heaven to fly unto but thee, nor in earth
of whom I may receive any comfort, but at thy favorable hands, which are
stretched out day and night, to receive all that by earnest repentance turn to
thee, being ready to ease all those that are lade^ with the burden of their
sin, and to refresh their distressed consciences. In the multitude of thy
mercies I approach unto thee O Lord, desiring thee to look down from the
height of thy sanctuary, upon me poor and wretched sinner, and to wipe away
mine offenses, and to blot out my misdeeds, especially, this my ungracious,
unclean, and ungodly act, that it may not come up in remembrance with thee,
nor be imputed to me for ever, for thy sons sake, O Lord, in whom thou art
well pleased, in whom thou wast fully satisfied upon the cross for my
sins: grant me free pardon and remission of that I have so foolishly by my
exceeding frailetie, committed against thee in this shameful deed. But O thou
my unclean and unthankful soul! my ungodly and rebellious heart! what did I
sinful wretch and execrable caitife, so blindly and desperately attempt? How
art thou become quite senseless, that thou wast so ready to anger thy most
loving God, and to provoke thy most mighty Judge, that thou might satisfy
thy filthy flesh, suborned both by thine and Gods most malicious adversary,
to grieve and vex the spirit of the Lord, and to damn thy self for ever?
Has not God of his singular favor, made the heavens of old, and placed the
Sun and Moon in the^, two glorious lights, with innumerable stars, a
wonderful workmanship, for thy use and benefit? Has he not lifted up the
clouds by his strong arm, and heaped treasures of rain, hail, and snow, to
do thee service? Has he not in the midst of the world, laid the foundations
of the earth, that thou might have a stable habitation, and might from
thence behold every way thou look, the walls of his beautiful place?
Has he not gathered the waters into one place, and made the dry land
appear, and drawn forth by his power a pure substance of air between heaven
and earth, that fishes might multiply in the seas, fowls in great abundance
fly in the open face of the firmament, tender plants, herbs, flowers, and
trees in all variety, grow and fructify upon the ground? yea creeping things,
cattle and beasts increase in infinite number, in pastures, fields, gardens,
orchards and groves; and all these to do thee pleasure? Has he not further
given thee springs and rivers gold and silver, pearls and jewels; even plenty
of streams, stones, and metal, to furnish thee with whatsoever for profit
thou need, or for pleasure desire? Has he not made thee Lord and ruler
over al his creatures, even over the huge Elephants, the Whale, the strong
Lion, and Unicorn, and horse of war? over the savage Tigers, Bears and
Wolves? over the mighty Eagle, Griffin, Vultur, Ostrich, and Hawke? Art thou
not clad and defended, fed and enriched, cheared and renowned by these his
creatures, and that all the parts of thy body, and senses of thy mind, might
be partakers of his goodness, and with his sweetness refreshed, comforted and
delighted in great measure? yea, above all this, has he not breathed into thy
body an immortal soul, that thou might remain with him in glory for
ever? Did he not at the first frame thee like unto himself, that he might
therefore love thee as his son? Did he not cast into thy spirit the beams of
his wisdom, that thou through thy understanding might behold him and his
glory, and stirred up sparks of goodness in thy heart, that thou might by
thy affection embrace him and his bounty, and be made perfectly blessed by
his infinite happiness, who when Adam thy ungrateful father, by distrusting
him that had faithfully promised, was thoroughly able to fulfill his will, and
resolutely determined, exceedingly to advance him, having given him this whole
world in testimony thereof, by discontenting his mind with the excellent
estate he was placed in of unspeakable love, unless he might be as good as
God himself, proudly desiring to make dust the fellow of him who was from
everlasting, infinitely full of wisdom, power, grace and majesty, and had
done all this at the persuasion of the most traitorous rebel of his right
gracious king, and spiteful enemy of his most bountiful master, even then
when this most villainous conspiring with Gods notorious adversary, had
deserved immortal hatred against him, and all that pertained unto him: yea
thee as yet unborn, but contained in him, whose whole mass by his impious
disobedience, became by just judgment a temple of cursed estate for ever, and
for ever: thou also thy self bringing forth fruit of contempt of his law,
who is most holy, merciful and mighty: yet even then I say, of unspeakable
pity and compassion intended, nay promised, nay labored to deliver him and
thee from that dreadful vengeance which ye had purchased by your own wicked
and ungracious demerits, and to reconcile you base abiects and vile castawaies,
and yet stubborn and spiteful haters of the great God Iehoua, who when there
was no means to be found in heaven, nor seas, nor in the earth, nor under the
earth, but that he should damn his only begotten Son, the very brightness
of his glory, who never offended him, but was an eternal delight unto his
soul, and rejoicing unto his spirit, that thou might be saved, a gross
lump of slime and clay, still vexing him by thy wickedness; yet delivered his
son into the full power of Satan, to put him to a most shameful death, by
the hands of most detestable persons, and did cast him far away out of his
favor, and threw him down into the bottomless pit of his unsupportable wrath
and indignation, that thou might be placed between his own arms in the
kingdom of heaven, in all royalty and glory, as his dear and entirely beloved
son. Why therefore wast thou O my unholy and unthankful nature, so ready and
prone, so violent and headlong, to commit things lightly displeasant in his
sight, who in a manner, and as far as it was possible, slew himself for thy
safety, when he had no creature so disobedient unto him as thee? O thou my
inward soul, and spirit of my mind awake, and stand up to defend thy self,
for thou art besieged with mighty enemies, the prince of darkness, the rulers
of the air, the spiritual craftines and policies of hell! why arisest thou
not thou sluggard? thy foes in great number are prepared with many ambushments,
having a huge army all maliciously bent, with venomous darts to pearce through
thy heart: they are entered thy hold at all five gates of thy outward senses:
yea, they have broken down thy inward doors, and have left thee but one
window toward heaven to escape by, even thy prayers, whereto the spirit of
God waits thy speedy coming: make have O thou heavy with sleep, or thou
art taken by thy cruel enemies, whose hands are of iron, and their teeth of
steel, to grind thy very bones to powder: hearken no longer to that stinking
harlot, thy wicked appetite, which lying in thy bosom, desires nothing but
thy utter destruction: she persuades thee that thou art in no present danger,
that she may rejoice at thy miserable end. It may be thou art fed to the
slaughter, that though thou go on a little way in thy pleasant path, thou
may return back when thou will, and thy little wandering will not greatly
be regarded. O thou unwise and sottish of heart! when will thou understand?
Has the son of God endured such pain for the smallest of thy sins, and
make thou so light account of so grievous crimes? Does the law thunder
curses, and plagues, and everlasting torments against thy least inordinate
motions, and did thou not dread to perform so shameless a practice?
Know thou not that the eyes of God, and his Angels behold thee doing that
thou would be ashamed to do in the presence of ungodly men, or unclean
beasts? or do thou not consider how thou did grieve the spirit of God,
who has vouchsafed of his infinite mercy to dwell in thy body to this end,
chiefelie that he might mortify thy carnal lusts? Why did thou then defile
his temple, which he has sanctified to be an house for himself to dwell in?
take heed thou drive not out so worthy and noble a ghest, by such swinish and
fleshly behavior, who if he once depart, then shall thou be an hold for
devils, and legions of damned spirits, that they may stuff thee full of all
manner of iniquity, and then at length become pitch and brimstone to maintain
the fire of Gods scorching wrath in thy sinews, spirits and inward bowels,
drinking out in full measure the dregs of the wine of his rage and fury: and
can thou be so blind and rechlesse, that for the vain pleasure of sin for
a little while, thou will constrayne God to torment thee everlastingly, who it
may be even at this instant, if thou will still try his patience and long
sufferance, will suddenly take thy spirit from thee, or come in judgment to
recompense all sinners by his final sentence in the burning of the whole
world, the stipend of horror, shame, confusion, and utter reprobation? and
weigh with thy self, that to approach to God, is the chiefestioy of his
chosen, to behold his glorious countenance in the face of his son, whereas thy
sins do separate thee from him, and make thee afraid to speak to him by
prayers, which is thy chiefest and greatest solace in this mortal life: how
much more will thy ungodliness make thee wish delay of the last judgment, the
speedy and present coming whereof is a chief prop of our fight, in the
midst of so many troubles and temptations: and withal, remember how the
devil that roaring Lion labors by this impure act, to make thee most
filthy and loathsome in the sight of God, and rejoices to see thy gracious
Father, merciful Savior, and comfortable sanctifier, so abused and
withstoode, and angered by thee whom he has wonderful made, carefully
preserved and dearly redeemed, and tenderly loved, that if it may be thou
should by utter Apostasy, dishonor him in the face of the world, who has
advanced thee in the presence of all his Angels: and though thou be so sure in
faith, that thou can not utterly fall (the consideration whereof should make
thee more dutiful, and not encourage thee in a sinful course) yet may thou
by little and little, and by often falling, bring thy self into a better
liking, both of the wicked and of wickedness it self) whom thou ought to
hate with a perfect hatred, and then God by just judgment cast thee into a
sure sleep, that thy filthiness may be seen of men, and thou condemned to the
grief of the righteous, and scorned to the shame of the ungodly, and in the
mean season, by provoking Gods judgment: be spoiled of thy goodly ornaments,
of thy godly desires, of religious thoughts, of zealous affections, of
Christian communication, of holy endeavors, of assured persuasions of faith, of
steadfast waitings through hope, of constant suffering by patience, and hearty
reioycings from love. In the perfect consummation of which things, because all
happiness consists, beware thou careless wretch, least suddenly by thy
abominable filthynes, thou either for a time wholly deptyue thy self of
comfortable feeling of these things, or much diminish thy present graces and
blessings received of the holy spirit, to the glory of God the Father. But
why do I utter my voice, or strive to make a dead carcass move? O quicken thou
me that art the fountain of life, and call thou out of heaven thy dwelling
place, that my wa^dring soul may hear the voice of her shepherd, and follow
thee whither soever thou leadest: nay of thy tender compassion take me up upon
thy shoulders, and carry me gently into thy fold again: for thieves have
stolen me away, and have bound my feet so that I cannot go, and they watch for
me until thou art gone, that they may carry me away quick from thy
pastures: O do thou therefore presently deliver me, and give me thy helping
hand: O cast thou down by thy spirit my raging lust, and by thy grace subdue
mine untamed affection. I am weak O Lord, and unable to resist the force of
my mighty adversary: send thy help from above, and save me out of the jaws
of the cruel lion: thou have delivered me out of the mouth of hell; O let not
the gates thereof any more prevail against me: let me not any longer be
occupied in ungodliness, lest mine enemy triumph over me, saying in his
malicious heart, There, there, so would I have it Let this sin be far from
me O Lord, least I should defile my self any more with this notorious
wickedness: work therefore in mine heart an utter detestation of it, that I
may ever hereafter keep my self pure and unspotted for thy kingdom. Thou
that art able to make of stones children to Abraham, mollify I pray thee my
stony heart, that all manner of son like affections may be imprinted therein:
pluck up O good father these roots of bitterness, that no unsavory fruit may
come of the tree, which thou by thine own hand have planted I desire, I look,
I call, I cry, for thy assistance, that I may conquer this unruly motion. O
blessed Savior that have granted so many petitions upon earth, to them that
were careful for the body, fulfill I pray thee, this my desire; not for
health; nor strength, nor riches, nor honor, nor for food, nor apparel, but
for thy heavenly grace and inspiration: yea let me lose all those, rather than
to be left to my sinful flesh, that I should be ruled any longer thereby.
Mortify good father in me the old body of sin, and give unto me a new body,
purged from these dead works to serve the living God: renew my spirit daily,
that I may cast away these works of darkness: let it be enough O merciful
father, that my weakness in failing heretofore, has been made known unto me,
least I should be too proud. Now let thy strength appear in putting this
mine enemy under my feet, that thereby I may be bold to put my confidence in
thee. Why should my body made by thine hand, and my soul framed according to
thy image, be given over as a pray into the hands of Satan? Deliver me O Lord
from the snare of the hunter, and preserve me from the hand of mine enemy,
who lies in wait for my spiritual lif^, and labors my everlasting
destruction: so shall I praise thee for thy great goodness, and magnify thy
name for giving me conquest over my adversary that is too strong for me. To
thee I fly for succor till the tempest be ouerpast, hide me I pray thee
under thy shield and buckler, that none of the fiery darts of Satan take hold
on me. Good Lord, for the love thou bear unto mankind, for thy sons sake,
who has taken our nature upon him, grant that I may not be tempted above my
strength, and that in all temptation I may fly unto thee, as a horn of my
salvation, yielding thee most humble and hearty thanks for that thou have
given me a desire to withstand my sinful flesh; which thy work I beseech thee
for thy name sake, to perfect and fully accomplish.

Matthew. 26. 41. Watch and pray, least ye enter into temptation: the spirit is
willing, but the flesh is weak.
Another zealous Prayer.
Eternal God, almighty, and all merciful: we thy unworthy servants,
prostrate before thy throne of grace, do yield our selves body and soul
unto thee for all thy benefits, which thou from our birth have heaped upon us,
as though we had always done thy will although we be occupied about vain
things, never marked, never loved, never served, never thanked thee so heartily
for them, as we esteem a mortal friend for the least courtesy. Therefore we
come with shame and sorrow to confess our sins, not small, but grievous; not
a few, but infinite; not past, but present; not secret, but presumptuous;
against thy express word and will: against our own conscience, knowledge and
liking, if any had done them but our selves. O Lord, if thou should require
but the least of them at our hands, Satan would challenge us for his, and we
should never see thy face again, nor the Heavens, nor the earth, nor all the
goodness which thou have prepared for man. What shall we do then, but appeal
unto thy mercy, and humbly desire thy fatherly goodness, to extend that
compassion toward us, which thy beloved son our loving Savior has
purchased, so mightily, so graciously, and so dearly for us; we believe and
know, that one drop of his blood is sufficient to heal our infirmities,
pardon our iniquities, and supply our necessities, but without thy grace, our
light, our strength, our guide, we are able to do nothing but sin, as woeful
experience has taught us too long, and the example of them that are void
thereof, whose life is nothing else but the service of the world, the flesh and
the Devil. Therefore good father, as rhou in special favor have appointed us
to serve thee, like as thou have ordained all other creatures to serve us; so
may it please thee to send down thy heavenly spirit into this earthly
mansion, to illuminate our minds, mollify our hearts, change our affections,
subdue our reason, regenerate our wills, and purify our nature to this
duty; so shall not thy benefits, nor thy chastisementes, nor thy word
return void, but accomplish that for which they were sent, until we be
renewed to the image of thy son. Good Lord we beseech thee, look down in
the multitude of thy compassions upon thy militant Church, this sinful realm,
thy gracious handmaide our dread Sovereign, her Honorable Counsel, the
civil Magistrates, the painful Ministers, the two Universities, the people
that sit in darkness, and all that bear thy Cross. Gather us into one
communion of thy truth, and give unto every man, a spirit to his calling, that
we being mindful of the account, and that we are called Christians, may
firmly resolve, speedily begin, and continually persevere in doing and
suffering thy holy will. Good Lord bless and sanctify our meeting, that no
temptation hinder me in speaking, nor them in hearing, but that thy word may be
heard and spoken as the word of God, which is able to save our souls in that
day, howsoever it pleases thee by weak and foolish things to magnify thy
self. There is no cause, O God most just, why thou should hear sinners,
which art displeased with sin, but for his sake which suffered for sin, and
sinned not: in whose name we are bold to lift up our hearts, hands, and voices
unto thee, praying as he has taught us. Our father which art in heaven, etc.

FINIS.

