NEW ENGLANDS TRIALS.

Declaring the success of 26. Ships employed thither within these six years:
with the benefit of that Country by sea and land: and how to build threescore
sail of good Ships, to make a little Navy Royal.

Written by Captain John Smith.

LONDON, Printed by William Jones. 1620.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL THE Master, the Wardens, and the Company of the
Fish-mongers.
TO the consideration of your favorable constructions I present these six
years continued trials from New England: if you please to peruse them, and
make use of them, I am richly rewarded. The subject deserves a far better
habit, but it is as good as the father can give it. Let not therefore a
soldiers plainness cause you refuse to accept it, how ever you please to
dispose of him, that humbly sacreth himself and best abilities to his
Countries good, and the exquisite judgment of your renowned perfections.

Yours to command, John Smith.

NEW ENGLANDS Trials.
NEw England is a part of America betwixt the degrees of 41. and 45. the very
mean betwixt the North Pole and the Line: From 43. to 45. the coast is
mountainous, rockie, barren and broken Isles that make many good harbors. The
water is deep close to the shore; there are many rivers and fresh springs:
few Saluages, but an incredible aboundan^e of fish, foul, wild fruits, and
good timber. From 43. to 41. and half, an excellent mixed coast of stone,
sand, and clay: much corn, many people, some Isles, many good harbors, a
temperate air, and therein all things necessary; for the building ships of
any proportion, and good merchandise for their fraughts; within a square of
twelve leagues 25. harbors I sounded, thirty several Lordships I saw, and
so near as I could imagine, three thousand men. I was up one river forty
miles, crossed the mouths of many, whose heads are reported to be great Lakes;
where they kill their Beuers; inhabited with many people, who trade with those
of New England, and them of Cannada.

The benefit of Fishing, as that famous Philosopher Master Dee reports in
his British Monarchy.
He says, that more then forty four years ago, the Herring Busses out of
the Low Countries, under the King of Spain, were five hundred, besides one
hundred Frenchmen, and three or four hundred sail of Flemings.

The coasts of Wales and Lankashire was used by three hundred sail of
strangers.

Ireland at Baltemore fraughted yearly three hundred sail of Spaniards, where
King Edward the sixth intended to have made a strong Castle, because of the
strait, to have tribute for fishing.

Black Rock was yearly fished by three or four hundred sail of Spaniards,
Portugalls, and Biskiners.

Mr. Gentleman and many Fishermen and Fishmongers, with whom I have conferred,
report:
The Hollanders raise yearly by Herrings, Cod, and Ling, 3000000. pounds.

English, and French by Salt-fish, poor John, Salmons, and Pilchards, 300000.
pounds.

Hambrough and the Sound, for Sturgion, Lobsters, and Eeles, 100000. pounds.

Cape Blanke, Tunny and Mullit, by the Biskinners and Spaniards. 30000. pounds.

But diverse other learned experienced Obseruers say, though it may seem
incredible:
That the Duke of Medina receives yearly tribute, S.
of the Fishers of Tunny, Mullit, and Purgos, more then 10000. pounds.

Lubeck has seven hundred ships: Hambrough six hundred: Embden lately a
fisher town, 1400, whose customs by the profit of fishing has made them so
powerful as they be.

Holland and Zeland, not much greater then Yorkshire, has thirty walled
towns, 400. villages, and 20000. sail of ships and hoyes; 3600. are
fishermen, whereof 100. are Dogers, 700. Pinckes and Welbotes, 700. frand
botes, 400. Enaces, 400. galbotes, Britters and Todebotes, with 1300. Busses;
besides three hundred that yearly fish about Yarmouth, where they sell their
fish for gold; and 15. years ago they had more then 116000. Seafaring men.

These fishing ships do take yearly 200000. Last of fish, 12. barrells to a
Last; which amounts to 3000000. pounds by the Fishermens price that 14. years
ago did pay for their tenths 300000. pound; which venting in Pomerland,
Sprusland, Denmark, Lesland, Russia, Suethland, Germany, Netherlands, England,
or e^sewhere, etc. make their returns in a year about 7000000. pounds; and
yet in Holland they have neither matter to build ships, nor merchandise to
set them forth, yet they as much increase as other Nations decay. But leaving
th^se uncertainties as they are, of this I am certain:

That the coast of England, Scotland, and Ireland, the north Sea, with Island,
and the Sound, New-foundland, and Cape Blancke, do serve all Europe, as well
the land Towns as Ports, and all the Christian shipping, with these sorts of
Staple fish which is transported; from whence it is taken, many a thousand
mile, viz. Herring: Salt-fish. poor John. Sturgion. Mullit. Tunny. Porgos.
Caviare. Buttargo.


Now seeing all these sorts of fish, or the most part of them, may be had in a
land more fertile, temperate, and plentiful of all necessaries for the
building of ships, boats and houses; and the nourishment of man: the seasons
are so proper, and the fishings so near the habitations we may there make,
that New England has much advantage of the most of those parts, to serve all
Europe far cheaper then they can, who at home have neither wood, salt, nor
food, but at great rates; at Sea, nothing but what they carry in their ships,
an hundred or two hundred leagues from their habitation.

But New Englands fishings near land, where is help of wood, water, fruits,
fowls, corn, or other refreshings needful; and the Terceras, Mederas,
Canaries, Spain, Portugal, Prouance, Sauoy, Sicilia, and ali Italy, as
conuensent markets for our dry Fish, green Fish, Sturgion, Mullit, Caviare,
and Buttargo, as Norway, Swethland, Littuania, or Germany, for their Herring,
(which is here also in abundance, for taking;) They returning but wood, pitch,
tar, soape-ashes, cordage, flax, wax and such like commodities: We, wines,
oils, sugars, silks, and such merchandises as the Straites afford, whereby
our profits may equalize theirs; besides the increase of Shipping and
Mariners. And for proof hereof:

With two ships I went from the Downs, Proof 1. 1614.
the third of March, and arrived in New England, the last of April. I had but
forty five men and boys, we built seven boats, 37. did fish; my self with
eight Bthers ranging the coast, I took a plot of what I could see, got
acquaintance of the inhabitants, eleven hundred beuer skins, one hundred
Martins, and as many Otters: forty thousand of dry fish we sent for Spain,
with the salt-fish, treine oil and furs, I returned for England the 18. of
July, and arrived safe with my company the latter end of August. Thus in six
months I made my voyage, out and home, and by the labor of 45. got near the
value of fifteen hundred pounds in those gross commodities. This year also
one went from Plimmouth, spent his victual, and returned with nothing.

The Londoners, Proof 2. 1615.
upon this, sent four good ships, and because I would not undertake it for
them, having engaged my self to them of the West, the L^ndoners entertained
the men that came home with me; They set sail in January, and arrived there in
March: they found fish enough until half June, fraughted a ship of three
hundred Tons; went for Spain with dry fish, which was taken by the Turks;
one went to Virginia, to relieve that Collony; and two came for Eng^and, with
the green fish, treine oil, and f^rres, within six months.

With a labyrinth of trouble I went from Plimmouth with a ship of two hundred
Tons, Proof 3. 1615.
and one of fifty; but ill weather breaking all my mastes, I was forced to
return to Plimmouth, where re-imbarking my self in a ship of three score
tons, how I escaped the English (...), and the French, and was betrayed by
four Frenchmen of war, I refer you to the Description of New England; but
my Vice Admiral, notwithstanding the latenesse of the year, setting forth
with me in March, the Londoners in January, she arrived in May, they in March,
yet came home well fraught in August, and all her men well, within five months
odd days.

The Londoners, Proof. 4. 1616.
ere I returned from France, for all their loss by the Turks, which was
valewed about four thousand pounds, sent two more in July: but such courses
they took by the Canaries to the west Indies; it was ten months ere they
arrived in New England: wasting in that time, their seasons, victual, and
healths; yet there they found means to refresh themselves, and the one
returned, near fraught with fish and train, within two months after.

From Plimmouth went four ships, Proof 5. 1616.
only to fish and trade, some in February, some in March; one of two hundred
tons, got thith^r in a month, and went full fraught for Spain, the rest
returned to Plymouth well fraught, and their men well, within 5 months odd
days.

From London went two more, Proof 6. 1616.
one of 220. tons, got thither in six weeks; and within six weeks after,
with forty four men and boys, was full fraught, and returned again into
England within five months and a few days; the other went to the Canaries with
dry fish, which they sold at a great rate, for royalls of eight, and (as I
heard) turned Pirates.

I being at Plymouth, Proof 7. 1617
provided with three good ships, was wind-bound three months, as was many a
hundred sail more; so that the season being past, the ships went for
New Foundland, whereby my desseigne was frustrate, which was to me and my
friends, no small loss.

There was four good ships prepared at Plymouth; Proof 8. 1618.
but by reason of their disagreement, the season so wasted, as only two went
forward, the one being of two hundred tons, returned well fraught to
Plymouth, and her men in health, within five months; the other of four score,
went for Bilbow with dry fish, and made a good return.

This year again, Proof 9. 1619.
diverse ships intending to go from Plimmouth, so disagreed, as there went but
one of 200. tuns, who stayed in the Country about six weeks, with thirty
eight men and boys, had her fraght, which she sold at the first penny for
2100. pounds, besides the furs; so that every poor Sayler, that had but a
single share, had his charges and sixteen pound ten shiltings for his seven
months work: but some of the company say, for six months in the Hercules,
they receeued seventeen pound two shillings a share.

For to make trial this year there is gone six or seven sail from the west
Country, Proof 10. 1620.
only to fish, three of which are returned; and (as I am certainly informed)
have made so good a voyage, that every Sayler for a single share had twenty
pounds for his seven months work, which is more then in twenty months he
should have gotten, had he gone for wages any where. Now though all the former
ships have not made such good vyages as they expected, by sending opinionated
unskillful men, that had not experienced diligence, to save that they took;
nor take that there was; which now patience and pract^se has brought to a
reasonable kind of perfection in d^sp^te of all D^tractors, For this next
year 1621. it is reported 12. or 20. sail is a preparing.
and Calumniations, the Country yet has satisfied all, the defect has been
in their vs^ng or abusing it, not in it self, nor me.

Here I entreat your Honorable leaves to answer some objections. Many do
think it strange, if this be true, I have made no more use of it, and rest so
long without employment. And I think it more strange they should tax me before
they have tried what I have done, both by Sea and Land, as well in Asia, and
Africa, as Europe and America. These fourteen years I have spared neither
pains, nor money, according to my ability, in the discovery of Norumbega,
where with some thirty seven men and boys, the remainder of an hundred and
five, against the fury of the Saluages, I began that plantation now in
Virginia; which beginning (here and there) cost me near five years work,
and more then five hundred pound of my own estate; beside all the dangers,
miseries and incomberances, and loss of other employments I endured gratis.
From which blessed Virgin, where I stayed till I left five hundred English,
better provided then ever I was (ere I returned) sprung the fortunate
habitation of Somer Isles. Burmudos.


This Virgins sister (called New England, An. 1616 at my humble suite, by our
most gracious Prince Charles) has been near as chargeable to me and my
friends; from all which, although I never got shilling, but it cost me a
pound, yet I think my self happy to see their prosperities.

If it yet trouble a multitude to proceed upon these certainties, what think
you I undertook, when nothing was known, but that there was a vast Land? I
never had power and means to do any thing (though more has been spent in
formal delays then would have done the business) but in such a penurious and
miserable manner, as if I had gone a begging to build an University; where, had
men bin as forward to adventure their purses, as to crop the fruits of my
Labors, thousands ere this, had been bettered by these designs. Thus betwixt
the spurte of Desire, and the bridle of Reason, I am near ridden to death in a
ring of Despair; the reins are in your hands, therefore I entreat you to
ease me: and those blame me (believe) this little may have taught me, not to
be so forward again at every motion, unless I intended nothing but to carry
news. For now they dare adventure a ship, that, when I went first, would not
adventure a groat, so they may be at home again by Michaelmasse; but to the
purpose.

By this all men may perceive the ordinary performance of this voyage in five
or six months, the plenty of fish is most certainly approved; and it is
certain from Cannada and New England has come near twenty thousand Beuer
skins, within these five years. Now, had each of those ships transported
but six, or three pigs, as many goats and hens, fruits, plants and seeds as I
proiected* by this time there might have been victual for a thousand men. But
the desire of present gain (in many) is so violent, and the endeavors of many
undertakers so negligent, every one so regarding his private, that it is hard
to effect any public good, and impossible to bring them into a body, rule, or
order, unless both Authority and Money assist experiences: it is not a work
for every one to plant a Colonie (but when a house is built, it is no hard
matter to dwell in it.) This requires all the best pars of art, judgment,
courage, honesty, constancy, diligence and experience to do but near well:
and there is a great difference betwixt Saying and Doing. But to conclude, the
fishing will go forward if you plant it or no; whereby you may transport a
colony for no great charge, that in a short time, might provide such fraughts,
to buy of us their dwelling, as I would hope no ship could go or come empty
from New England.

The charge of this is only salt, nets, hooks, lines, knives, Irish rugges,
course cloth, beads, hatchets, glass and such trash, only for fishing and
trade with the Saluages, besides our own necessary provisions, whose
endeavors will quickly desray all this charge; and the Saluages have entreated
me to inhabit where I will. Now all those ships have bin fished within a square
of two leagues, and not one ship of all these, would yet adventure further,
where questionless 500. sail may have their fraught, better then in Island,
Newfoundland, or elsewhere, and be in their markets before the other can have
their fish in their ships. Because New Englands fishing begins in
mid-February, the other not till mid-Maie, the progression hereof tends much
to the advancement of Virginia, and the Burmudas: and will be a good friend in
time of need to the Inhabitants in New Foundland.

The returns made by the Western ships are commonly divided into 3. parts;
one for the owners of the ship, another for the master and his company, the
third for the victulers; which course being still permitted, will be no
hinderance to the plantation, go there never so many, but a means of
transporting that yearly for little or nothing, which otherwise will cost many
a hundred of pounds.

If a Ship can gain, twenty, thirty, fifty in the hundred, nay near three
hundred for 100. in seven months, as you see they have done, spending twice
so much time in going and coming as in staying there; were I there planted,
seeing the variety of the fishings in their seasons, serves the most part of
the year; and with a little labor we might make all the salt we need use. I
can conceive no reason to distrust, but the doubling and trebling their gains
that are at all the former charge, and can fish but two months in a year: and
if those do give twenty, thirty, or forty shillings for an acre of land, or
ship Carpenters, Forgers of iron etc. that buy all things at a dear rate, grow
rich, when they may have as good of all needful necessaries for taking (in my
opinion) should not grow poor; and no commodity in Europe does more decay
then wood.

Master Dee records in his British Monarchy, that King Edgar had a navy
of four thousand sail, with which he yearly made his progress about this
famous Monarchy of Great Brittany, largely declaring the benefit thereof:
whereupon it seems he protected to our most memorable Queen Elizabeth, the
erecting of a Fleet of three score sail, he called a little Navy Royal;
immitating the admired Pericles prince of Athens, that could never secure that
tormented estate, until he was Lord and Captain of the Sea.

At this none need wonder, for who knows not, her Royal Majesty during her
life, by the incredible adventures of her Royal Navy and valiant Soldiers and
Seamen; notwithstanding all treacheries at home, the protecting and defending
France and Holland, and re-conquering Ireland, yet all the world, by Sea or
Land, both feared, loved, and admired good Queen Elizabeth.

Both to maintain and increase that incomparable honor (God be thanked) to
her incomparable Successor, our most Royal Lord and Sovereign King James,
etc. this great Philosopher has left this to his Majesty and his kingdoms
considerations.

That if the Tenths of the Earth be proper to God, it is also due by Sea, the
Kings highwayes are common to pass, but not to dig for mines or any thing,
so Englands coasts are free to pass, but not to fish, but by his Majesty's
prerogative.

His Majesty of Spain, permits none to pass the Popes order for the East and
West Indies, but by his permission, or at their perils. If all that world be
so justly theirs, it is no injustice for England to make as much use of her
own, as strangers do, that pay to their own Lords the tenth, and not to the
owners of those Liberties any thing, whose subjects may neither take nor sell
any in their territories; which small tribute, would maintain his little Navy
Royal, and not cost his Majesty a penny; and yet maintain peace with all
forrainers, and allow them more courtesy, then any Nation in the world affords
to England.

It were a shame to allege, that Holland is more worthy to enjoy our fishings
as Lords thereof, because they have more skill to handle it then we, as they
can our wool, and undressed cloth, notwithstanding all their wars and trouble
some disorders.

To get money to build this Navy he says, Who would not spare the hundred penny
of his Rents, and the 500. penny of his goods; each servant that takes 33. s.
4. d. wages, 4. pence, and every forrainer seven years of age, 4. pence
yearly for 7. years 3* not any of these but yearly they will spend 3. times
so much in pride, wantonness or some superfluity. And do any men love the
security of their estates that are true subjects, would not of themselves be
humble suitors to his Majesty, to do this of free will as a voluntary
benevolence, so it may be as honestly and truly employed as it is proiected,
the poorest mechanicke in this kingdom will gain by it.

If this be too much, would the honorable Adventurers be pleased to move his
Majesty, that but the 200. penny of Rents, and the thousandth penny of Goods
might be thus collected, to plant New England, and but the tenth fish there
taken, leaving strangers as they are. You might build ships of any burden and
numbers you please, five times cheaper then you can do here, and have good
merchandise for their fraught in this unknown Land, to the advancement of
Gods glory, his Church and Gospel, and the strengthening and relief of a
great part of Christendom, without hurt to any: ^o the terror of Pirates, the
amazement of enemies, the assistance of friends, the securing merchants, and so
much increase of Navigations, to make Englands Trade and Shipping, as much as
any Nation in the world, besides a hundred other benefits, to the general good
of all true subjects, and would cause thousands yet snborne, bless the time,
and all them that first put it in practice.

Now, lest it should be obscured, as it has been, to private ends; or so
weakly undertaken, by our ouer-weening incredulity, that strangers may
possess it, whilst we contend for New Englands goods, but not Englands good. I
present this unto your Lordship, and to all the Lords in England, hoping (by
your honorable good liking and approbation,) to move all the worthy Companies
of this noble City, and all the cities and Countries in the whole Land to
consider of it, since I can find them wood, and half victual with the
aforesaid advantages, with what facility they may build and maintain this
little Navy Royal, both with honor, profit and content, and inhabit as good
a country as any in the world, within that parallel, which with my life, and
what I have, I will endeavor to effect, if God please, and you permit.

As for them whom pride or covetousness lulleth asleep in a Cradle of
slothful carelessness; would they but consider, how all the great Monarchies
of the Earth have been brought to confusion: or but remember the late
lamentable experience of Constantinople; and how many Cities, Towns, and
Provinces, in the fair rich kingdoms of Hungaria, Transylvania, and Wallachi;
and how many thousands of Princes, Earls, Barons, Knights, and Merchants, have
in one day, lost goods, lives, and honors: or sold for slaves, like beasts in
a market place; their wives, children and servants slain, or wandering they
knew not whither: dying, or living in all extreamities of extreme miseries and
calamities. Surely, they would not only do this, but give all they have, to
enjoy peace and liberty at home; or but adventure their persons abroad, to
prevent the conclusions of a conquering foe, who commonly assaulteth, and best
prevails, where he finds wealth and plenty (most armed) with ignorance and
security.

Much more I could say, but lest I should be too tedious to your more serious
affairs, I humbly crave your honorable and favorable constructions and
pardons, if any thing be amiss.

If any desire to be further satisfied, they may read my Description of
Virginia, and New England, and peruse them with their several Mappes; what
defect you find in them, they shall find supplied in me, or in my Authors,
that thus freely have thrown my self, with my Mite into the Treasury of my
Countries good, not doubting but God will shirre up some noble spirits, to
consider and examine it worthy Collumbus could give the Spaniards any such
certainties for his dessigne, when Queen Isabell of Spain set him forth with
fifteen sail: And though I can promise no mines of gold, yet the warrelike
Hollanders let us immitate, but not hate, whose wealth and strength are good
testimonies of their treasure gotten by fishing. Therefore (honorable and
worthy Countrymen) let not the meannesse of the word Fish distaste you, for it
will afford as good gold as the mines of Guiana, or Tubatu, with less hazard
and charge, and more certainty and facility: and so I humbly rest.

FINIS.

