OF THE AVTHOR AND SVBSTANCE OF THE PROTESTANT CHVRCH AND RELIGION, TWO BOOKS.

Written first in Latin by R. S. Doctor of Divinity, AND Now reuiewed by the
Author, and translated into English by VV. Bas.

Every thing must be reduced to its beginning.

Tertull. Praescript. cap. 20. Permissu Superiorum, M.DC.XXI.

The Scope of this Work.
IF both Luther himself, and the famousest Protestant^ of all sorts, have many
ways most plainly and most freely confessed, that Luther was the Author and
Beginner of the Protestant Church and Religion (as in this work does
manifestly appear) then undoubtedly he was so.

And if Luther were the Author and Beginner thereof, assuredly, it is not the
Church and Religion of Christ.

Read therefore and judge indifferently; and thereby an end may be made of all
Controversies in Religion betwixt the Catholics and Protestants.

THE PREFACE OF THE AVTHOR TO the Reader.
Wherein the manner and profit of this Work is declared.
THERE are two kinds of questions (gentle Reader) which are in controversy
betwixt the Catholics and Protestants; the one kind is of fact, to wit,
Whether Luther was the Author, and beginner of the Protestants Church and
Religion; whether before him it were visible and had Pastors; whether he and
the first Protestant Preachers were sent to preach Protestancy, and the li^e:
The other kind of question is of Christ's doctrine or law: For example, whether
Christ taught good works do justify, be necessary to salvation, meritorious,
and such others. Why a a question of Fact is handled rather the^ of doctrine
At this present I treat not of this second kind of question, but only of the
former and that for three causes. First the questions of Doctrine are
innumerable, but the questions of Fact, few. And many have handled them, and
Whether Luther were Author and beginner of the Protestant church and Religion
For if it be made manifest, that he was the Author and Beginner of it, every
one will straihgt see that it is not Christ's Church and Religion, but Luthers
they pretend Scriptures, Prescrip. c. 15.
and with this their boldness shake some, and in the dispute weary the constant,
catch the weak, and send away the midal^ sort with scruple and dou^ts. But in
questions of Fact they are destitute not only of al pretense of Scripture,
unless it be some most vain, but also of all testimony of men and help of
reason, and stand only upon their own sayings, and are convinced by the
testimonies of the whole world, and sometime also by their own confessions, and
therefore are brought to debate these kind of questions no more willingly, then
is a thief to his trial. Neither do they in these disputs either weary the
constant, or catch the weak; but show their own weakness and wilfullnes unto
all kind of men. And this is the cause why Ministers are so loath to dispute of
the Church, because the Church, being a company of men, includes many
questions of fact, as of antiquity, succession, continuance, visibility,
mission, ordination of Pastors, and such like; in which points there is little
color, or show on their part.

2. Fourthly, Protestants exact more difficult poofes in questions of doctrine,
then they can demand in matters of Fact. For in matters of Fact, whereof the
scripture speaks nothing, they must be content with testimonies of men,
against whom no just exception can be made, or they must refuse all trial of
these kind of questions. But in controversies of doctrine, they account those
only to be lawful proofs, which are taken out of the scripture. Neither do
these satisfy them, unless they be plain and Melan. and Brent. in Hospin.
fol. 107. Colloq. Ratisb. sess. 11.
express, and (as they say) word Vorst. respons. ad Slad.
for word contain that which is in question, or at least be so pregnant and
strong, that they Luth. de seru. arbitr. fol. 440. Lib. 6. confess. c. 4.
stopp all m^ns mouths that they can gainsay nothing. For it is the common
fault of Protestants, which S. Augustine says, himself was guilty of, whiles
he was an heretic, that they will be as certain of all things as that seven
and three make ten. Nay they yield not always to these kind of proofs; For
what can be said more expressy, more plainly, more literally, then the
scripture says, that man is justified by works, and not only by faith; that,
that which our Savior gave with his hands to his Apostles after his last
supper, was his very body and blood, and such like: and yet the Protestants
yield not to these kind of testimonies, but devise figures and shifts to
delude them. Catholics proofs in controversies of doctrine are certainly
Theological demonstrations, because they are clearly drawn from the proper
principles of Divinity, to wit, from clear words of God confirmed by the
tradition of the Church and unanimous exposition of the Fathers; which kind of
proof is as great and strong, as either Divinity or law, or any Science
whatsoever which is founded in words either does affoard, or the nature of any
law or science which is grounded in words (as Divinity is) can bear or
affoard. And as the Philosopher says well, it were starck madness to exact any
other kind of proofs of any Profession, then the nature thereof can affoard. 1.
Eth. 1.
But because heretics expound what words soever as they list, and little set
by the authority of the Church or Fathers, and the unlearned hardly perceive
what kind of proof is a Theological demonstration, and such as Divinity can
affoard no greater, or which is the true sense of Gods word, or how great the
authority of the Churh and Fathers ought to be; therefore with them, Catholics
proofs in points of doctrine, albeit in truth they be Theological
demonstrations, take little effect Whereas on the other side Catholic proofs
in matter of Fact, are not only Theological, but also (that I may so speak)
Mathematical demonstrations, because they consist of one principle which is
grounded not only upon the foundations of Divinity, to wit the word of God
together with the exposition of the Church and Fathers but also is manifest by
the light of reason: which kind of principles these are, That Gods Church has
always him: that it is one: that it is the auncientest of all Churches: that
it is always visible: has always Pastors, and the like: And of another
principle, which may be tried by our sense and experience, as that the foresaid
properties agree neither to the Protestants nor to the Anabaptists, nor to any
heretical company. And therefore these kind of demonstrations move even the
most obstinate heretics, and are evident even to the most ignorant and
unlearned persons.

3. And hence arises a fifth cause of handling rather questions of Fact then of
doctrine, because the fruit of debating those questions is reaped with more
facility and of far more. For whereas few but divines do themselves perceive the
true meaning of the testimonies of Scripture wherewith the questions of doctrine
are debated; as the true meaning of the law, few but lawyers themselves do see;
all perceive the meaning of those testimonies wherewith the questions of fact
are disputed, Epist. dedicat. exercit. cont. Baron.
who will affoard an atte^tiue eye to see, or ear to hear. And here upon
Casaubon wrote, that for to insinuate into the mind of the Reader any opinion
now in controversy, Baronius historyes are of greater force, D. Flauignie.
then Bellarmines disputes. And said also sometime, as one most worthy of
credit, who heard him, told me, that whiles he read Bellarmines disputations,
he began to doubt of all Religion, but whiles he perused Baronius Annals, he
felt himself by little and little drawn toward Papistry: which thing might
well have befallen him and such others, not because Cardinal Bellarmine proves
less soundly, for the nature of the matter, the truth of Catholic Religion in
questions of doctrine, then Cardinal Baronius does the same in questions of
Fact, but because such is the nature of the testimonies, wherewith the truth of
Catholic faith in questions of doctrine is proved, that they are less evident
then the testimonies wherewith the Catholic truth in matters of Fact is
proved, and also have many things which seem to be contrary and repugnant to
them. Whereupon it falls out that some hearing or reading controversies of
doctrine disputed between Catholics and Heretics, and not being able of
themselves to discern betwixt truth and show of truth, either follow neither
party, but become uncertain or Atheistes, or content with any show of truth
take that part to which any affection of their will does draw them. Whereas
none by hearing or reading controversies of Fact, becomes not more confirmed
in the Catholic faith or more auerted from heresy. And therefore Tertullian
counsaileth us, Praescrip. cap. 1^.
not to dispute with Heretics out of Scripture, by which questions of doctrine
are disputed, but advises us to appeal to antiquity, succession, and such
like which concern questions of fact.

4. Lastly, though the fruit of disputing both those kind of questions were
equal, yet since the Author, by order of nature, goes before the thing whereof
he is Author, according to the order of Nature we ought to entreat of the
Author of Protestancy before we dispute of Protestancy it self. For (as well
says Tertullian) nothing but God alone is without beginning which how much it
goes before in the state of all things so much ought it to go before in the
handling of them, Lib 5. cont Mar.
Lib 3 cont Mar.
that the state may be known. And other where: Nothing is known before the
beginning is known. Wherefore I will begin my first dispute concerning the
Protestant Religion of the Author ther^of: Yet before I do that, I must set
down and determine what a Protestant, or the Protestant Church and Religion
is, and what is necessary for one to be a Protestant, and discover the
uncertainty of Protestants. And this much touching the matter which I have made
choice of to handle in this little work and the causes thereof.

Why proved only out of Protestants.
5. As for the manner wherewith I undertake to discuss this question of Fact,
whether Luther was the first Author and beginner of the Protestant Church, and
Religion, I purpose to prove it only out of the confessions of Luther himself,
and of the three sorts of Protestants, to wit, Lutherans, who profess to
follow Luther in all points of doctrine; Sacramentaries, who notoriously
dissent from him touching the real presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament;
and our English Protestants, who differ from both the former at least in
discipline and government of their Church: because this kind of proof out of
their own words I find to be both necessary and most effectual with
Protestants. Necessary, because of this question of Fact, neither the
Scripture, Necessary.
or the Fathers say any thing, as also, because, seeing Protestants deny part
of the scripture, and interpret the rest as they please, and will not stand to
the sentence of the Church, Councels, or Fathers, account reason Sophistry,
and contem me the testimonies of Catholic writers, they have left nothing but
their own co^fessio^s, by which we may dispure with them. And I pray God they
do give place to their own most frequent and most plain confessions, and not
delude them by voluntary and frivolous interpretations; for then hope may be,
that there will be some end of these controversies. At least we shall reap this
profit by this labor, that by it shall be manifest to all, that either
Protestants will hear no testimony, admit no judgment, no not their own,
which is a most evident argument of a most desperate cause; or that they shall
be condemned by their own verdict and sentence; or lastly that there can be no
form of speech so plain, no words so clear, no sentence so manifest, which
they with their feigned figures and devises will not wrest, frustrate, and
delude; which is in effect to disanull al kind of proof which is taken out of
words or testimonies whatsoever. For I will bring so plain testimonies of
theirs, as plain can scarce or not at all be devised; I will bring so many, as
themselves will require no more; I will bring so weighty, as themselves will
demand none more weighty; I will bring them also most freely and often iterated
and repeated; lastly I will bring not only those which indirectly and by
consequence prove that which I would, but those also, and that especially and
oftenest, which directly testify that which they are brought to confirm.
Wherefore either they will not delude these words of theirs, or they will delude
all words whatsoever; And either they will not refuse these their own
testimonies and confessions, or they will reject all testimonies and judgments
whatsoever, which is in effect to confess that their cause is most desperate
and most worthy to be rejected and condemned of all.

Most effectual.
1. This manner also of proof is most effectual, for what can be of greater
force to convince a man, then his own judgment and acknowledgement of the
truth? Surely unless a man will profess himself to be en enemy of truth, By
reason.
and of the number of them who see good and follow bad, he must needs embrace
that truth which himself confesses. Experience also shows the same. By
experience.
For when our Savior could neither by infinite miracles nor evident scriptures
stop the mouths of the Jews, he so convinced them out of their own words,
that (as the Evangelist writes) they answered him not a word nor from that
day any durst ask him a question. And the Donatists, Matt. 22.
when they made answer to the Catholics arguments taken out of scripture,
were so entangled in their own fact touching the Maximinists as (says S. In
collat. 3. diei c. 11.
Augustine (they ever more stood dumb at that^ And now we see, that
Protestants are tonguetied at no sort of books so much, as at those, which are
composed of their own testimonies. This manner of dealing used the holy
Fathers against the Pagans, as is to be seen in Clement, By the Fathers.
Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian, Arnobius, ^actantius, Augustine, and others; and
against heretics also, as appears in the said S. Augustine. S. Hierome, and
others, most often, and the same they most highly commend. For thus writes In
Eusebius. l. 7. c. 6.
S. Denis of Alexandria: It helps me much, that I can disprove them out of
their own words. S. Orat. de S. Basil.
Gregory Nazianzen: It is the greatest cunning and wisdom of speech to bind
(the Adversary) with his own words. And De Trini. c. 130
Tertullian, of Nouatian: It is a strong kind of proof, which is taken of the
adversary that truth may be proved eue^ by the enemies of truth. S. Lib. 2.
cap. 53.
Ireneus: We often disgrace them by their own doctrine. And Lib. cont. Secund.
c. 3.
S. Augustine: Neither will I bring against thee any other sentences for to
show the error of Manichee, then out of thine own epistle: Which work of his
he Lib. 2. Retract. c. 10.
prefers before all the other which he wrote against that heresy. Nay, the
same holy Fathers account this manner of dealing with heretics necessary, and
prefer it before all others. For thus says S. Ireneus Lib. 1. cap. 35.
It is needful to disprove the Valentinians by their Mothers Fathers and
Ancestors. And in another Lib. 4. c. 14.
place: That is a true and unanswerable proof which brings attestation from
the adversaries themselves. And Lib. de anima c. 3.
Tertullian: The adversaries testimony is eftsoons necessary. Again: I must
strike them with their own weapons. And Atha. l. de carne Christi.
S. Athanasius, who was most tried in combats with heretics: Against
wranglers we must oppose their own arguments, in which (says he) I have the
greatest hope of victory. S Chrysostom Hom. 3. in epist. ad Tit.
also: We must convince them by this, when we turn their own ill sayings
against themselves, as often as we make those who were the famousest amongst
them, their accusers. And lastly Lib. 1. cont. Petil. c. 27.
S. Augustine the most fortunate champion of the Church against heretics seeing
that the Donatists could be evidently convinced by their own dealing with the
Maximinists, exhorts Catholics to let alone all other kind of arguments, and
still to urge this only: Remember (says he) this only fact of the Max minists,
cast this in their faces, answer to al objections by the Maximinists alone And
Ibid. cap. 18.
again: I will not leave this only fact which God has put before their eyes
to stop their mouths, and to amend them if they be wise, or to consound them
if they remain obstinate. And in like manner, when he saw, that the Donatists
cause was quite overthrown by that saying of theirs: Neither one cause does
prejudice another, nor one person another, he thus speaks unto Catholics:
Sermi 22. de verb. Apostol.
I request you, I bese^ch you for Christ's sake, that you remember it, speak
it, and have it ever in your mouths. There could not be pronounced on our
behalf, a briefer, surer, and plainer sentence Thus you see how greatly the
Fathers esteem of this kind of dealing with heretics, and how earnestly they
urge us for to use it.

7. And Protestants ought the more to allow this kind of proceeding with them,
because they much commend it, and prefer it before all others. Luther: There
De ser. arbit. fol. 442.
is no stronger proof, then his own confession, who is accused, and his
testimony against himself. And again: No Inc. 1. 1. Pet. fol. 449.
man can conu^nce a liar better then by his own words. He^husius: The Lib. de
Coma.
sh^rtest way of al to convince an adversary is that which is taken out of his
own confession, wherewith he openly acknowledges that which is objected. Lucas
Epist. Euchar.
Osiander: The confession and testimo^y of the adversary is of greatest
authority. Peter Loc. tit. de Iudaeis fol. 3^0.
Martyr: Surely amongst other testimonies that is of greatest weight, which is
given by the enemies. D Bancroft: Let Survey c. 8. page 14^.
us take hold of that which they have granted. You may be bold to build upon
it for a truth, that they are so constrained to yield unto. D Cont. 292. c. 14.
Whitaker: It must needs be a strong argument, which is taken out of the
confession of the Adversaries. For the testimony of the adversaries is of force
against themselves. And Praef. in Cant.
again: It is a notable matter and increases much the triumph for to be
proved by the testimony of the adversaries. And D Morton in the Epistle
dedicatory of his answer to the Protestants Apology: Which kind of assistance
of learned adversaries the Apologists themselves have laid down for the
greatest reason of satisfaction, and we do accordingly admit. Nay, they begin
to use this kind of arguing against us, and vaunt much thereof: Who may not
(says the said. D. Apol. l. 1 cap. 25. Differences betwixt Protest. manner of
dealing and ours.
Morton) justly congratulate the Protestants happiness, whom truth it self
proceeding out of their adversaries mouths does patronize?

8. But, by their leave, there are many and great differences between their
and our kind of proceeding in this matter. First many of the Catholics, whom
they produce against us, wrote before their Religion was risen, and therefore we
answer that of them which S. Hierom answered of the ancient Fathers, who lived
before Arius appeared: Lib. 2. contr. Rufin.
Before Arius (says he) arose in Alexandria like a noontide Devil they spoke
some things innocently and not so warily which cannot escape the obloquie of
certain perverse men. And which S. Augustine answered of S. Chrysostom when the
Pelagians alleged his testimony. Discoursing (says he) in the Catholic
Church, Lib. 1. cont Tul. c. 6.
he thought not that he was otherwise understood None was yet troubled with
such a question; you not yet iangling, he spoke more securely. But the
Protestants which we produce lived al after that protestancy was both bred and
hatched, and after the Catholic faith had for many ages shined through out the
world, and therefore could not be ignorant what words of theirs might make for
the Catholic faith, Cassander Erasmus-Cornelius Agrippa. Marsil of Padua.
and prejudice their own cause. Another difference is, that none of the
Catholics whose testimonies Protestants allege against us, is accounted of us
for a man sent extraordinarily of God, and much less for a Prophet,
Evangelist, or Apostle. Nay, Beatus Rhenanus Faber Stapulensis, Orthuinus
Gratius.
many of them are obscure writers, and of small or no reckoning among us, some
of them are not held for Catholics of us, and some of them even by the
judgments of Protestants themselves are our open enemies. But the confessions
of faith which we cite against Protestants contain their faith, so that they
cannot be rejected of them, unless they will renounce their faith. And of the
men whose testimonies we produce, one is accounted of them a Humf. ad Rat. 4.
Camp.
God, another a Prophet an Colloq. Aldebur. Schusse^b. Catal. 13. Hunius
praefat. de liber. arbit.
Evangelist, an Apostle, a third Elias, an Angel. His writings are held for
inspired from heaven, for a rule of faith, and equal to the writings of the
Apostles. Another is called a ^^anae. lib. 4, de Eccles. c. 9. Beza ep. 6.
great and admirable Prophet, others are esteemed for lights, lamps, bright
stars, props, founders, parents, renewers of the Protestants church and
religion. Others are men extraordinarily sent and divinely raised to lighten
the world; most of them for very learned, famous and well deserving of the
Protestant religion; and finally all for sincere Protestants. The holy Fathers
were wont to refute both the Justin. dial. cum Tryphon. August. l. de ciuit.
Chrysostom. hom. 26. in 2. Cor. Cyril. l. 6. in Julian.
Pagans superstition and the Hier. cont. Vigilant. Ambros. sermon. 5. de Sanctis.
Hilar. l. 1. and 6. de Trinit.
heretics errors out of the Devils confessions. Of which kind of proof Apol.
cap. 22.
Tertullian, using it, makes this account: What more manifest then this fact?
what more sure then this proof? Believe them, they speak true of themselves,
who use to credit them when they lie. No man lies to his own disgrace. And S.
Lib. ad Demetr.
Cyprian: Who so say that thou worshipest the Gods believe even them whom
thou worshippest. And likewise Minutius in Octauio: Neither do they lie to
their own shame, especially if some of you be by. Believe themselves
witnessing that they are Devils, and confessing the truth of themselves. But
our proof taken out of the Protestants confessions of faith and out of Luther
and such like famous Protestants testimony against Protestancy, is much more
evident and stronger; both because it is more likely that men will confess the
truth, though against themselves, then the Devil the father of lies and sworn
enemy of truth; as also because the confessions of the Devil were extorted from
him by force, as the Fathers themselves do acknowledge, but these of Luther
and his mates come most freely from them. Believe therefore (O Protestants)
your chief leaders, Note.
your founders, Instructors Prophets, Eua^gelists, and Apostles, in that which
they freely and of their own accord confess of themselves and of their
doctrine. Even by the testimony of your own Prophets and teachers believe, that
Protesta^cy is newly risen, first founded by Luther, and before known to none.
No man willingly lies to his own shame; no man freely confesses that which
overthrows his own cause, but which he cannot deny. No man knew protestancy
better then they, no man favored it more then they. Who (says Calvin) is to
be credited touching Popery, more then the Pope himself? De ver ^ Eccles
reform.
And whom shall we believe touching the author and hatching of protestancy
amongst the Lutherans, rather then Luther himself, Melancthon, the
Century-writers, Kemnice, Schusselburg, and the like? Or amongst the
Sacramentaryes, rather then Zuinglius, Bullinger, Bucer, Peter Martyr, Calvin,
Beza, Plessie, and such others? or amongst English Protestants rather then
Jewel, Fox, Whitaker, Fulke, Humfrey, Perkins, and the like, whose frequent
and plain confessions we heerin produce. A third difference between our and
the Protestants manner of proceeding in this kind of proof is, that
Protestants oftentimes allege Catholics testimonies corrupted, mangled, and
falsified; and sometimes also the objections which they make against
themselves, instead of their answers, as Cardinal Peron not long since showed
Plessie to have don before the French King, conferenrence at fountain Bel-caue.
even by the judgment of Protestant themselves. And it were easy to demonstrate
that D. Apol. part. 1. l. 1. c. 23. l. 2. c. 41. part. 2. l. c. 35. l. 2. c. 41.
Morton has done the like in his Apology. But I produce the testimonies of
Protestants certain and entiere, at least for that sense for which I allege
them. For I have cited none in this work which either I have not seen with
mine own eyes, and for the most part have quoted not only the books and
chapters but also the leaves and pages, or if I have wanted the book, I have
cited them out of some good Author. The fourth difference and that of great
moment is, that the Catholics, whose testimonies Protestants allege against
is (if so be they were true Catholics) were always ready to revoke and recall
whatsoever they had written contrary to the catholic faith, and to submit all
their words or writings to the censure of the catholic Church, which to be
the mind and disposition of all Catholics, Protestants themselves confess. For
thus writes D. Contr. 2. q. 5. c. 8.
Whitaker: This is the condition, this the consent of the Popish Church, that
all hang their salvation upon one man, and submit themselves to one man's
judgment. And D. Apol. part. 1. l. 2. cap. 31.
Morton: Is there any Papist that thinks any decree of the Pope can be
contemned or broken without crime or heresy? Which since it is so, in vain do
they object any Catholics words against the Catholic faith. For either they
are not contrary thereto, or if they be, they are already revoked, recalled and
disanulled by himself. But the mind and proceeding of Protestants is far
otherwise, who subject not their opinions to the judgment of the Church, but as
they think that she may err, so will they hold their opinions notwithstanding
her sentence to the contrary; and therefore justly may we produce their
testimonies against their own Church.

9. The fifth difference, and which is much to be noted, is, that Protestants
allege Catholic witnesses in matters of doctrine, in which some times by
reason of the obscurity of the matter a man may chance to err and slip;
August. l. 11. cont. Faust. c. 5.
or else in such matters of fact, as were in times or places far distant from
them, so that themselves could not search the truth, but believed the reports
of others. Such a question is that of Pope Ioane, in which Protestants cite no
Catholic author which lived not some ages after that time, wherein Pope Joan is
said to have been. Or if they produce any Catholic Author in any matter of
fact, the truth whereof he might have tried, either he is of no credit, or the
matter is such, as it turns to no prejudice of the Catholic faith. But we
here produce Protestants in a matter of fact, and such a matter as they could
most easily know. For what was more easy, then for Luther and his fellows to
try either then or ever since, whether, when he first began, there was in the
world any Protestant company, whether it were visible, whether it had Pastors,
and the like? For who can think, that only the Protestant company could lie so
close hid, that neither in all Luthers time or ever since, either the being, or
the estate or condition, or place or Pastors, or any thing at all thereof could
be espied out of so many Arguses, which now in one whole age have sifted all
corners of the world to find it out? And besides, this is such a question of
Fact, as upon the decision thereof an end may be made of all controversies
between Catholics and Protestants. For (as I said before) if Luther be the
Author and beginner of the Protestant Church, it is certain, that it is not
the Church of Christ, nor to be followed of Christians, Note.
but to be forsaken and detested. To which I ad now, that if Luther himself and
such and so many learned and famous Protestants as I have cited, do by many
ways, and so plainly confess, that Luther was the Author thereof, it cannot be
doubted, but that he was in truth the Author of it. For I allege not men of
small credit among Protestants, but such as are of greatest authority with
them; nor a few, but many; nor of one nation alone, but of diverse, to wit,
Germans, Italians, French, English, Scotts, Flemings and others; nor
Protestants of one sort or sect, but of all three namely Lutherans,
Sacrame^taries and English Protestants. So that they could not bear false
witness in this matter either for want of knowledge, because they were many
and learned and of different countries, and most diligent in searching the
matter, and the matter it self most easy; nor for want of good will toward
the cause, because they were all most earnest Protestants. And to refuse the
testimonies of such witnesses in a matter of fact, in their own time, so easy
to be known, and so diligently searched of them, what other thing is it, then
obstinately to refuse to know the truth of this matter so important to be
known, and whereby may be made an end of all contentions in Religion? Wherefore
let Protestants say as they please, Note.
that in questions of doctrine they will not depend upon Luther, Calvin, or any
one, or all their doctors together, but upon the scripture alone: Nevertheless
in matter of fact, whereof the scripture says nothing, such as this is (for the
Scripture tells not what was the state and condition of the Protestant Church
when Luther began, in what place it was, what Pastors it had, who saw it, and
the like) either they must confess, that they refuse all trial and knowledge
of so important a truth, or they must give credit to the deposition of
sufficient witnesses. And if ever men were or can be sufficient witnesses of
any matter of Fact, Luther and those Protestants which here I produce, are
sufficient witnesses of that which I bring them for to testify. And thus much
touching the cause why I prove Luther to have been the founder of Protestant
Religion only by the testimonies of Protestants.

Why so many Protestants testimonies are alleged.
10. As for the reason why I allege so many Protestants, that is, that it many
appear, that it is not the private testimony of some one or few, but the
general consent of them all, or at least the common sentence of many of them.
And if I seem to any Catholic over tedious in heaping up so many testimonies
of Protestants, I pray him to consider, that I write not this book to
Catholics to confirm them in the Catholic faith, who I know to that end do
not need the testimonies of Protestants; but that I write it partly to
Catholics, for to furnish them with store of Protestants testimonies to stopp
their mouths, and to show them that they are right Heretics, that is,
condemned (as the Apostle speaks) by their own judgment, to which end a few
testimonies of theirs would not suffice. And therefore to such as intend this
end the multitude of testimonies will not be troublesome. For who, that
indeauoureth to va^quish most obstinate enemies, will complain of the abundance
of good soldiers whereof he may make choice? And if I had rehearsed only some
few testimonies, and named the places where the rest may be found, some would
have cauilled, as M. Jewel did against D. Harding, that I had cited dumb
witnesses. Besides, seeing the judgments of men are diverse, it may fall out,
that what kind of testimonies seem strong and forcible to some, others acount
but weak and little to the purpose; and therefore it was behofull, that there
should be as it were a storehouse of Protestants testimonies, that every one
might take what weapon he thinks fittest for him, and use it against them.
But especially I gathered these testimonies of Protestants for the Protestants
themselves, that by their own men's judgment I might withdraw them from their
error. And therefore I was not so fearful to bring too many for Catholics, as
careful to provide enough for Protestants. In which I could hardly offend by
multitude. For as S. Lib. 1.
Vigil says, Man's mind possessed with the error of a false opinion, is hard
and slow to perceive truth, with how many witnesses so ever it be urged thereto.
De gestis cum Emerit.
Or as Lib. de Patient.
Tertullian writes: much talk in matter of edification is not foul if at any
time it be foul. And Lib. 1. cont. Iou.
S. Hierom: delay is no loss, when by delay the victory is more assured.
Whereupon S. Augustine counsaileth us, not to regard and delay whatsoever, so we
bring good proof of what we say. Besides, Whi. cont. 295. c. 17. l. 1. de
script. c. 11. sect. Sadeel. in Refut. Posnan. c. 12.
Protestants deny that we ought to judge of them by one or few; though they be
Pastors, and White in defense of his way. c. 7.
write that M. Brierly in his Protestants Apology, although it be stuffed with
all kind of Protestants testimonies, has brought but a few testimonies. And as
S. Lib. 3. cont. Cres. c. 6.
Augustine says of the Donatists, they are ready to deny what they can. Or as
S 3 Epist. ad C^esipb.
Hierome speaks: Shutting their eyes deny what they would were not. For
what could be more inpudently denied, then that which D. Lib. 3. de Eccles. c.
6.8.49.
Field denies that when Luther began, the public and general face of
Religion in the Western Church was Papisticall? These men need have their
mouths shut, and their ears stopped with multitude of testimonies. For as
Instit. 3. c. 25.. 3.
Calvin says) it is the part of wicked and furious obstinacy, to discredit so
many and so authentical testimonies. Or as an Praefa. Synt. conf.
other says: If in a matter of great importance one only witness were
alleged, what place would his testimony find? But under so many and so great
witnesses as are here produced, all pretext of not receiving the truth is
taken away. In so great certainty of so many witnesses, how is there so great
love of darkness, that they open not their eyes to see the light? To which I add
that saying of Varius in Lib. 2. de finibus.
Cicero: Either these witnesses will suffice, or nothing will suffice
Nevertheless, that I might both somewhat ease the wearines of Catholics in
reading so many testimonies, and better set before the eyes of Protestants the
force of their testimonies, I do for the most part mark in the margent those
testimonies which are most forcible, and after I have recited them all, I
gather the force and sum of them together which he may read, who loatheth to
run over so many. Why many testimonies of the same man.


11. I bring also diverse testimonies of the same Protestants, especially of
Luther, that it may appear, that that confession slipped not from him unawares
and unadvisedly, but that it was his constant judgment, if there can be any
constancy in heretics. For I remember that Praefa. opusc. Call.
Beza, for to cover Caluins foul contradictio^s of himself, wrote; Lobechius
praefat. disput. VVhitakad Demonstrat. 1. Sanderi.
As if of that which one has written briefly in some place, ^t were to be
gathered what he thought of every point of doctrine. I grant notwithstanding,
that I have brought some testimonies which are not so clear, as of themselves
they would convince the matter; Yet such they are as strengthen those that are
clear, and of them receive light. For as in gathering an army not only stout
men but also some other are chosen, who may increase the strength of those that
are stout, and likewise may be encouraged by them; so it fares also in
gathering testimonies. Neither yet did I gather all that occurred: but only
such as seemed more to the purpose. It will also delight the reader to see how
some Protestants plainly and roundly confess the truth, others deal more
craftily and closely, and in them he shall espy that difference which S. Austin
Lib. de peccat. origin. c. 12.
noted between Celestius, and Pelagius, of whom he writes, that he was more
open this more close; he more obstinate this more false, he more free, this
more wily. If any ask how it fell out, that Protestants should give such plain
testimonies against their own cause; I answer, that there were many causes
heerof. First the evidence of truth, which makes its enemies, yea the devils
themselves sometimes to confess it: The very coyners of lies (says Lib. 2.
cont. Eun.
S. Basil) oftentyms caught with the evidence of truth, as with a snare, even
against their wills do witness it. Again, It is the nature of lies to bewray
themselves, like Lib. 5. cont. Mar.
as Tertullian writes: Thieves commonly leave something behind them, which
bewrays them. For as S. Augustine In sentenc. Prof.
says: It is incredible, that he should not be taken by lies, who lies to
take others. Or as S. Basil Lib. 1. cont. Eun.
has: So it is, that evil is not only contrary to good but also to it self.
And Luther In cap. 12. Mat. in cap. 4. and 37. Genes.
himself: There is no heretic, who is not found of spiritual men to speak
against himself in his lies. And else where: This happens to the wicked, that
by lying they cannot beware not to bewray themselves by their words. They lie
some while an sometimes, but continually they cannot. At last lies bewray
themselves especially with them who mark and observe. For there escapes some
word from them with which they are taken. The same confess Resp. ad Nebul. and
admon. vlt.
Calvin, Cont. Castle. p. 421.
Beza, Cont. 1. q. 2. c. 3. and q. 5. c. 8.
Whitaker, and others. Another cause is, because Protestants (as heretics are
wont to do, and Zuin. ^. de relig. c. de Euch. Hospin. part. 2. fol 90. colloq.
Aldeb. fol. 154. Schusselb. tom. 7. catal. p. 126.
themselves confess that they practice it) accommodate their sayings and
doctrine to time, place, and occasions, and therefore utter those sayings which
we here allege, before whom and when they thinck they will make to their
purpose; but where they see they will hurt their cause, either they deny them,
or seek by frivolous and fond expositions to avoid and delude them. So the
Donatists (as Lib. ad Donat. past collat.
Augu^^ in notes) would not confess that, which would have confounded them,
when the Catholics urged it, but after when an other point was in handling. A
fourth cause may be given, that as the Scorpion affords a remedy for her
sting, and of the vipers flesh is made the counter poison; so God has
ordained, that heretics affoard sufficient means to refute their errors:
Neither yet therefore (as S. Supr. c. 33.
Augustine writes) give we any thanks to them, but to God alone. For that they
should for our cause produce and discover all these things by speaking or
writing, truth enforced them, not charity invited them. And Cont. R. Angl. fol.
343.
Luther himself: So must the enemies of truth confound and mock themselves for
a reward of their blasphemies. And In cap. 4. Genes.
again: Since God ordayneth that folly is always joined with malice, Cain
bewrays himself And for this cause the defense of truth is easy against the
adversaries thereof. Whereupon Hospi. part. 2. histor. fol. ^9.
Hospinian thus writes of the Lutherans: They are become grievous enemies and
adversaries, not so much of others, as of themselves; surely by a most evident
testimony of Gods judgment, and a worthy punishment and confusion for these
kind of ambitious and contentious men. Which I would God Protestants would
observe, not in Lutherans only, but also in other Protestants. For they should
find, that they have no heavier adversaries then themselves, and that
Protestants (as Lib. 2. c. 9.
Lactantius wrote of Cicero) cannot be more sorely confuted, then they are by
Protestants themselves.

Faults escaped in the printing.
Page Line Fault Correction 8^. 11. himelf himself 82. 27. unless he unless he
be 96. 6. numb. 66. numb. 96. 107. 19. The There 109. 23. light of dele of 120.
4. credible incredible 127. 7. the these 23^. 6. dele have bin 237. 2. be be by
140. 6. fourth third 147. 33. way wax 154. 7. in is 168. 23. sonde sponge
169. 3. one our 170. 33. 1525. 1535. 181. 14. should only should only say 184.
27. predigious prodigious 205. 31. boasts boasts that ^19. vlt. Taye Faye
211. 33. of faith faith of 222. 21. first fifth.

If any other faults have escaped, it is desired of the Gentle Reader, to
correct them of his courtesy, the Author being far absent from the Print.

THE FIRST BOOK.
Of the substance of the Protestants Church and Religion, and of their
uncertainty therein. CHAP. I.
BECAUSE, as after Plato and Aristotle, Tully says very truly: Whosoever will
according to the order of reason treat of any thing, Lib. 4.
must first define or explicate the nature thereof, that it may be known what
it is whereof he speaks; and Protestants agree, that the definition is the
very ground of all disputation; before I do show, Calvin. 3. Institut. cap. 4..
1. Sadeel. in Refut. These. ^osnan. cap. 2.
who was the first author of the Protestant Church and Religion (which I will
do in the second book) I will in this first define and determine what is a
Protestant, and what is the Protestant Church and Religion. And because
Protestants in this matter (as in all others) are variable and inconstant,
sometimes requiring many things to the making and constitution of a Protestant,
and sometimes being content with very few things, sometyms stretching the
bounds of their Church most largly, otherwhiles drawing the^ very strait,
according as it serves to their present purpose; I will first discover this
their uncertainty about so weighty a matter, and afterward out of their own
principles and confessions of faith, set down what is indeed necessary to the
very substance and being of a Protestant, and of their Church and Religion. And
in this Chapter I will show, how few they sometimes do admit to be of the
Church, and how many things they require to the making of a Protestant; and in
some chapters following, how many they at other times do grant to be of their
Church, and how few things they account necessary for to be a member thereof.
That done I will make manifest, what is indeed necessary thereto.

They exclude Papists.
2. First of all therefore they sometimes exclude Catholics, (whom they term
Papists) out of the Church, as is manifest by all their writings, in so much
that the French Protestants in the 28. article of their confession say: We
openly affirm that where the word of God is not received, nor there is any
profession of obedience due thereto, nor any use of Sacraments, there, properly
speaking, we cannot judge to be any Church. Wherefore we condemn the Popish
Conuenticles. And D. Whitaker in his second book against Dureus and 2.
section, is so earnest that he says: I will not allow the very name of a
lawful Church unto the Roman Church, because it has nothing, which a true
Church ought to have And both he in his 2. Controversy 6. question 3. Chapter,
D. Sutliue in his first book of the Church 3. cap. and lib. 2. cap. 9. M.
Perkins in his reformed Catholic toward the end, Calvin in his book against
the Chaunter of Lions, Beza in his of the notes of the Church, the Confession
of Saxony in the Chapter of the Church, and many others do reckon diverse
articles, or every one whereof they pronounce Papists to be ^ut of the Church.
And because their opinion here^n is well enough known, and hereafter also we
shall have occasion to show how haynously they con^emne the Popedom or
Papistry, I will here re^earse no more of their sayings touching this point.
The like sentence they sometimes pronounce of the ^nabaptists Anabaptists.
and Atians. For thus speaks the con^ession of Auspurg Cap. 9. They condemn
the Anabap^^sts, who disallow the baptism of infants, and think them to ^^e
faned without baptism. And the Confession of Swit^erland cap. 20. We condemn
the Anabaptists, who deny ^at infants ought to be baptized. The same is
manifest by ^he English Confession c. 38. and by the Confession of ^asse c. 24.
and others. Of Arians Arrians.
they give this ver^ct in the foresaid Confession of Auspurg in the first
^rticle: They condemn all heresies risen against this article of the Trinity)
as the Manichees, Arians, Eunomians etc. and in like sort the French Confession
art. 6. the ^nglish art. 1. the consent of Poland, and others; in (...) much as
in England the Protestants have burnt me Arians.

3. Sometimes also they thrust out all here^ckes. Heretics
For thus writes Luther in his explication of ^e Creed. Neither Gentile, Jew,
Heretic, Luthera^s.
or any sinner is ^ued, unless he make atonement with the Church, and in all
^ings, think, do, and teach the same. And the Magde^^rgians in the preface of
their 6. Century: Neither ^eretikes, nor deuisers or patrons of sanaticall
opinions, are of ^^rist, but they are of Antichrist, and of the devil, and
apper^^ne to Antichrist and the devil: they are the impostume and ^^e plague
of the people of God. The ministers of the Prince Elector of Saxony in the
Conference held at Aldburg, in the 3. writ, cast out of the Church all, Who
(say they) wittingly and willingly defend such corruptions of doctrine, as have
been condemned by the lawful judgment and consent of the Catholic Church. And
the Ministers of the Duke of Saxony in the 4. writ of the said Conference,
pronounce this sentence: Whosoever they are, that do cloak and defend
corruptions of the word of God, that is, of the articles of faith, after they
have been admonished; we judge not to be true members of Christ, unless they
repent. And Vrbanus Regius, one of the first and chiefest scholars of Luther,
in his Catechism says: All Heretics are out of the Church. The same teaches
Schusselburg, a principal superintendent amongst the Lutherans in his
Catalogue of heresies, and many others. As for the Sacramentaries,
Sacrame^taries.
thus professes the French Confession in the 6. article: We detest all Sects
and heresies which have been rejected by the holy Fathers as S. Hilary, S.
Athanasc, S. Ambrose, S. Cyrill. Whereupon Sadeel in his preface of his answer
to the abiured articles, says: Our Confession of faith condemns all
Heretics. Likewise the Confession of Basle in 24. article writes in thi^
sort: We drive away all, whosoever dissenting from the society of the holy
Church, do either bring in, or follow strange and wicked doctrines. And Peter
Martyr in his Common places, in the title of heretics: This in sum I will say
heretics are not otherwise to be dealt with all, then Infidells (...) Jews.
Calvin also in his 2. book of Institution cap. 15. number. 1. Rightly Augustine
denies Heretics have the same foundation with the godly albeit they preach
t^^ name of Christ. And in his instruction against the Libertines: That we may
speak properly, Heretics are not only like to wolves or thieves, but much
worse. Beza in his boo^ of punishing Heretics: If one term Heretics saithle^
apostatas, he shall give them their due title. And again: Heretics affirm
Christ in word, and deny him indeed. Danaeus in his 5. Controversy and 691.
page An heretic, condemned by lawful judgment, and actually cast out of the
Church, is not of the visible Church, nor of the invisible neither, actually or
apparently, so long as he remains in that state. Polanus in his 7. book
which he terms Syntagma, cap. 5. Heretics, whiles they remain such are not
members of the Catholic Church. And Vorstius in his Anti-bellarmin page 79.
The Ghospellers do esteem Antichrist in common to be every heretic who
opposes himself either openly and plainly, or closely and indirectly to
Christ and his doctrine. And in the 121. page There is no controversy between
us and our adversaries touching heretics, Schismatikes and Apostatas properly
and truly so called, that they are altogether out of the Church of Christ.
Thus foreign Protestants. In England, English Protestants.
his Majesty in his epistle to Cardinal Peron written by Casaubon: The King
damneth and detesteth those, who either have departed from the says of the
Catholic Church, and are become heretics, or from the Communion, and are
become Schismatikes. The Apology of the Church of England part. 3. diuis. 3.
We condemn all sorts of the old heretics, as the Arians, the Eutichians etc.
and shortly, all them that have a wicked opinion either of God the Father, or
of Christ, or of the holy Ghost, or of any other point of Christian Religion:
for so much as they be confuted by the Gospel of Christ we plainly pronounce
them for damnable and detestable persons, and defy them even to the devil. D.
Whitaker in the preface of his Controversies: If we be heretics, it is reason
they should warn all theirs to fly from us. And Controuer. 2. question. 1.
cap. 4. That he proves heretics and Apostatas and Schismatikes not to be
members of the true Church makes nothing against us. None of our men ever
taught that. The like he has question 5. cap. 1. and 18. D. Sutliue in his
first book of the Church cap. 1. Heretics are not of the Church. D. Morton in
his Apology 1. part. 1. book cap. 3 affirms, that Heretics are not to be
accounted of the church in truth but in name, not indeed but equiuocally.
Finally D. White in his way to the Church page 110. All heretics teach the
truth in some things, and yet we deny them to be the Church of God. And in the
defense of the same way cap. 8. sect. 1. There is little or no difference
between the Devil and an Apostata, or Heretic.

4. The same censure they sometimes give of Schismatikes, They exclude
Schismatiks.
as appears by the words of his Majesty, D. Whitaker, and Vorstius already
rehearsed. Besides, Luther in his great Catechism tom. 5. page 628. affirms
the sense of that article, The Communion of Saints, to be this: I believe that
there is on earth a little Congregation of Saints, agreeing in all things
without sects or Schisms. And Melancthon in his book against Swenfeild tom.
2. Luthera^s.
page 201. Neither is there more then one Church, the Spouse of Christ, neither
does this company consist of diverse Sects. Solomon Gesnerus in his Common
places the 24. place of the Church: Catholics are opposite to Schismatikes and
heretics. The same teaches Schusselburg in his 8. tome of the Catalogue of
heretics, page 726. 727. Amongst the Sacramentaries, the Switzers in their
Confession, Sacrame^taries.
article 17. do thus profess; We so much esteem the Communion with the true
Church of Christ, as that we teach, that those cannot live before God, who
communicate not with his true Church. And the French Protestants in theirs,
article 26. We believe, that none can lawfully withdraw themselves from the
assemblies. Bullinger in his Epitome or Compendium of faith 6. book, 11. cap:
They be out of this Church, wh^ upon envy or contention separate themselves
from her, and without cause will have some thing peculiar to themselves.
Musculus also in his common places, in the title of the church: The unity of
Heretics and Schismatikes is bastard and divided. True, entier, and Catholic
unity is not among Schismatikes. And in the title of Schismatikes: A
Schismatike puts himself in danger of loss of his salvation, in departing
from the Communion of the flock of the Lord. For by that departure, he is not
only separated and divided from that Ecclesiastical and external society of
the faithful, but also from participation of the blood and spirit of Christ.
Calvin likewise in his treatise of the necessity of reforming the Church: We
do profess the unity of the Church, such as is described by S. Paul, to be
most dear unto us; and we accurse all them, that shall any way violate it. And
in his fourth book of Institutions chap. 1. numb. 2: Unless under Christ our
head, we be united to all the rest of his members, there is no hope for us of
the everlasting inheritance. For we cannot have two or three (Churches) unless
Christ be torn in pieces. And number. 4. Out of the lap the Church there is no
salvation: departure from thence is always pernicious. Again number. 10: God
makes so great account of the Communion with his Church as he holds him for
a renagate and fugitive, whosoever obstinatly separateth himself from any
Christian society, which retains the true use of the word and Sacraments. And
he adds, that the forsaking of the Church, Is the denial of God and Christ.
The like doctrine he delivers in his Catechism, upon the 1. Cor. cap. 1. and
other where Polanus in his Theses part. 2. says: Schismatic Churches are to
be forsaken. And Bucanus in his places, loc. 41. of the Church, quest. 33.
avouches Schismatiks to be out of the Church, and quest. 5. that they are not
univocally a Church, that is, they have not the true nature of a Church. The
same says Danaeus in his treatise of Antichrist cap. 17. And in his 3. book
of the Church cap. 5. writes thus: Schisma^ikes actually excommunicated and
cast out of the Church by lawful sentence, are no more of the visible Church.
For (says he) the mark that you be of the visible Church, is this, that you
outwardly profess the faith, and communicate in Sacraments with the rest of
the Church. And he adds, that such are neither actually of the invisible
Church, but only in possibility, and that the holy Fathers liken suc^ to
Heathens. Pagans, and infidells. And in his Apology for the Switzers Churches
he defines Schism to be a separation from the rest of the body of the
Catholic Church. Zanchius also in his treatise of the Church cap. 7. reaches,
that Schismatikes are not in the Church. And su^us in his 3. book of the
Church c. 5. approves the fame of such Schismatikes, as separate themselves
from the whole Church. The strangers in England writing to Beza in the 24
epistle have these words in their 13. article: Whosoever is lawfully
excommunicated of a particular Church, or cutteth himself of upon unlawful
causes, and with scandal, in that does loose all privilege of the Catholic
Church. And Beza answers them in the name of the Church of Geneua in this
manner: Your thirteenth article we wholly receive at most orthodoxall. Casaubon
in his 15. exercitation against Baronius number. 6. It is an undoubted truth, that
how often soever a pious flock is joined to a true Bishop, there is a Church of
God; in so much that if any forsake that Church, it cannot be doubted, but that
he is out of the Church. Finally, Chamier in his epistle to Armand, excludes
Schismatikes out of the Church, because (says he) they want the sincerity of
the Sacraments. English Protestants
Amongst our English Protestants, his Majesty in his foresaid epistle to
Cardinal Peron. All those testimonies of Augustine, prove only this, that there
is no hope of salvation for those, who leave the Communion of the Catholic
Church; which the King willingly grants. D. Whitaker in his 2. controuer. 5.
quest. 6. cap. says: It is false, that heretical and Schismatic Churches
be true Churches. Again: The Catholic Church consists not of divided, but
of united members. And cap. 2: The true and Catholic Church is that, which
consists of Catholics. D. Fulke in his book of the succession of the Church:
What auailed it them to eternal salvation, to have been sound in Religion and
doctrine, seeing they were cut of from the Communion of the true Church, in
which alone salvation is, and from her true head? What skilleth it whether
one, being drawn by heresy or Schism, from the body of Christ, be subject to
everlasting damnation? D. Humfrey in his answer to the 3. reason of F.
Campian: We confess, that he is undone, who is separated from the followship
of the Church. And D. Field in his first book of the Church, cap. 7: The name
of the Catholic Church is applied to distinguish men holding the says in
unity, from Schismatiks. And in his 2. book c. 2. he says, that Schismatikes
are not Catholic Christians. Thus we see how Protestants sometimes do teach,
that the true Church consists of Catholics, and of members united not
divided, that it has no Schisms or Sects: That Schismatiks are not Catholics,
that their unity is not true, nor Catholic, that their Churches ought to be
forsaken, that they are not univocally Churches, nor true Churches, that they
are not members of the true Church, but out of the Church, altogether out of
the Church, and actually neither of the visible nor invisible Church, and that
this is an undoubted truth: which confession of theirs must be well noted and
kept in mind, for thereby is overthrown (as we shall see in the 2. book)
their only argument wherewith they endeavor to prove, that their Church was
before Luther, and also is defaced their only essential mark of finding the
true Church, by the truth of doctrine. For Schismatikes (as we shall hear them
confess in the 2. book) hold true doctrine, and nevertheless (as here they
acknowledge) are not of the true Church.

They exclude those that deny any fundame^tal article.
5. In like manner they do commonly debar from their Church, all such as deny
any principal or fundamental point of faith; Melancthon in his book of
common places in the title of the Church: They are not members of the Church
who pertinaciously maintain errors opposite to the foundation. And in his
answer to the Bauarian articles: Saints may have errors, but not such as
overthrow the foundation. In his examen of those that are to take orders:
Agreement in the foundation, Luthera^s.
is a thing necessary to the unity of the Church. And upon the 3. cap. of the
1. epistle to Timothy: The foundation is held in the Church, otherwise there
should be no Church at all. And in his 79. proposition, tom. 4: It is most
certain, that those companies are not the Church of God, who either are
altogether ignorant of the Gospel, or impugn some article of the
foundation, that is, some article of faith or doctrine of the decalogue, or
maintain open idols. Chemnitius in his common places pa. 3. title of the
Church: Neither can these be acknowledged for the true Church, who embrace
fundamental errors. And the Lutherans in the conference at Ratisbon, Ses. 14.
Hutter in his Analysis of the Confession of Auspurg, Gesner in his 24. place,
Adam Francis in his 11. place, and other Lutherans commonly agree, that the
Church cannot err Fundamentally, or in the Foundation. And the Confession of
Saxony gives this note, to know who are in the Church: Sacrame^taries.
Those who hold the Foundation. As for Sacramentaries, Calvin in his 4. book
of Institutions cap. 2. number 1: So soon as a lie has broken into the castle of
Religion, the sum of necessary doctrine is inuerted, the use of Sacraments is
fallen, certainly the destruction of the Church ensues, even as a man's life is
lost, when his throat is cut, or his vital parts deadly wounded. And soon
after: It is certain, that there is no Church, where lies and error have
gotten to the top. And cap. 19. number. 17: Without doubt the Church of the
faithful must agree in all the heads of our Religion. Sadeel in his answer to
the Theses held at Posna cap. 12: I think the matter is thus to be defined by
the word of God, that if any in what Church soever dissent in the foundation of
says, and be obstinate in their errors: such appertain not to the unity of
the Church. The like he has in his answer to Arthure, cap. 12. Vesinu^ in his
Catechism quest. 54. cap. 4: The whole Church erreth not, nor wholly, nor in
the foundation. Polanus in his Thesis of the Church says: The Church erreth
not in the foundation. The same teaches Zanchius in his treatise of the Church
c. 7. Lubbertus in his 2. book of the Church c 3. Vorstius in his
Anti-bellarmin page 139. Bucanus in his 41. place, and other Sacramentaries
commonly. And with them herein agree our English Protestants. English
Protestants
For thus says his Majesty in his epistle to Cardinal Peron: The Churches are
united in unity of says and doctrine, in those heads which are necessary to
salvation. And D. Whitaker in the preface of his Controversies: The foundations
of says are of that nature, that one being shaken, nothing in all religion
remains sound. And Contr. 2. quest. 4. cap. 1: We say, that the Church cannot
err in things simply necessary. Which he often repeateth in the 2. cap. And
quest. 5. cap. 17: If any fundamental doctrine be taken away, the Church
straight way falls. And cap. 18: The fundamental articles are those, on
which our faith relyeth, as the house upon the foundation. Again: If any
fundamental and essential principle of faith be ouerturned or shaken, it
cannot be truly called a Church. And quest. 6. cap. 3: That is no true Church
which takes away one only foundation. The same he teaches in his 1. book of
the scripture cap. 7. sect. 8. and cap. 12. sect. 3. M. Perkins in his
explication of the Creed: If any man or Church, retain, or defend, obstinatly,
or of wilful ignorance, a fundamental error, we must not account them
anymore Christians or Churches. D. Sutliue in his first book of the Church
cap. 1: Those blemishes take away the name of the true Church, which are
against the grounds of faith. D. Field in his 2. book of the Church cap. 3:
Purity free from fundamental and essential error, is necessarily required in
the Church. D. Morton in the 1. part o^ his Apology, book 2. cap 38: Purity of
doctrine in fundamental principles of faith, is required to the being and
constitution of the Church. And in his answer to the Protestants Apology l. 4.
c. 3. Sect. 5: The denial of fundamental doctrines, does exclude men from
salvation, and disannulleth the name of the Church in the gainsayers. D. White
in his way to the Church page 110: We do not think every company to be the
true Church, that holds only some points of the true faith: but it is
requisite that the foundation be holden. And in his defense of the way cap. 17:
A fundamental point is that which belongs to the substance of faith, and is so
necessary that there can be no salvation without the knowledge and explicit
faith thereof. And surely they all, and at all times, ought to affirm this,
seeing they deliver truth of doctrine, as an essential mark of the Church,
which they must needs understand (and so Vorstius in his Anti-bellarmin page
148. expresses it) of true doctrine in fundamental points. And this their
doctrine touching this matter, I earnestly commend to the memory of the Reader,
because it is necessary to find out, what a Protestant is, and also is one of
the grounds, whereby it may appear, that there was no Protestant Church before
Luther, because before him there was no company which held all the same
fundamental points of doctrine which Protestants do hold.

6. Finally; They exclude all that deny any article of faith.
they sometyms shut out of their Church all those, who deny any one point of
faith, be it fundamental or other. For thus writes the Apology of the
Confession of Auspurge: The Church of Christ is not among them, who defend
naughty opinions, contrary to the Gospel. And Luther in his epistle to Count
Albert: It is not enough, if in other things he confess Christ and his
Gospel. For who denies Christ in one article or word, denies him, who is
denied in all, because there is but one Christ, Luthera^s.
the same in all his words. And upon the 17. cap. of Deuteronomy: Faith
suffers nothing, and the word tolerateth nothing, but the word must be
perfectly pure, and the doctrine always sound throughout. And upon the 17.
cap. of S. Matthew: Faith must be round, that is, believing all articles,
though small ones. For who belieueth not one article rightly, belieueth nothing
righly, as James says, Who offends in one, is guilty of all: and so who in
one article doubts or belieueth not (at least obstinatly) dissolueth the
roundnes of the grain, and so can do no good. And upon the 5. cap. to the
Galathians: In divinity a small error overthrows all the doctrine. Doctrine
is like to a Mathematical point, it cannot be divided, that is, it cannot
suffer either addition or detraction. And when Zuinglius and his followers
desired of the Lutherans to be esteemed as their brethren, Melancthon (as
Hospinian reports in his Sacramentarian history fol. 81.) roughly said unto
them: We marvel with what conscience they can account us for brethren, whom
they judge to err in doctrine. And again fol. 82. Luther gravely spoke unto
them, saying: he greatly merueiled how they could hold him for a brother, if
they thought his doctrine to be untrue. And the same Melancthon together with
Brentius writes thus to the Lantgraue: Perhaps Christians, who are entangled
in some error, which they do not obstinatly defend, may be tolerated as
brethren, but they which not only bring false doctrine into the Church, but
also maintain it, are not to be acknowledged for brethren. And again
Melancthon in his examen of those who are to take orders, tom. 3. There are in
that company (of the Church) many who are not Saints, but yet agreeing in
doctrine. The Deuines of Wittemberg in their refutation of the orthodoxall
consent page 73: Like as he who keeps the whole law and offends in one (as
James the Apostle witnesses) is guilty of all: so who belieueth not one word
of Christ, albeit he seem to beliue the other articles of the Creed, yet
belieueth nothing, and is to be damned as incredulous. For every heretic did
not impugn every article of faith, but commonly each of them of purpose
impugned some one or other, whom nevertheless the Church justly condemned as
heretics, if they pertinaciously stood in their errors. Schusselburg also in
his 3. tom. of the Catalogue of Heretics, page 85. Christian faith is one
copulative, and who denies one article of faith, calls in doubt the whole
body of the heavenly doctrine. Which he repeateth again in the next page And
tome 8. page 361: The Lutherans do fly him, who depraueth the doctrine of truth
in any article whatsoever. And in his 2. book of Caluinisticall divinity,
article 1: We are certain by the testimony of Gods word, that an error in
one false doctrine, obstinatly defended, makes an heretic. For S. Chrysostom
upon the epistle to the Galathians said most truly, that he corrupts the
whole doctrine who overthrows it in the least article. And Ambrose wrote
rightly to the Virgin Demetrias, That he is out of the number of the faithful,
and has no part in the inheritance of Saints, who disagreeth in any thing from
the Catholic truth. Sacrame^taries.
Thus the Lutherans. Peter Martyr in his epistle to the strangers in England
tom. 2. loc. col. 136: We answer, all the words of God, as far forth as
they proceeded from him, are of equal weight and authority, and therefore none
may receive this, and reject that as false. James says boldly, who sins in
one, becomes guilty of all. That, if it have place in keeping of the
commandments, is also true in points of faith. Sadeel in his index of Turria^s
Repetitions page 806: I said, that it was no true Church, which teaches
doctrine repugnant to the written word of God. And his Majesty in his Monitory
epistle page 97. English Protesta^t^
in Latin: I call God to witness, that I hold him not for a Christian who in
this learned age belieueth that. (to wit, that Enoch and Elias are to come.)
And D. Morton in his answer to the Protestants Apology lib. 4. c. 2. sect. 3.
after he had said, that in a Church, albeit corrupted with error and
superstition, yet if it do not ruinate the foundation, the erroneous and
superstitious professors may be saved, adddeth: Which notwithstanding we must
so understand, as that the error and superstition do not proceed from
knowledge but from ignorance, which ignorance is not affected but simple. Thus
we see that Protestants somtymes confess that true faith is like a grain, or
Mathematical point, which cannot be parted; that the articles of faith are one
copulative, and cannot be divided, that who so obstinatly denies one article,
belieueth, truly, none; that the obstinate denial of any one point of faith is
sufficient to damn, or to make an heretik, and no brother of the faithful, or
member of the Church. And finally, that she is no true Church, who wilfully
maintains any one thing repugnant to the Gospel or word of God. Which
indeed is most true, and is the doctrine of the holy Fathers and Catholics, and
I would to God Protestants would constantly stand unto it.

7. By all, which has been rehearsed in this chapter out of Protestants, it
appears how many sorts of Christians, Protestants do sometimes exclude out
of the Church, namely Papists, Anabaptists, Arians, al Heretics, all
Schismatiks, all those, who deny any fundamental point of faith, and finally
al who obstinatly deny any point whatsoever of faith, or of the word of God.
And how many things they sometimes require to the making and being of a
Protestant, to wit, that he believe all and every point of their faith, and
obstinatly dissent in none. To which their doctrine, if they would (as I have
said) always constantly stand, it would easily appear, first how small a
company the Protestants Church is, and how little it is spread through the
world, and much less Catholic or universal, seeing there is no Province, nor
scarce any city, in which all Protestants agree amongst themselves in all
points of their doctrine. Secondly it would easily appear that the Protestant
Church was never before Luther, seeing there is no appearance, that before him
there was any company of Christians who in all points of doctrine agreed with
Protestants. But Protestants (as I said in the Preface) accommodate their
doctrine and opinions to times and occasions. And the times, when they deny
Papists to be of the Church, are when they exhort them to leave the Roman
Church, or excuse their own reuolting from her, or when they dehort others
from returning to her. For at all these times, it serves to their purpose to
deny that Papists are of the Church, or in the way of salvation; which at other
times, as we shall see in the next chapter, they are content to grant. And the
times when they exclude Anabaptists, Arians, Heretics, Schismatiks, and all
that deny either fundamental or other articles of faith, out of the Church,
are, when either the evidence of truth enforces them thereto, or when they are
ashamed to acknowledge such ugly monsters for brethren and members of their
Church, or would exhort such as have left their company to return unto them,
and keep others from forsaking them: or finally would brag of the agreement and
purity in doctrine of their company. For at those times it serves their turn
to renounce all the foresaid kind of men, whom at other times, especially when
we demand of them, who were of their Church before Luther, they are most
willing to receive, as their kind brethren; diligently scraping and gathering
such shreeds and clouts, when they perceive their own nakedness and beggary,
which themselves, when they thought they were rich and had no need thereof,
most disdainfully cast on the dunghills, as shall appear in the chapters
following.

CHAP. II. That Protestants sometimes account Papists for members of their
Church.
IN the former chapter we have seen how sparing Protestants sometyms be in
admitting others into their Church, now we shall see how liberal they be at
other times, in so much that they grant, not only all those, whom in the
former chapter they rejected, but also their professed enemies, idolaters,
Infidells, Atheists, Antichrist himself, and all, whosoever under the name of
Christians, impugn the deeds or doctrine of the Pope, to be their brethren,
their fellows, and members of their Church. This we will show concerning the
Papists in this chapter, and of the others afterward.

1. That Protestants sometimes do acknowledge Papists to be in the Church is
manifest. First by their open confession thereof. Luthera^s.
For in the preface of their Confession of Auspurg, speaking of themselves and
Papists, Papists serve under christ.
they say: We are all soldiers under one Christ. And Luther in his epistle
against the Anabaptists (as Calvin in his book against the Chaunter of Lions,
and D. Whitaker in the place hereafter cited do confess) writes: The kernel
of Christianity in Popery.
That in Popery is true Christianity, yea the kernel of Christianity, and many
pious and great Saints. Again: If Christianity be under the Pope, then it must
be the body and member of Christ. And upon the 28. chapter of Genesis: We
confess, that there is a Church among the Papists, because they have Baptism,
absolution, the text of the Gospel, and many godly men are among them. Calvin
in his 140. epistle to Sozi^: I think I have sufficiently proved, that in
Popery there remains some Church, albeit half destroyed, and if you will,
broken and deformed. And upon the 2. c^ap. of the 2 epistle to the
Thessalonians: The Body of Christ
I confess it is the temple of God, in which the Pope rules, and he calls
it the very sanctuary of God And, de vera reform. page 332. Sacrame^taries.
^ayth, that S Paul affirms that Antichrist (whom he will have to be the
Pope) shall sit in the temple of God. And lib. de scandalis page 103: In the
midest of Gods temple. And lib. cont. Precentorem page 372: In the very
sanctuary of God. And Respons. ad Sadolet: In the midest of Gods sanctuary.
Surely this is to grant, that the Roman Church, in which the Pope sits, is
the very temple and very sanctuary of God. And in his answer to Sadolet: We
deny not those to be Churches of Christ, which you govern. In his 4. book of
Institutions, chap. 2. number. 11. he says, that among Papists Gods covenant
remained inviolable. Not yet killed.
And number. 12 We deny not, that there are Churches among them. Neither deny we,
but there remain Churches under his (the Pope he means) tyranny, but which
he has almost killed. Iunius in his book of the Church, cap. 17. writes that
the Popish Church, as far as it has that which belongs to the definition
of a Church, is a Church; that it has not given up the ghost, that it has all
divine things, Not yet dead
and of Gods part is yet the Church. Zanchius in the preface of his book of
the nature of God: Satan even in the very Roman Church could not bring all
things to that pass, that it should no more have the form of a Christian
Church. And soon after: Wherefore the Roman Church is yet the Church of
Christ. Yet the Church of Christ.
P^essy in his book of the Church 2. chap. avouches, that the Roman Church is
the Spouse of Christ, Spouse of Christ.
is not yet forsaken of him, that as a Mother, she bears children to God
(which he repeateth again in the 10. chap.) that she retains life, and that
the name of the Church ought no more to be denied to her, then the name of a
man unto a living man. Bucan in his 41. place of the Church, quest. 5: The
assemblies of Papists are Churches, as a man infected with leprosy or besides
his wits, does not leave to be a man. Polanus in his first part and Thesis of
the Church: The Roman Church truly is a Church; because Antichrist sits in
the Church. And in his Syntagme of divinity lib. 7. c. 8: The present Roman
Church is yet the Church of Christ. Serauia in his defense of the degrees of
ministers, page 30: The Roman Church, is a Church, and mark what I say more,
she is our mother, in whom and by whom, God did regenerate us. And page 31:
The covenant of God remains this day in the Latin Church. Boysseul in his
confutation of Sponde page 6: I exclude not the Roman Church out of the
universal Church. I acknowledge her to be yet in the covenant of God; which he
repeateth oftentimes. And page 12: The Roman Church, is the Church of God. Page
19: It is a member of the universal Church. p. 283: It is yet the Church,
Spouse and temple of God. Yet the Church Spouse and temple of God.
And page 822: We deny not, that the Roman Church is the Church of Jesus
Christ, redeemed by him. Vorstius in his Anti-bellarmin p. 188: The vulgar
Roman church has not yet lost all spiritual life, is not yet openly deuorced
from Christ. And Peter Martyr in his epistle to Bullinger, writes, Yet alive.
that he gave counsel, that the Papists and they should not call one the
other Heretics, but account themselves for brethren. As for English
Protestants, Engli h Protestants
his Majesty in his speech to the Parliament, anno 1605. 9. of November, and put
forth in print, speaks thus: We do justly confess, that many Papists,
especially our forefathers laying their only trust upon Christ and his merits,
may be, and oftentimes are saved; detesting in that point, and thinking the
cruelty of Puritans worthy of fire, Papists may be saved.
that will admit no salvation to any Papist. And in his epistle to Cardinal
Peron: The Roman, the Greek etc. Churches, are members of the Catholic Church.
Members of the Catholic Church.
And D. Andrews in his Tortura Torti toward the end, speaks thus to the
Papists: We are content to call you members of the Catholic Church, though
not sound members. Hooker in his 3. book of Ecclesiastical policy page 128:
We gladly acknowledge them to be of the family of Jesus Christ. Of the family
of Christ.
And lib. 5. page 188: They should acknowledge so much nevertheless still due to
the same Church (of Rome) as to be held and reputed a part of the house of God,
a limme of the visible Church of Christ. D. Couel in his defense of Hooker page
68. May be saved. Note.
says: We affirm them of the Church of Rome, to be parts of the Church of
Christ, and that those that live and dye in that Church, may notwithstanding be
saved. D. Barlow in his 3. sermon ad Clerum: The learneder writers do
acknowledge the Church of Rome, to be the Church of God. M. Bunny in his
treatise of Pacification, sect. 18: Neither of us (Papists and Protestants) may
justly account the other to be none of the Church of God. We are no several
Church from them, nor they from us. D. Some against Penry in diverse places
auouceth, That Papists are not altogether aliens from Gods covenant. That in
the judgment of all learned men, and all reformed Churches, there is in Popery
a Church, a Ministry, a true Christ: If you think that all the Popish sect
which dyed in the Popish Church, are damned, you think absurdly, and dissent
from the judgment of the learned Protestants. D. Whitaker in his fourth
controversy quest. 5. cap. 3. calls the Papists Church, the temple of God,
more then half dead, and almost decayed. And that temple, wherein the Apostle
says, that Antichrist shall sit, and which he affirms to be the Roman
Church, he terms the very Church of God, the true Church of God, the society
of the faithful, the lively temple composed of lively stones; such as are the
faithful and the elect. And he adds: There is among them (Papists) some
Ministry and some preaching of the word, which doubtless affords salvation
unto some. And as the gifts of God are without repentance; so the covenant
which God made with Christian people, is not quite broken. And cont. 2. quest.
5. Gods covenant with Papists.
cap. 15. after he had confessed, that Luther had said, that in Popery are all
the goods belonging to Christians, the keys, the office of preaching, true
Christianity, and the very kernel of Christianity; he adds: These things are
indeed among them. M. Powell in his 2. book of Antichrist, cap. 2. grants
the Roman Church to be the true Church, albeit with a new kind of distinction
he deny the Popish church. And D. Rainolds in his 5. Thesis, albeit he say that
the Roman Church be more then sickly and weak, yet he dares not say that she is
quite dead. And D. White in his way, p. 352. says, That Popery in as much as
it differs from us, is not to be imagined by us to be another Church distinct
in place and countries from the true Church of Christ: but we affirm it to be
a contagion, raging in the midst of the Church of Christ it self. And in his
defense c. 37. page 355: I never denied the Church of Rome to be the visible
Church of God, wherein our ancestors professed the truth, and were saved. And
cap. 41. page 408: Professing the Church of Rome it self in all ages, to have
been the visible Church of God. Lastly D. Hall in his Rome Irreconciliable sect.
1. says, that the Roman Church is a true visible Church, but not sound, and
that it differs from the Protestant Church, At the sick from the whole.
Heereto I add, that oftentimes they call the Roman Church their Mother, which
has borne them to Christ, as we shall rehearse hereafter, and that before
Luthers time they seek their Church in Popery, and amongst the Papists.

2. Secondly I prove this same out of that which diverse times they grant,
that the Roman Church holds all the fundamental articles of faith, That
Papists hold the foundation of faith.
which themselves commonly teach (as hereafter shall be showed) to suffice to
make a Church. Their Confession of Auspurg in the 21. chapter has these wodrs:
This is almost the sum of doctrine among us, in which as it may seem, there
is nothing which differs from scripture, or from the Catholic Church, or
from the Roman Church, Luthera^s
so far as it appears by writers. All the dissension is about some few
abuses, which have crept into Churches without certain authority. Whereby we
see that the first and auncientest Protestants, The su^me of faith in Pope^y.
publikly professed, that they differed not from the Roman Church in the sum
of doctrine; but that all their disagreement was about some few abuses. And
albeit the words be somewhat altered in the printed copies; yet that they were
in the original copy which was presented to Charles 5. Emperor, is manifest
by Fabritius, who repeateth them so out of that copy; by Pappus, in his 3,
defense against Sturmius, who so also reports them; by Zanchius in his
dispute between two Deuines, where he repeateth these words out of the said
Confession: There is nothing in our doctrine which differs from the church of
Rome, as far as it is known by writers: and finally by Hieremias Patriarch of
Constantinople in his censure upon the said Confession, it being sent unto him
by the Protestants, where he thus writes to them: Ye say, ye agree in all
things with the Latins, Cocleus anno 1^28 Vse^berg. causa 17.
and that the difference betwixt you and them, is only touching some abuses:
likewise Luther in his foresaid epist. cont. Anabap: We confess that in Popery
is much good belonging to Christians, yea all Christian good, All Christian
good.
to wit, that in Popery is the true Scripture, true baptism, the true
Sacrament of the altar, the true keys for remission of sins, the true office
of preaching, the true Catechism, as the Lords prayer, the ten commandments,
and the articles of faith. Whereupon Schusselburg in his 8. tome of the
Catalogue of heretics page 439. says: We deny not but that Luther said that
all Christian goods are in Popery, What was needful to salvation.
and came from thence unto us John Regius in his consideration of the censure
etc: Albeit the Ministry of Papists be corrupted with many traditions and
inventions of men, yet it had that which was necessary to salvation, to wit the
Canonical scripture, the Creed etc. Leonard Cren^zen: The bishop of Rome
holds the same foundation of the Catholic faith 1. Cor. 3. The foundation of
Faith.
which I and the Catholic Apostolik Church do acknowledge, although there be
some difference of opinions in certain circumstances Thus the Lutherans. Of
the Sacramentaries, Sacrame^taries.
Iunius in his 5. controversy lib. 3. cap. 19. writes thus of Papists,
Lutherans, and Caluinists: We agree in the essential foundation. Essential
foundation.
Zanchius in his foresaid preface: In despite of the Devil that Church (of
Rome) has kept the principal grounds of faith. Principal grounds of faith.
Boysseul also in his forenamed confutation page 79: We acknowledge that it is
pure in the chief articles of Christian Religion. And Vorstius in his
Anti-bellarmin page 188. It is manifest that there are many in that company (of
Papists) who rightly hold the fundamental points The fundamental points.
of our Religion. And of the English Protestants, his Majesty in his monitory
epistle page 148. plainly intimates that Papists do stick unto the ancient
foundations of the old true Catholic and Apostolic faith M. Hooker in his 3.
book of Ecclesiastical policy page 128. says: Touching those maine points of
Christian truth, wherein they constantly still persist, English Protestants
we gladly acknowledge them to be of the family of Jesus Christ. D. Whitaker in
his 2. cont. quest. 5. cap. 14: Papists have the Scripture, Baptism,
Catechism, the articles of faith, the ten commandments, the Lords prayer; The
main points.
and those things came to us from them. D. Whitgift in his answer to the
admonition page 40: Papistry confesses the same articles of faith that we do,
although not sincerely. And page 62: Papists believe the same articles of faith
that we do. M. Perkins in the preface of his reformed Catholic: By a reformed
Catholic I understand any one that holds the same necessary heads of Religion,
with the Roman Church, The necessary heads.
yet so as he pares of, and reiects all errors in doctrine, whereby the said
religion is corrupted. D. Morton in his answer to the Protestants Apology lib.
3. cap. 18. sect. 1: We may grant, that God may cooperate with them to the
conversion of Infidels, The gospel of salvation.
so far as the Gospel of Christ, which is the power of God to salvation, is
preached by them. D. White in defense of his way cap. 38: In the substantial
articles of faith, we agree with them. Lastly D. Hall in his foresaid book
says, The substantial articles.
that the Roman Church is one touching the common principles of faith. Those
things which she holds together with us, make a Church. As far as she
holds the foundation, she is a church.

3. Thirdly, the same point is proved, The articles which make a Church.
by that they grant some to be saints, whom they acknowledge also to have
lived and died Papists. For of S. Bernards holiness thus writes Luther upon the
4. cap. to the Galathians: Bernard a man so holy, pious, chaste, etc. The
Apology of the Confession of Auspurg in the chapter of answer to the
Arguments: Antony, Bernard, That they say some Papists be saints.
Francis, Dominicke, and other holy Fathers. Brentius in his Apology for the
Confession of Wirtenberg page 297: I judge Bernard to have been a man endued
with great piety, and to live now happily with Christ. Calvin in his 4. book
of institutions c. 7. number. 22: Gregory and Bernard holy men. Vorstius in
Anti-bellarmin page 181: We grant Bernard indeed to have been pious. Lubbert
in his 6. book of the church c. 7: We think Bernard to have been truly holy.
D. Whitaker cont. 3. quest. 5. c. 14: I take Bernard to have been holy indeed.
And D. Morton in his Apology part. 2. lib. 2. c. 23: I confess Bernard was a
Saint. And as plainly do they confess that he was a Papist. For thus Luther in
the place now cited: Let us imagine that Religion and discipline of the ancient
Popery to flourish now, and to be observed with that rigor, with which the
Eremits, Hierome, Augustine, Bernard, Francis, and many others observed it. And
in his book of abrogating Mass: Bernard, Bonauenture, Francis, Dominicke,
with their followers, not knowing the Pope, did honor his Kingdom; believing
all things thereof to be good and just, and of God. The Magdeburgians in their
12. Century col. 1637. speak thus of him: He worshipped the God of Ma^zim
(they mean the mass) till the last moment of his life. And in the next
column: He was a most eager defender of the seat of Antichrist. Melancthon in
his book of the Church, and upon the 14. cap. to the Romans: He yielded to
many errors, as to the Abuses of the Mass, to the Popes power, to vows, to
the worship of Saints. Danaeus in his controversies, page 313. says: He
approved the Popery. M. Jewel in his defense of the Apology 21. art. diuis. 8.
page 450: Bernard was a monck, and living in a time of such corruption, and
being carried with the tempest and violence of the same, must etc. Bale in his
2. century of writers page 177: He increased the authority of the bishop of
Rome, as much as he could. D. Field upon the 14. of S. Matthew: Bernard was
deceived with the error of Peter's superiority. And D. Whitaker in his answer
to the 7. reason of Father Campian: Bernard, whom alone your church in many
years has brought forth a holy man. And in his 4. controversy quest. 2. c.
17. he affirms that he endeavors to confirm the Popes superiority. Seeing
therefore by the confession of Protestants, he was both an earnest Papist unto
his dying day, for all his life time he honored mass, believed the Popes
superiority (in which two points Protestants say the essence and soul of a
Papist does consist) and briefly believed all things belonging to the Pope to
come from God: and also was a very holy man, in his life time, and now a
blessed Saint in heaven; they must needs confess, that even the most vehement
Papist may be of the church; because neither true sanctity, nor salvation can
be found out of the church. Whereunto the Protestants in the late Conference at
Ratisbon Sess. 13. say: If they were truly saints, then their error was not of
that kind which ouerturneth the foundation. For it implies contradiction, that
one should be a true Saint, and yet foster error which ouerturneth the ground
of salvation. In like sort they grant diverse others to be true saints, and yet
withal Papists, but for breuities sake I will content my self with this
example of S. Bernard. But I will not omit to say, that they confess our
Christian forefathers before Luthers time to have been Papists, from the top to
the toe, from the first to the last, as shall be showed in the 2. book cap. 3.
and notwithstanding dare not say, that they be damned, yea confess them to be
saved. Luther in his book of private mass enquireth, what is to be thought of
our ancestors who have founded innumerable Masses; and answers: I cannot
tell certainly. But upon the 41. cap. of Genesis, he says: Doubtless many
have been saved under Popery. And upon the 5. of S. Matthew: Our Popish
forefathers saved.
Neither do we condemn the Christians who lived under the Pope. Brentius in
the preface of his Recognition: We doubt not, but that many have obtained true
salvation in Popery. Osiander in his Manual englished: We do not condemn our
godly ancestors who lived in time of Popery. Zuinglius in his acts of
disputation fol. 638: It is impious to pronounce our ancestors to be damned. D.
Morton in his Apology part. 1. l. 1. c. 90: Be this impiety far from us, to
adiudge our ancestors, to damnation. And D. White in his defense page 356: I
never denied the church of Rome to be the visible church of God, wherein our
ancestors possessed the true faith and were saved. But how could our Popish
ancestors be not damned, how could they be saved, unless they were in the true
church, out of which even Protestants themselves confess, that there is no
salvation, That they confess true mission and Pastors in Popery.
but only damnation.

4. Fourthly I prove that Protestants cannot deny Papists to be of the true
Church, because they oftentimes both by word and deed acknowledge the vocation
and Mission of Popish Pastors, to be lawful and sufficient to make a true
Pastor of the Church. Luther upon the 5. cap. of S. Matthew: We confess that
amongst Papists are pulpits, Baptism, Sacraments, and all other things
belonging to Apostolical vocation and function. And in his book or private
mass: There remains in Popery, Vocation, Ordination, Ministry of the word,
and keys to bind and loose. Again: Christ has conserved his Ministry under
Popery. And as is before cited: There is all Christian good in Popery, the
keys, the charge of preaching etc. John Regius in considerat. Censurae page
93: Although it be true that the Popish ministry was depraved with sundry
traditions and devises of men, yet had it those things which were necessary to
salvation. Bucer in Romans 8. page 427. telling us by what authority and right he
preached Protestantisme, says: I had by lawful means already attained the
charge to preach Christ, and to teach those things which he commanded. Iunius
lib. singulari de eccles. cap. 17: God calls the church wherein Popery
reigns, by his spirit, by his word, by the public instrument of that holy
marriage by the ministry, by sacred affairs and actions. On Gods part these
things are apparently in that church. Plessy lib. de Eccles. cap. 11. p. 361.
The vocation (of our men) is the same that they (the Papists) boast of. Page
362: Our adversaries and our first ministers had the same Ecclesiastical
calling. Boysseul in confutat. Spondaei page 486: It is no reproach for our
Pastors to have issued out of yours; or, as you say, to have had their vocation
from yours. Moulins lib. 1. de vocat. cap. 5. page 20. endeavoring to uphold
the calling of their first Reformers, says: They have that calling which is
ordinary in the church of Rome Pa. 21: They had their calling of the Pope. cap.
9. page 36: They have the same ordinary calling which our adversaries have. And
lib. 2. tract. 1. cap. 1. page 172: The calling they had in the church of Rome,
sufficed to bind them to preach. And page 173: Their commission was no other
then the ordinary charge. Serauia in defen. Grad. minist. cap. 2. page 31. We
ought not to think, that in the church of Rome ecclesiastical ministry is
decayed. And page 33: I like not their frowardnes, who acknowledge no ministry
in the church of Rome, but deem all that is there, devilish. Ibid: Beza does
exagitate Popish orders over much, wherein I fear least he prejudice a good
cause. D. Whitaker contr. 4. quest. 5. cap. 3. page 682: The Papists have some
sort of ministry, and some preaching of the word, which doubtless avails many
to salvation. And other where (as is before cited) Among the Papists there are
the keys, the office of preaching, etc. M. Bell in his first book of the
Popes funeral cap. 5. affirms that he had rejected only the accidents of his
Popish orders, but retained the substance still. M. Mason in his 5. book of
the ordination of ministers, cap. 12. says, that Popish ordination consistes
of two parts, to wit, of power to offer sacrifice, and of power to administer
the word and Sacraments, and albeit he rejects the former, yet the later he
approues, as that wherein true ministry consists. Sadeel respon. ad artic.
abiurat. 61. And Vorstius in Anti-bellarmin page 177. teach the same; and so
must all others do, who hold the mission of Luther and their first ministers to
have been ordinary, and received from the Papists: which opinion most
Protestants do now follow, retracting, upon better advise their former
assertion, and confessing that the mission of their new Reformers, was not in
substance extraordinary. And their deeds and actions do no less declare their
approbation and esteem of the mission and Pastoral charge which is in the
church of Rome. For as Turrian reports lib. 2. de Eccles. cap. 3. and Luther
intimates tom. 2. epist. ad Bohemos, when the Catholic Bishops give orders,
the Hussites of Bohemia steal in privily among the rest. The Lutherans also
made suit to the estats of the Empire, that their ministers might receive
orders from the bishops of Misnia and Numburg. And in artic. 10. Smalcald, they
profess thus: If the bishops (of the church of Rome) would truly execute their
office, and look carefully to the church and word of God, it might be
permitted them to give orders unto us and our preachers. You may add hereunto,
that neither Luther nor any Reformer else ever sought other ordination, then
what they had received of Papists; and that in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's reign, the supposed Prelates earnestly be sought a Catholic Bishop
to consecrate them. And even to this day, if any renegate Priest join himself
to the Protestants, they order him not anew, but deem him fit for their
ministerial function, by virtue of the orders he received of Papists. Now if
Papists have true Mission, true pastoral charge, and true Pastors, True
mission and Pastors inseparable from the Church.
surely they have also the true church; it being impossible, that the church
should be severed from the true Pastors; or that the keys of heaven which are
in the true Pastors hands, should be out of the church, or that the power to
remit sins, the prerogative of true Pastors, should be where the church is
not. Nay, the Protestants themselves confess as much. Luther tom. 4. in cap.
4. Oseae fol. 295: True it is, that the Ministry is only in the Church.
Melancthon tom. 1. Lutheri disput de Eccles. Polit. fol. 483: The ordination of
Ministers is one of the peculiar gifts of the Church. Calvin lib. de neces.
reform. Eccles. page 57: This one reason is as good as thousands, that who so
has showed himself an enemy to true doctrine, has lost all authority in the
Church. D. Whitaker ad demonstrat 18. Sanderi: Out of the Church there is no
other seat but the seat of error, of pestilence, and everlasting destruction.
The same teaches Sadeel ad Sophism. Turrian loc. 10. D. Field in his 1. book
of the church cap. 14. and others.

5. Fifthly it is evident by the doctrine of the Sacramentaries, who hold that
the children of Papists are in the covenant of God, and estate of salvation,
through the faith of their parents; Papist^ children saved by the faith of
their parents.
and may therefore be baptized: much more then must they teach, that the
parents themselves are for their own faith in the covenant of God and estate
of salvation; which could not be, were they not in the Church. The antecedent
is manifest by the saying of many Protestants. For thus writes Luther lib. de
capt. Babylon. tom. 2. fol. 77: Here I say that which all say, that infants are
helped by the faith of them which offer them. Calvin in his Catech^sme cap. de
lege: God extends his bounty so far unto the faithful, that for their sake
he is good to their children not only blessing their affairs in this world,
but also sanctifying their souls, that they may be accounted of his flock.
Contr. Seruetum. page 601: We think, that there will be no use of Baptism
until this promise, I will be thy God and of thy seed be apprehended by faith;
but every one apprehends it not only to himself, but also to his issue. Beza
part. 2. Respon. ad acta Montisbel. page 118: Parents through Gods grace do
ap^rehend grace by true faith, according to the form of the Covenant, as well
to their posterity as to themselves. Which he oftentimes repeateth. And
likewise in Confess. cap. 4. sect. 48. and cap. 5. sect. 9. and page 126 M.
Perkins de Sacramento Baptismi tom. 1. col. 846: Others say, that the faith of
the Parents is also the faith of their children, all the time of their infancy
or childhood, and that because parents do by their faith apprehend the promise
both for themselves and for their children: Which opinion seemeeh to me the
fittest of all. The like he says in cap. 3. Galat. The sequel likewise is
undoubted. For if the faith of Popish parents be of force to establish their
very children in the Covenant of God and estate of salvation, though it reside
not in them, nor be their act; much more does it establish the parents
themselves, who have that faith in them, and whose act it is. Nor do the
instances D. Morton brings against it in his answer to the Protestants
Apology, lib. 4. cap. 6. make any thing to the purpose; as that in case of
necessity an heretical Priest or Schismatike may absolve from sins; and an
Infidel administer Baptism. Again: That if such as were free of a city and
are araigned of treason, should have issue after their condemnation, their
children nevertheless shall enjoy the title and right of citizens, whereof
their parents were destitute. These examples (I say) are not to the purpose;
because he, who is either baptized by an Infidel, or absolved by an heretical
Priest, enters not into the covenant of God and estate of salvation for ought
that is in the person which baptizeth or absolueth him, but for the Sacrament
of Baptism or Penance, which he receives indeed by the others
administration, but has it in himself. And the son of a traitor is not made
a Citizen, in regard of any thing that is in the father alone, but for his
own birth which appertains to himself, though his Father be author thereof.
But the Sacramentaries teach, that the child of a Papist is in the covenant of
God and estate of salvation, not for his own faith (for they say he has none)
but for the belief of his father; which is no way possible, if the same faith
be not of force to work the like effect in the father himself; seeing it
belongs far more to him, then to his child, and therefore must sooner give
him interest in the covenant, then the child that is descended of him. For how
can the fathers belief lay hold on the promises and covenant of God for his
children, and cannot do it for himself?

6. These allegations demonstrate, The su^m^ of Protestants Confession touching
Papists.
that by the Confession of the Protestants, the starkest Papists (such as are
of belief that the mass, the Popes primacy, and all things else of his are
good, upright and of God) are soldiers under Christ, may attain to salvation,
may be Saints; yea that there are among them both many and great Saints. That
there is in the Church of Rome what so is necessary to salvation, the sum of
faith, the ground-works the essential ground-works, the principal grounds of
faith, the chief articles, the fundamental heads, the necessary heads, the
chief parts, the Gospel of salvation, the kernel of Christianity, and all
Christian good. Lastly that the Church of Rome, Is a limme and member of the
universal Church, of the Catholic Church, a member of the true Church, and is
of the family of Jesus Christ; that it is mother to the children of God, that
it is the Church of God, the temple of God, the body of Christ, the Spouse of
Christ, that it abides yet in the covenant, is not yet cast of, or put away, is
not yet killed, but is yet alive. Which words plainly import that the Roman or
Popish Church is a true Church in the sight of God.

7. But is it credible, Note.
that such as make profession of Christian religion, should mount to that
height of impiety, as dare to reject and divorce themselves, from that Church
which they confess remaynes yet in the covenant of God, and which Christ has
not yet rejected? Is it credible, that they fear not to impugn, to make
bitter inuectiues, to disgorge curses and execrations against her, whom they
acknowledge to be their Mother, which bore them to Christ, to be the Church of
God, to be the body and Espouse of Christ? What can be more lewd and impious,
then to rage and rail against their own mother, against the Church of God,
against the very body and Espouse of Christ? What strange and monstrous blindness
is it, not to perceive, that whiles they confess the church of Rome to be the
church of God and Espouse of Christ, they acknowledge their own to be the
Synagogue of Antichrist and strumpet of the Devil? For Christ cannot have two
Espouses, repugnant each to other. Now the Protestant church and church of Rome
are parts so opposite, as can never make one. For they jar and disagree
mainely in diverse weighty points, as namely touching the canon and exposition
of the Scripture, touching sacrifice and the Sacraments, touching the worship
of God, and his Saints; touching the means to obtain remission of sins, and
many the like. Whereupon Beza in Confess. cap. 7. page 56: We dissent (says
he) from the Papist, about they very sum of salvation. And others say no
less, as shall be showed hereafter in the 2. book and 6. cap: If ours be true
Religion (says S. Augustine to the Donatists which yet came nearer to Catholics
then Protestants do) yours is superstition. Lib. 2. co^t. Gaud. c. 11.
Again: If our communion be the Church of Christ, yours is not Christ's Church;
Lib. 1. de Bapt. c. 11.
for that is but one, which so ever it be. And in another place: When they
approve that Church, which (as is manifest) we communicate with all, and they
do not; by that their testimony they acknowledge thems^lues convinced, Lib. ad
Donat. post. codat.
and give you plain notice (if you be wise) what you ought to forgo, and what
it behoues you to cleave to and retain. And S. Cyprian epistle 76: If the
Church were on Nouatus side, it was not with Cornelius.

Number. 4.
8. The Protestants now and then perceive as much, when they acertaine us (as
has been showed in the first chapter) that who so seuereth himself from any
particular congregation, which is a true Church, excludes himself wholly from
the church. Calvin saw it, when 4. Insti. c. 2.. 10. he wrote thus: We cannot
grant them (Papists) that they are the church, but the necessity of subjection
and obedience will befall us. If they be churches, the power of the keys is in
their possession. If they be churches, that promise of Christ: Whatsoever ye
bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, takes effect in them. M. Perkins
perceived it to, when in his explication of the Creed col. 794. he said:
Zanchiu^ lib. 1. de E^cl. c. 7.
As long as any church forsakes not Christ, we may not withdraw our selves from
it. The reason is apparent, because in so doing we should depart from Christ,
or Christ should be parted, even as we are rent and disioynted from the church
wherein he is. And in his Reformed Catholic tract. 22. col. 470. Wh^re he
says: We ought not to divide our selves from any nation or people, which has
not before cut it self of from Christ. D. Field likewise saw it in his 3.
book of the Church c. 47. Where he makes this acknowledgement: Surely if he
can prove that we confess it (the Church of Rome) to be the true Church, he
needs not use any other argument. But we have clearly proved it by sundry
plain confessions of many famous Protestants. And hitherto we have discovered
how they sometime harbor and receive Papists into their church: now we will
show that they use the like curtesy toward the rest.

CHAP. III.
That Protestants acknowledge for members of their Church, sometime those that
deny as well fundamental as other articles of their faith; sometimes Heretics,
Schismatiks, yea their professed and sworn enemies.
THAT they esteem all such to be members of their Church, as swerve from the
Christian faith only in points not fundamental, themselves in the preface of
the Switzers Confession declare in these words: Mutual consent and agreement
in the principal points of doctrine, in orthodoxe sense, and brotherly
charity, was of religious antiquity thought abundantly sufficient. And D.
Whitaker cont. 4. quest. 1. c. 2. page 527: God forbid that they should be no
longer of the number of the faithful, who are in some points of a contrary
opinion, so they assent in the chief and principal and necessary matters. And
for as much as the Protestants opinion herein is well known (for wh^^ it is
objected unto them, that their churches disagree in points of faith, this
serves them for excuse) I think it needless to allege any more of their
sayings. He that will may look the Confession of Saxony cap. de Eccles. Luther
tom. 7. lib. de not. Eccles. fol. 149. Melancthon tom. 4. in ca. 3. 1. Cor.
Kemnitius 1. part. Examinis tit. de bonis operibus page 332. Zuinglius tom. 1.
in Prefat. lib, de Provident. Calvin. 4. Institut. cap. 1.. 12. and cap. 2.. 1.
Beza epist. 2. Zanchius in prefat. lib. de natura Dei. Hospin, part. 1. Histor.
lib. 1. cap. 2. Vorstius in Anti-bellarmin. page 116. and others more. And as
their judgments are different touching the fundamental articles of faith, so
in determining, who are to be accounted members of their Church their opinions
are unlike. Some of the^ say, that the sum, the chief and principal heads
of faith, and all things necessary to be believed are comprised in the Apostles
Creed. The Apostles Creed.
The principal heads of faith (says Calvin 2. Institut. c. 16.. 8) are set
down in the Creed. And it is (as D. Whitaker says lib. 3. de Scriptura cap.
3. sect. 1.) a list of the chief heads of faith. It contains (says M.
Perkins in his Reformed Catholic col. 476.) all points of Religion which we are
necessarily to believe. Hemingius in Syntagmate page 196: It contains the
groundwork of the whole frame of Religion. Vrsinus in Cathechesi: The sum of
those things which the Gospel proposes unto us to believe, that we may be
partakers of Gods covenant, is comprehended in the Apostles Creed. Pareus lib.
1. de Iustificat. cap. 9. has these words: In the Creed is laid open the sum
of that doctrine, which we must believe to salvation. The same teaches Luther
tom. 7. in 3. symbol. fol. 138. Confessio Pasatina in initio, prefat.
Syntagmat. Confess. the French Catechism, Brentius in Prolegomenis, page 244.
The Catechism of Heidleberg part. 2. Bullinger in compendio fidei lib. 6. cap.
2. and tom. 1. decad. 5. sermon. 2. Polanus in Analysi. Catechismi Basse.
Boysseul in confutat. Spondei p. 10. Raynolds in Apol. These. page 241. Carleton
in Consensu tract. de Eccles. c. 9. The same is intimated by Zanchius lib. 1.
epist. page 219. and by Musculus in locis tit. de Eccles. page 309. These men
then, if the sequel of their doctrine be correspondent to the premises, must
needs acknowledge, that the profession of the Apostles Creed, though joined
with the denial of whatsoever other articles of faith, suffices to make a
Protestant, and a limme of their Church. And some of them there be who confess
it. For Bullinger lib. cit. cap. 11. fol. 83. says: All that we comprise in
the 12. Belief of the Apostles C^e^d sufficient to salvation.
articles, is the true and Christian faith, unto which whosoever cleauech, he
beliueth right, is approved of God, is justified, and made partner of
everlasting life. Calvin cont. Gentil. page 659: The confession of faith
contained in the Apostles Creed, ought to be enough for all modest Christians.
And Musculus in the place last quoted. They are wonderful unreasonable and
unadvised, who not content with this belief, exact of the faithful, that they
believe yet other things which are neither mentioned in the Apostles Creed, nor
in baptism. Aretius in locis part 3. fol. 67: The articles necessary to
salvation are those, which the Creed has set us down. As for the rest, since
the matter cannot be decided, variety of judgments must be borne with all.
Polanus also in the place before cited: These articles (of the Creed,) if they
be unfeignedly believed suffice to purchase salvation; nor is it required we
should believe ought besides. And Hall in ^ua Roma irreconcil. sect. 1: We are
all one and the same Church, as many as in any part of the earth worship Jesus
Christ the only Son of God and Savior of the world, and profess the same
common belief comprised in the Creed.

The Creeds.
2. Some of them will have the grounds of faith to be contained in the Creed; as
Plessy lib. de Eccles. c. 5. Hereupon Mark Antony de Dominis in consil. suae
profect. page 18. and 20. says: Restore peace and charity to all Christian
Churches, which profess Christ by the essential cognisances of belief.
Others ad to the Creeds the 4. general Councels or at least one of them, as D.
Andrews in Respons. ad Apol. Bellarmin. cap. 1. page 52: That which is set
down in the Creeds and 4. general counsels, The Creeds and the 4. general
^ouncels.
is to us a sufficient object of faith. And in Tortura Torti page 127: Nor do
we lightly discern and try heresy by other touchstone, then by examining
whether it be repugnant t^ any of the three ancient Creeds, or 4. ancient
general counsels. And Melancthon tom. 3. l. de iudicijs Synodorum fol. 389.
says of himself, that he is not without the Church, because he faithfully
imbraceth all the articles of the Apostles and Nycen Creed. Musculus also in
the place above quoted puts down this conclusion: As many as believe the
Apostles and Athanasius Creed, hold all the Catholic faith, and are not
heretkes but Catholics. Some of them are of opinion, that all the fundamental
points of belief are contained in the Creed and decalogue; The Creed and
Decalogue.
as Melancthon tom. 1. in cap. 7. Matthew. page 402. tom. 3. in respons. ad
artic. Bauar. fol. 363. Vrsinus in Miscellaneis These. 8. page 1^4. M. Perkins
in his exposition of the Creed col. 789. Some of them say, they are in the
Creed, the decalogue, and Lords prayer; The creed Decalogue, and Lords prayer.
as Luther tom. 7. in Enchirid. fol. 118. Beza lib. de notis Eccles. page 52.
Keckerman lib. 1. System. Theol. 201. D. White in the preface of his way, and
in his defense of the same cap. 8. page 54. Others reckon the 10.
commandments, the Creed, the Lords prayer, and the Sacraments; as D. Whitaker
cont. 1. quest. 4. cap. 4. The creed Decalogue, Lords prayer, and Sacraments.
And the Ministry.
page 342. (howbeit quest. 5. cap. 9. page 362. he omitteth Sacraments, and
puts in Catechism in exchange.) Vorstius in Antibellarm. page 24. unto
which Ieslerus lib. de bello Euchar. page 40. adioyneth the ministry. And these
men according to their several decisions concerning the fundamental points of
belief, must with like diversity require in a limme of the Protestant Church
either the belief of the Creed alone, and decalogue; or must add besides (as
each think it needful) the Lords prayer, the Sacraments, Baptism and worship
of Christ.
the Catechism, and the Ministry.

3. But sometimes they give larger scope, and demand far less, to wit,
Baptism only, or faith in Christ. Let him let Chr^s^ianity stand (sait^ D.
Andrews in respons. cit. cap. 5. page 126) in baptism and worship of Christ.
M. Morton in his book of the Kingdom of Israel and the Church page 91: In
what place soever any society of men adore true God in Christ, they profess
the substance of Christian Religion: Baptism alone.
Ierlach. us disput. 22. de Eccles. page 662: Wheresoever baptism remains
curier in regard of its substance, thither reaches the territory of the
Catholic Church: Luther de Notis Eccl. fol. 150.
Again: If they acknowledge true baptism both in o^rs and in other
congregations, they must yield, that in the same there is likewise the Catholic
Church. And Hurterus in his Analysis of the Confession of Ausburge page 525: As
many as are enrolled for Christ's soldiers by sacred baptism, or at least wise
are joined to him, by profession of faith, are every one of them members of the
Church simply taken, as it signifies the company of them that are called.
Serauia defens. contra Bez^m cap. 2. page 31: As long as there remains amongst
them the new and old testam^nt, together with the Sacrament of baptism, and
belief in God the Father, and in the Son, and holy Ghost; and they trust to
be saved by the Son of God and his death; albeit they adioyne a number of
their own wicked forgeries, they are notwithstanding parts and members of the
universal Church. The ministers of the scattered Church of the Netherlands in
sua narrat. page 71: No man can, Profession of Christ.
nor ought to give sentence in the Church of an others condemnation, of whom
it is not publicly known, that he is fallen away from the foundation of the
Apostolical Confession, uttered by the mouth of Peter. Oecolampadius epist. ad
Bucerum apud Hospin. part. 2. Profession of Christ God and man.
Histor. fol. 112: We are gladly at peace withal those that confess with us
and teach Jesus Christ true God and true man in unity of person. And Bucerus
apud eundem fol. 84: Who so preach the same Christ with us, we account them
ours, what estimate soever they make of us. Beza de lib. notis Eccles. page 30:
We say it is a true definition of the true Church, whether generally
considered or in particular, wherein it is said to be a company which
acknowledges one Savior. To acknowledge one Savior.
For (says he) this al^ne is the only ground-work^ of that spiritual house of
God; Christ Jesus is the soul of that mystical body, the only rule and square
of that building. And the Confession of Bohemia artic. 8. defines the Catholic
Church to be all Christians, That are associated in one belief concerning
Christ and the holy Trinity. The faith of Christ and the Trinity.
The Confession of Basse artic. 5. has this assertion: We believe the holy
Christian Church etc. Wherein all those are Citizens, that confess Jesus to
be Christ, the lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world, and show
openly the same belief by works of charity. Acontius l. 3. Stratagem. Satanae
page 119. concludes that nothing else is necessar^ly to be believed, Belief of
one God and Christ.
but That there is one God and Christ his Son made man and raised from the
dead; and that salvation is purchased by his name, and not by any other name,
nor by the works of the law. And Luther upon the 7. of Math. fol. 86. closes
up all with this epilogue: The head and sum of Christian doctrine is this:
That God saves by Christ.
that God sent and gave his Son, by whom alone he pardons our offenses,
and does justify and save us. This (says he) and nothing else, it behoues thee
firmly to believe. Sometime to believe their article of justification by only
faith is as much as they require in a limme of their Church, The only article
of justification suffices.
or think needful to salvation. Luther tom. 7. tract. in 3. symbol. fol. 140:
I have found by experience, that who so have truly and sincerely believed that
principal article of Christian faith concerning Jesus Christ, though they had
their errors and faults, have at last notwithstanding been saved. And tom. 4.
in cap. 42. Pareus in 1. Galat. lect. 8. Iezler. de bello Euch. fol. 77.
Isaiae fol. 178: If we abide in this article, we are secure from heresies, and
retain remission of sins; which pardons our weakness in civil duties and
belief. And in cap. 43. fol. 200: Who so belieueth this article, is out of
danger for ever falling into error, and the holy Ghost must needs assist him.
And Brocard upon the 2. cap. of the Apocalips fol. 45: The former Ministers who
were before the first council of Trent, determined, that we ought not to
contend, but that their Supper should be common, which had received one
doctrine touching justification. Calvin de vera Eccles. reform. page 316.
writes thus: I know it is the common saying of a great many, that so the
doctrine of undeserved Justification continue sound, we should not be so stiffly
contentious about the rest. And the Author of the Preface in Syntagma Confess.
after he had affirmed that the article of justification is the ground work, the
form and soul of Christian religion, makes this demand: How can they then
but have peace one with another, whosoever are fellow-partners of so great
good? And he says, it is, An unseemly and heinous thing, that between such
there should be emnity and debate. And indeed all Protestants should teach so,
since they make this article the definition, the sum, and very soul of
Protestantisme, as shall be herrafter showed in the 6. chapter. Sometimes in a
member of their Church, they require only some one point of Christianity, or
but the profession of Christ's name. For Sturmius apud Hospin. in Corcord.
discord. c. 24. testifies that Bucer said: He would never condemn any one, in
whom he saw any point of Christianity. Any point of Christianity.
And Plessy lib. de Eccles. cap. 2. affirms that the Church may be infected
with heresy from top to toe, and yet be a part of the universal Church, as
long as it professes the name of Christ. And Moulins in his buckler of faith
page 43. The universal visible Church is the company of all them who profess
themselves to be Christians. Thus we see, that to a member of the visible
Church, yea to faith, to Christianity, to a member of the true and Catholic
Church, to eternal salvation (as Protestants sometime judge and determine)
little or nothing suffices. Do not these men go about to expose the Church and
means of salvation unto scorn and mockery? What Jew or Turk did ever make
his Synagogue so common?

4. Protestants challenge those that deny eue^ fundame^tall articles.
Albeit the former allegations do sufficiently convince, that when Protestants
calculate the limbs and members of their Church, they take, to make up the
number, such as renounce the very fundamental articles of their belief; yet
to make it more evident, and to prevent all color of doubt, I will add other
proofs besides. And first we have in this behalf their own Confessions. For
Beza lib. de Notis Eccles. page 45. teaches plainly, that some errors even in
some fundamental heads of faith, may creep into the Catholic Church. And D.
Whitaker cont. 2. quest. 4. cap. 3. page 490: It is manifest, that the true
Church may err for a time even in necessary points. The like has Hutterus in
Analysi Confessionis Augustanae page 453. and Iunius does intimate as much lib.
3. de Eccles. cap. 17. D. Whitaker again cont 2. quest. 5 cap. 17: We gather,
that the Church may for a time swerve from the truth even in some fundamental
points, and be notwithstanding safe. And Zanchius lib. 1. epist. page 221. will
not have us forsake any company on occasion of false opinions, which swerve
from the groundwork of faith. D. Hall likewise in sua Roma irreconc. sect. 1.
says, that the true Church may foster such errors, As by deduction and
consequence destroy the foundations of belief. D. Fulke in his sermon. upon the
Apocalips, having made this objection to himself, that seeing the Church is the
Espouse of Christ, it cannot be, that he suffered it to be possessed so many
ages with damnable errors; answeares it in this manner: What? Christ himself
has said: that the errors of false Prophets should be exceeding great, in as
much as the very elect, if it might be, should be led into error. And lib. de
Succes. Eccles. page 122. he says: It seems not fitting to take from the
Grecians the name of a Church; whom notwithstanding he confesses to be
ensnared with grievous errors. Now a grievous error (according to D. Whitaker
cont. 2. quest 4 cap. 1.) dissolues the foundation, and may therefore be termed
fundamental. M. Perkins in his exposition of the Creed, col. 790: When an
error is repugnant to the foundation, either directly or by necessary
consequence if it proceed of weakness, he in whom it is, ought to be reputed a
member of the universal Church. And upon 1. Galat. v. 2: If a Church through
frailty fall into error, although it concern the foundation, notwithstanding
it remaynes yet a Church, as is certain by the example of the Galathians. And
upon the epistle of Jude v. 19: The Church of Gaelatia through weakness
removed it self unto another Gospel, and erred in the foundation, yet Paul
writes to it as to the Church of God. D. Willet affirms the same in his
Synopsis cont. 2. q. 3. page 104. And Melancthon tom. 2. lib. de Eccl. page
123. touches the same string when he says: The true Church it self may have
errors which obscure and darken the articles of faith. And tom. 4. in cap. 9.
Rom: God gathers always some company, in which the foundation is kept,
sometimes less pure, sometimes more. D. White in his way page 111: Some
articles lying in the very foundation may be believed not so clearly. Nay
sometimes they dare avouch, that those very Corinthians that denied the
resurrection, and those Galatians also that changed the Gospel of Christ into
another Gospel, were of the Church. Luther. in 1. cap. Galat. fol 215.
Perkins loc. cit.
For thus the Switzers Confession c. 17: We are not ignorant, what manner of
Churches those of the Corinthians and Galathians were in the Apostles time:
which the Apostle accuses of many and grievous crimes, and yet terms them
the holy Churches of Christ. And Calvin 4. Institut. cap. 1.. 27: Most greiuous
sins possess sometimes whole Churches. The Apostasy of the Galathians was no
small offense; the Corinthians were less excusable then they; howbeit neither
of them are excluded from the Lords mercy. Sadeel in his answer ad These.
Posnan. cap. 12. page 866: The Galathians and Corinthians, though corrupted
with error, and disagreeing each from other about the chief groundwork of
belief, and that not concerning the manner but touching the matter it self,
retained notwithstanding the name of a true church. And hence he gathers,
that the debate and disagrement between the Lutherans and Caluinists
concerning the Eucharist, does not let either of them from being of the true
Church.

5. The deeds of the Lutherans and Sacramentaries yield us a second kind of
proof. For the Electorall or mild Lutherans in colloq. Aldeburg. scripto 8.
call themselves, Luthera^s profess that themselves differ fundamentally.
Fellows and companions of the same Ministry, fellow-cittizens and
fellow soldiers of those of Saxony or rigorous Lutherans: of whom
notwithstanding scripto 6. page 111. they give this censure: They have showed
themselves to dissent from our Churches in the foundation. Again: We will
make it evident, that they impugn the fundamental doctrine. And scripto 4.
page 4: Our opinion is, that we disagree not about impertiment matters only, or
things of no consequence; but about the maine and chiefest matters. And scripto
7: This one thing they aim at, and bend all their endeauours to undermine and
ouerturne the groundwork of saving doctrine. And page 374. they complain that
those of Saxony do often cry out of them, that they are worse then any
idolaters. And the Sacramentaries in Praefat. Apologet. Orthodoxi consensus,
write thus of the Lutherans: They have hitherto suffered among them, such as
call in question the doctrine of justification, of original sin, of free
will, of the Gospel, of the law and use thereof, of Christ's descent into
hell, of his person, of the election of Gods children, and many other articles
of no small moment; which things they easily put up, because all these go under
the name of Lutherans. Now that the Sacramentaries likewise acknowledge the
Lutherans for their brethren, is apparent by the Apology of the Church of
England, by the consent of Poland, by the preface of the Syntagme of
Confessions, Sacrame^^taries challenge Luthera^s.
by the Conferences of Marspurg and Montbelgard, and other public writings and
registered acts: and yet they see and openly exclaim against their errors in
fundamental points of faith. Of Luther thus writes Zuinglius tom. 2. Resp. ad
Luther. fol. 401: And yet say they differ fundame^tally from the^.
We judge thee a worse seductour, impostour, and denyer of Christ, then was
Marcion himself. And fol. 430. Luther as yet, is entangled and sticks fast in
two errors exceeding grievous, and in most foul ignorance. Of Melancthon thus
says Calvin epist. 183: Either he openly impugneth true doctrine in the
chiefest heads, or else hides his meaning craftily or not very honestly. And
epist. 179. he complains that Melancthon endeavors to overthrow his
doctrine of predestination: Without which (says he) the knowledge of Gods
free and undeserved mercy is utterly lost. The like he says, epist. 141.
Sturmius lib. de Ratione incundae Concordiae, says plainly, that the Lutherans
do pluck up the foundation of Christian Religion. And Bullinger in fundamento
firmo writes, that the very infidelity of the Jews and Gentiles is by the
Lutherans brought into the Churches. Cureus in Exegesi Sacramentaria page 91:
Surely the controuesy (between the Lutherans and Sacramentaries) is concerning
the foundation. The Sacramentaries in the Preface of the Conference at Mulbrun
say, that the Lutherans. Tear in preces and adulterate the articles of the
incarnation, of the true humane nature etc. Which articles (say they) no
Christian man can doubt but are the groundwork of salvation. And in the
foresaid preface: They are at variance, not about the Lords supper only, but
touching the person of christ, touching the union of his divine and humane
nature, touching the vbiquity of his body and corporal manducation thereof
common both to good and bad, touching his ascending up to heaven, and his
sitting at the right hand of his Father: of all these points they contend, and
that with such exceeding heat of disputation, as that old heresies not a few,
long since abolished and condemned, begin again to lift up their head, as if
they were recalled from hell. The like they have ibidem in Prolegomenis. Of the
controversy which is between the Lutherans and Sacramentaries about the ^eall
presence of Christ's body in the Eucharist, Martyr in locis tom. 2. p. 156.
gives this judgment: The contention and difference therein concerns the
chief heads of Religion. Calvin epist. 292. says, that the opinion of the
Lutherans does, By mischeiuous iuglings and legierdemains ouerturne the
principles of faith. Beza in his 5. epist. that it destroys the verity of
Christ's body. And epist. 81. that it recalleth from hell the folly and doting
errors of Marcion and Eutiches. Bucer cited by Hospin. part. 2. Hist. fol. 84:
It follows thereupon, that Christ is not true man. Paraeus in cap. 3. Galat.
lection. 37: There is nothing more directly opposite to Christian Religion,
then to think that the body of Christ does indeed lie hid really under the
bread, and that the same is truly eaten with the mouth. Sadeel. in tract. de
Coniunctione etc. page 369. that it overthrows the true nature of the true
body and blood of Christ Which thing (says he) we still lay to their charge.
And tract. de Sacramentali manducatione page 26. that it is a word of evils.
page 267: That it trains after it idolatry. And page 268: that it cannot stand
with the verity of Christ's body. Hospin. part. 2. citat. fol. 2. that it is the
foundation of Papistry. And fol. 181: The base and pillar which sustaineth all
the whole blended and disordered heap of abuses, and all the bread-worship
which has under the Popedom been devised and brought in. Lauaterus lib. de
dissid. Euchar. fol. 7. that it is the Foundation of the Popedom. Cureus in
Spongia, that it is the foundation, the strength, the throne of the God Maozim,
and of the Popish state. Calvin de Coena p. 8. and in Co^s. page 754. Beza in
fo. 6. v. 23.62. and ad 4. Demonstr. Illyrici. Zan^hius in Confess. c. 16.
sect. 12.
And Vrsinus in Catechism. quest. 78. cap. 3. says: As long as the opinion of
the corporal presence is maintained, Popish adoration, and oblation, and the
whole Popish mass is kept on foot. And there is not one Sacramentary, but
thinks the verity of Christ's body, and his ascension, and sitting at the right
hand of the Father clean taken away, if he should say he were substantially in
the Eucharist. Whereupon Zanchius tom. 1. Miscell. in iudicio de dissidio
Coenae page 553. says: There are two maine reasons why the one party (to wit
the Sacramentaries) renounce the presence of the body: The one, that the
article of Christ's ascension into heaven may be kept entire: the other that the
nature and verity of his humane body be not destroyed. Nay some of the
Sacramentaries in their Confessions of faith condemn the opinion of the
Lutherans as mad and blasphemous. For Confess. Crengerina cap. de coena Domini,
says: We condemn their madness, who avouch and maintain flesh-eating, that
is, who hold, that Christ's natural and very body, raw and bloody without any
change or transubstantiation at all, is received with the very mouth. And the
Scots in their Confess. page 159. say they, Detest that blasphemous opinion,
which avouches Christ's real presence in the bread and wine, and that he is
received by the wicked or taken into the belly. This and much more of the like
is sometimes the Sacramentaries plea against the real presence of Christ's body
in the Eucharist; and yet at other times they profess that this controversy is
not of so great weight and moment, as that it should dissolve Ecclesiastical
Communion and fellowship. For so teaches Martyr apud Simlerum in vita eius,
the author of the orthodoxe Consent. Prefat. Apologet. Hospinian part. 2.
Histor. fol. 78. Calvin de scandalis page 95. In Consens. p. 764. Beza lib. de
coena cont. Westphalum. page 258. M. Perkins in his exposition of the Creed,
col. 792. and others. Nay (as we said before) these men besought the Lutherans,
who steadfastly maintain the real presence, to hold them for brethren and
members of their Church. They can then find in their conscience to have
fellowship and Communion with those men, whose doctrine they condemn, As
Frantike and blasphemous; whose doctrine (they say) destroys Christ's
ascension, What kind of men Sacramentaries challenge for brethren.
and the verity of his humane nature; subuerteth the principles of faith and
chiefest points of religion; recalleth the doting follies of Marcion and
Eutyches, establishes the Kingdom of Antichrist trains after it idolatry and
a world of evils. Fie on these me^ belief, who think the maintenance of an
opinion, which (as themselves profess) overthrows the principal articles of
Christian faith, draws after it idolatry, and most foul heresies, lays the
found^tion whereon Antichristianity is raised; of so slight consequence as it
ought not to dissolve fraternity and Communion. What regard of faith or
salvation may we think these men have? There is yet another point o^
Luteranisme touching the vbiquity, or presence of Christ's body every where
reproved of the Sacramentaries, and held in extreme dislike; of which they
likewise exclaim: that it is Beza respons. ad acta montisb. l. page 252.
forged and composed of Eutychianisme and Nestorianisme: that the heresies of
Calvin 4 Instit. c. 17. p. 17.
Marcion and Eutyches, yea well nigh Hosp. pref. par. 2.
all old heresies are by it raised again from hell; that it subuerteth the
whole Perkins expos. Symb. coll. 792.
Creed; that it takes away the Sadeel. de verit. hum. not.
chief heads of Christian Religion; and that there is scant any one article of
Christian belief which it does not utterly abolish. And yet these self same
Sacramentaries style them who defend this opinion Sadeel. sup.
Most flourishing Churches; and made earnest sure to be held for Beza in
colloq. mo^tisbel. page 462.
brethren of those very men, who vpheld this doctrine against them, and
maintained it to their face. Nay the particular Churches of Sacramentaries
themselves consist of parts mainly disioyned in matters of belief.
Sacrame^taries say there is fundame^tall difference among them.
Examples hereof we need not seek a broad. Our own Protestants tell us, how
the Puritans their brethren allow not of the book of common prayer, but hold
it to be full of Whitgift. resp. ad Admonit. p. 145. 157.
corruptions and all abominations, and teach that Protestants Ib. resp. ad
schedas.
wickedly mangle and wrest the Scriptures, that they have no Resp. cit. page 6.
Pastors, that they have not a true Church, yea not so much as the outward
face of a Church; and that they exhort the Court of Parliament with perfect Page
32.
hatred to detest the present state of the Church; that no Page 33
Jew, no Turk, no Papist, could possibly have spoken more spitefully of their
Church and state, and that they seek to shake, nay to overthrow the Page 6.
foundations, grounds, and pillars of their Church. Finally, that the Puritans
will not account the Protestants their Resp. ad schedas. Bancrofts survey c. 33
brethren, and yet the Protestants nevertheless acknowledge Puritans for their
Resp. ad schedas Oxon. resp. ad Mi^len. Lonfer. ad Hampton Court. p. 44.
brethren and fellow laborers in the Lords harvest. In Scotland likewise (as
his Majesty witnesses) That which was Catechisticall doctrine in one assembly,
was hardly admitted for sound and orthodoxe in another; and yet these
assemblies excluded not one another from the Church. What can be therefore more
clear and evident, then that both the Lutherans and Sacramentaries acknowledge
(when they list) those to be members of their Church, who deny fundamental
articles of their faith?

6. A third proof may be drawn from the Protestants demeanor and carriage
toward the Fathers, Protestants say the fathers dissent fundame^^ally from
the^.
whom they claim and challenge for their fellow-cittizens, and yet confess
plainly (to omit what they acknowledge concerning other points) that they were
of a contrary belief in the article of Justification by sole faith; wherein
(as shall be here after showed) they say the soul, the sum, and definition
of Protestantisme consists. Luther tom. 1. In the art. of justification by
only faith.
colloq German. apud Coccium tom. 1. page 131: In which error (that works
joined with faith do justify) were many of the Fathers. And tom. 5. in cap. 3
Galat. fol. 358. he says, that of the difference, which he espied between the
law and the Gospel, as that the law taught justification by works, the
Gospel by sole belief, There is nothing to be found in the works of the old
Fathers. Augustine held it in part, Hierome and the rest knew it no: Melancthon
tom. 1. in Dominicam Trinitaris page 89: It is marvel, that the chief
Doctors had no knowledge of the justice of faith. Tom. 2. lib. de Eccles. page
134: Chrysostom reckons up many ways and means to obtain remission of
sins, as alms deeds, tears, and other works. The Centuriatours of
Magdeburg. cent. 3. cap. 4. col. 79. and seqq. say, that the Doctors of the
third age Make works the cause of our justice in Gods sight. Cent. 4. c. 4.
col. 293: In this article of justification this age revolted wholly from the
doctrine of the Apostles. And Cent. 5. in Prefat. they say of the Fathers of
that age: Chrysostom and the residue attribute justice unto works, they make
works the means of salvation, and ascribe justification either in part, or
formally, or wholly unto works. Gerlacinus tom. 2. dispat. 13: The ancient
Fathers would have the justice life, and salvation of a Christian man consist
in observing Gods commandments, as Hilary, Origin, Tertullian, Eusebius,
Chrysostom^, Augustine, etc. Kemnitius in locis part 1. cit. de Iustificat.
page 242. says that the Fathers Intermingled sometimes and entwyned the
doctrine of good works with the article of justification, sometimes plied and
bended the article of justification to good works. And part. 2. tit. de lege
page 106: If the Fathers disputes be all laid together, the sum of them is
this in effect, that sin and infirmity of nature is manifested by the law, to
the end we may search out a Physician, by whose grace it may be so healed, as
it be able to satisfy and fulfill the law, and so we be saved. And ibidem in
orat. de lectione Patrum page 3. The su^me of the fathers doctrine is
justification by works.
he says of S. Cyprian, He had a fundamental error. And page 4. of S.
Hilary: He held an erroneous opinion touching the foundation. Calvin also lib.
cont. Ver si pellem page 353: Three maine points of our says, to wit, the
corruption of our nature, free and undeserved justification, and Christ's
Priesthood, are so darkly and obscurely touched in the ancientest writers, that
no certainly can be drawn thence. Again: We shall never learn by the
Fathers, how we may be reconciled to God, how the obedience of Christ is freely
and undeservedly reputed ours. Martyr in locis cit. de scriptura col. 1432:
Other Fathers think good works much available to justification. Hospin. in
epist. dedicat. part. 1. Histor: All the Fathers well nigh do now and then
sprinkle and cast on with all the leaven of good works, and attribute
justification to them, either in part, or formally or wholly. Parcus lib. 4, de
Iustificat. c. 12: The Fathers both Greek and Latin especially those that wrote
before the Pelagian bickerings, fancied over much, and took too great a liking
to the Philosophers doctrine, concerning the justification of worcks. Finally
M. Perkins in Problem. cap. de Iustificat. says, that the old writers consound
the law with the Gospel, and do not distinguish the justice of the law from
the justice of the Gospel.

7. To them, who in this manner join friendship and Communion as well with
such as renounce fundamental articles of faith, as with those whose belief is
contrary in articles not fundamental, wh^^ marvel is it, if all heretics and
Schismatiks seem fit companions, and worthy to be accounted their brethren and
fellow-cittizens? But let us hear their own words, wherein they acquaint us,
what rank heretics and Schismatiks hold amongst them. Luther tom. 7. sermon. de
Dominica 20. post Trinit. fol. 262. says: They are frantique and beside
themselves who go about to sever the Church corporally from heretics.
Hemingius in Syntag. Institut. page 192: In the outward society of the Church,
are many heretics and Schismatiks. Solomon Gesner in locis loc. 24: Are
heretics then in the Church? By any means. Brentius in Praefat. Recognit:
Christ gives not over the conservation of his sheep in the midst of heresies,
but they must be such, as do not quite take away the foundation and Ministry.
Reineccius tom. 4 Armatur. cap. 6. page 35: We affirm there are heretics
even in the true Church. Hutte^us in Analysi Confessed. August. page 435: Neither
were heresies without the territory and limits of the true Church. Plessy in
his book of the Church cap. 2. affirms plainly, that all heretical and
Schismatic congregations are truly the Church. And ibid. page 25. he says:
Although particular Churches be insected with heresies, from top to toe,
nevertheless they are parts of the universal Church as long as they profess
the name of Christ. Moulins in his Bukler of faith part. 1. sect. 89: An
heretical Church may be said to be a true Church, even as man blemished with a
canker or infected with the plague is notwithstanding a true man. Sonis
Respons. ad Spondeum c. 10. page 365. Heretics are within the Church. Lubbert
lib. 2. de Eccles. cap. 3: It is manifest, that heretics are, some as yet in
the visible Church, some also in the church of the elect. Iunius lib. 3. de
Eccles. cap. 4: Heretics absolutely are of the Church, unless they be such as
overthrow fundamental articles of religion. Cap. 3: n. ^^
Bullinger teaches the same Decad. 2. sermon. 8. and it is the common doctrine
of the Protestants, who (as is before proved) exclude none from being members
of their Church, that deny only such articles as are not fundame^tall. Howbeit
some of them upon heretical privilege (as Tertullian speaks) will not have
such called heretics; Lib. de carne Co^isti, cap. ^5.
being indeed more ashamed of the name then of the thing it self. Zanchius
likewise lib. 1. epist. ad Dudit. page 150. says, that heretical and
Schismatic sects are within the Church. Tilenus in Syntag. disput. 14:
Heretics even those that subvert the foundation, and Schismatiks in regard of
outward Communion, are in the Church, till either of themselves they go to the
enemies side, or are cast out by the lawful judgment of the Church. And D.
Field in his first book of the Church cap 14: Seeing God gave the power of the
keys and the dispensation of his word and Sacraments only to his Church, if
Heretics be not of the Church, they do not then baptize. And cap. 7: They that
are partakers of the heavenly calling, and sanctified by the profession of
divine truth, and the use of the means of salvation, are of very diverse
sorts; as heretics, Schismatiks, hypocrites, and those that profess the
whole saving truth in unity and sincerity of a good and sanctified heart. All
these are partakers of the heavenly calling, and sanctified by the profession
of truth, and consequently are all in some degree and sort of that society of
men, whom God calls out unto himself, and separateth from Infidels, which
is rightly named the Church. D. Whitaker contr. 4. quest. 5. c. 3. page 679: All
heretics are within the Church. Hooker in his 3. book of Ecclesiastical
policy page 128: We must acknowledge even heretics themselves to be, though a
maimed part, yet a part of a visible Church: Again: If an Infidel should
pursue to death an heretic professing Christianity only for Christian
Prosession sake, could we deny unto him the honor of Martyrdom? By which
words it is plain, that they admit heretics not only into the visible Church,
but into the invisible also, or company of the elect and predestinate to
salvation. And D. Andrews in his answer to Bellarmines Apology cap. 5. page
121. denies that the words, Catholic and Heretic are opposite; wherefore
unless he will debar and shut out some Catholics from the Church, he must
needs give admittance to heretics, seeing by his own verdict they may be
Catholics. D. White in defense of his way cap. 38. page 367: The second sort of
the militant Church are hypocrites and unsound members, that are not called
effectually, but disobey the truth whereof they make profession such are
heretics, schismatiks etc. Touching their acceptations of Schismatiks, besides
what has been already alleged, D. Field in his first book of the Church cap.
13. Writes thus: They challenge Schismatiks.
The departure of Schismatiks is not such, but that, notwithstanding their
schism, they are and remain parts of the Church of God. Iunius in the place
before quoted lays claim to those Schismatikes, Who (says he) sever not
themselves from the whole Church but only from a part thereof. But D. Morto^ in
the 1. part of his Apology lib. 1. cap. 2. says absolutely without any
acception or restraint at all: Schismatiks are of the Church. And lib. 2. cap.
10. page 288: Variances (says he) and schisms do not betoken the false
Church. And D. Willet in his Synopsis cont. 2. quest. 3. page 104: We say that
Schismatiks, though they hold some false points of doctrine, yet if their
errors be not fundamental, and if they retain the purity of doctrine in all
points necessary to salvation, and the administration of the Sacraments, may
make a particular Church by themselves. These are their acknowledgements
touching Heretics and Schismatikes in general. They acknowledge the Grecians.
Let us now descend to particularities, and see the courteous admission they
give to some of them by name.

8. The Grecians and other Eastern Schismatiks, yea heretics to, for the most
part, find that favor at their hands, as they vouchsafe to account them
members of their Church. His Majesty epist. ad Card. Peron pa. 13 has thus:
The Churches of Rome, Greece, Antioch, Aegipt, Aethiopia, Muscouy, and others
more are members of the Catholic church. D. While in defense of his way c. 37.
page 355: The visible churches of Greece, Aethiope, Armenia, and Rome, with the
nations contained therein, have in them the true church of God, wherein men may
be saved. D. Morton in his answer to the Protestants Apology lib. 4. cap. 2.
sect. 7. says, that the Assyrian Churches keep the true foundation of
Christian faith. The same, (especially of the Grecians) teaches Luther tom. 2.
lib. de captiu. Babylon. fol. 65. and in Assert. art. 37. fol. 114. Innius
cont. 4 lib. 4. cap. 6. Sedeel. Respons. ad These. Posnan. cap. 12. D. Whitaker
l^b. 7. cont. Duraeum sect. 3. Bucanus loco 41. quest. 5 D. Field lib. 3. de
Eccles. cap. 5. and 28. D. Fulke de Success. page 120. Burhill pro Tortura
Torti c. 15. and others.

9. And sometimes they are not less free-harted toward western heretic.
Melancthon in locis a Maulio editi^tit. de Eccles. page 491. writes, that two
girls, who were burnt (as he says) for Anabaptisme, They challenge the
Anabaptists.
held the foundation of says, and died in a good Conf^ssion. And Zuinglius
tom. 2. lib. de Author. sedit. fol. 134. and seq. exhorting his fellowers, not
to revolt from his doctrine, for the debates and quarrels between the
Protestants and the Anabaptists, calls both parts most learned and sons of
the same Father. Neither must thou (says he) give any man way to shake and
weake^ thy says, although thou see that men of the greatest learning move
disputes, and fall by the cares with much ^agernesse of contention, touching
external matters (he means baptism) but let this be rather thy steadfast
persuasion, that by the Son of God we are all made sons of the same Father.
Again: Neither am I wont to speak these things, for that I am so greatly
moved with the baptism of children. And ibidem lib. de Baptismo fol. 96. he
says, that baptism is a matter of ceremony, which the church may omit or take
quite away. Oecolampadius in his 2. book of epistles p. 363. says, baptism
is an external thing, which by the law of charity may be dispensed withal.
And Musculus in locis tit de haeresi page 605. reckons the Anabaptists amongst
those, who (says he) keeping the foundations of faith, about secondary matters
have fallen into misbeliefe. And Bucanus loc. 41. de Eccles. quest. 5.
avouches plainly, that Anabaptists are a Church, Like as a man attainted with
leprosy or out of his wits, is a man. Hi^ Majesty epist. ad Card. Peron page
25. says: Some reckon baptism among those things, which whether we have or
want, the matter is not great. And D. Whitaker cont. 4. quest. 7. cap. 2. page
716. says we may abstain from baptism, so there be no contempt and scandal
in the fact. Finally D. Morton in his answer to the Protestants Apology lib.
4. albeit in the 6. chapter he make a doubt whether Anabaptists retain and
hold the foundation, yet in the 2. cap. sect. 10. speaks thus: The
Anabaptists exclude Protestants and all different professions from the hope of
spiritual life, yet do not Protestants judge the state of every Anabaptist to
be so utterly desperate. We see how they teach that Anabaptists hold the
foundation, and deny but an external, secondary, and ceremonial matter, and
such as may be omitted, so it be don without scandal; that Anabaptists and
themselves are sons of the same Father, that they are in the state of
salvation, and that they are a church as a man tainted with leprosy is a man.
Now concerning the Arrians of these times, M. Morton in his book of the
Kingdom of Israel, and the Church page 94. And the Arrians.
avouches plainly, that their Churches are to be accounted the Churches of
God, Because (says he) they hold the foundation of the Gospel. Hooker in his
4. Daneus in c. 53. Aug. de hares. Whitaker. ad Rat. 10. page 241. Parentius in
Instruct Gall. p. 27.
book of Ecclesiastical policy page 181. writes thus: The Arians in the
reformed churches of Poland etc. Nay some of the Protestants lay claim to that
old heretic Aerius, for that he agreed with them in denial of prayer for the
dead, and some other points; yet that he was stained with Arianisme, S.
Epiphanius, who lived in those times haer. 75. and S. Augustine 53. (witnesses
whole credit herein can no way be impeached) do plainly testify.

They lay claim to their professed enemies.
10. Lastly they forbear not sometimes to challenge for their own, such as
were their professed enemies, as is certain by their claim to the Papists and
Grecians, who condemned and branded their doctrine with the marck of heresy.
And the Sacramentaries pretend a right to Luther and the Lutherans, In Council.
Trid In Censura Orient.
howbeit it is well known, that both the Master and the sect have diverse times
censured and condemned their doctrine by name, as in the Confessions of
Auspurg, Mansfeld, Antwerpe, and that of Sueueland set forth anno 1563. in the
book of Concord, in the visitation of Saxony, and else where it appears. And
that in the Conference of Marpurge and Montbelgard they gave them the repulse
and flatly refused to admit them for brethren. Nay, as Lanatherus writes lib.
de dissid. Euchar. anno 1556: There have been many Synodes held (by the
Lutherans) wherein they consulted what way they might take to quell and make an
end of the Sacramentaries. And they show the same encroaching desire in
personal Claims. For Illyricus in his Catalogue lib. 19. col. 1917, enrolleth
amongst his witnesses Clicthouaeus, an earnest and vehement adversary both of
Luther and Occolampadius. D. Humfrey in vita Iuelli claymeth Erasmus, for a
maintayner and Champion of the truth. Rainolds l. 1. de Idolat. cap. 2.
M. Fox vouchsafes him a place in his calendar of Protestant Saints, and
Verheiden sets his pourtraiture amongst the Worthies and Pairs of their
religion. Vorstius in Append. Respons. ad Sladum page 136. accounts him one
of his own, that is (says he) one of the reformed. D. Whitaker Contr. 4.
quest. 5. cap. 3. page 693 says: It is most apparent that Erasmus thought the
same of religion that we do. And yet Erasmus himself lib. 16. epist. 11.
professes, that he acknowledges not Luther, and impugneth openly both him and
his doctrine. And (as Amidorfius writes in epist. apud Lutherum tom. 2. fol.
487.): The sum of Erasmus doctrine is this, that Luthers doctrine is heresy.
O tho Brunsfelsius in his answer to Erasmus sponge, layth these things to his
charge: Thou make protestation never to have conversation or fellowship with
those men, who embrace the gospel under Luthers name. Again: It is well
known and confessed, that of so many enemies of the (Protestant) gospel, no
one ever did it more harm then thou. Hutterus in Expostulat. Hospin. part. 2.
Histor. fol. 72. James Andrew lib. cont. Hosium p. 110 D. James l. de corrupt.
scripturae and Patrum page 66. and others, say the like of him. D. Humphrey ad
Rat. 3. Campiani will have King Henry 8. to have been a member of their Church.
D. Fulke lib. cont. Heskins. and Sander. sect. 82. says, he was a member of
the Catholic church of Christ. And D. Andrews in Resp. ad Apoll. Bellarm. cap.
1. says: He was a true defender of the true says Bucer epist. dedicat.
Comment. ad Rom: He embraced the pure Gospel of Christ rejecting those
forgeries of men which are repugnant to it. And yet, it is most certain, that
he sharply persecuted and pursued Protestants even unto death. And as
Melancthon writes to him in epist. tom. 4: He oppressed the truth then
appearing and showing it self. And as Cambden says in Apparatu Annalium
Anglie. Protestants he burnt for heretics. Of Charles 5. Scultetus in Conc.
secular. page 10. writes thus: It is known by undoubted demonstration, that
Charles 5. departed this life trusting to the same comfort an^ the same says,
which Luther drew from the sacred welsprings, and broached to the people,
(James Andrews lib. cont. Hosium page 233. has the like) and yet in the same
sermon p. 27. he says: To this alone he bent his whole endeauours, that he
might pluck up the Lutheran religion by the roots. M Dove in his book of
Recusancy will needs persuade us, that Bellarmine himself is a Protestant, or
at least no right Papist. What marvel is it, if these men be so hardy as to
challenge the ancient Fathers, seeing they are not ashamed to claim in this
manner their professed enemies, such as are known to all the world, and are
yet alive.

That Protestants sometimes acknowledge Idolaters, Infidels, Antichrist
himself, and Atheists to be members of their Church. CHAP. IV.
1. THAT they sometimes confess idolaters are members of their Church,
Protestants challenge idolaters.
is evident. First for that they refuse not to receive Papists, (as we have
heard before) in exclamations and outcries against whose idolatry, their
tongues and pens are set most a work, for to their worship of the Eucharist,
of Saints, of images, of relics, they afford no milder name. And secondly it
appears by their own words. For M. Hooker in his 3. book of Ecclesiastical
Policy page 126. says: Christians by external profession they are all, whose
mark of recogniscance has in it those things which we have mentioned; yea
although they be impious idolaters, wicked heretics, persons excommunicable.
Again: Those whose knees were bowed unto Baal, even they were also of the
visible Church of God. Boysseul in Confut. p. 822 answering to the place where
Spondeus objected that if the Church of Rome be an Idolatresse, (as Boysseul
had avouched) it is not the Church of Christ; makes this reply: And why not as
well as Israel? And D. Whitaker Cont. 2. quest. 3. cap. 3. page 475. says:
Although this error (Idolatry in adoring the calfe) were most grievous, yet it
destroyed not the whole nature of the Church.

2. And Infidells.
That they sometimes comprize also Infidels in the Church, is manifest, first
because they affirm that such may be saved; For M. Fox in his Martyrologe page
495. reports that a certain Protestant Martyr whole learning piety and zeal
he greatly commends, taught that a Turk, Saracen, or any Mahamet an
whatsoever may be saved; if he trust in one God and keep his law. M. Bale in
his 6. Century page 464. bids us beware that we condemn not rashly any Turk.
And Zuinglius tom. 1. lib. de prouid. fol. 370. says: It is not universally
true, that who so has no faith is damned. Again: As for the damnation of
unbelievers it is meant only of those, who heard and did not believe. And tom.
2. declarat. de peccat. orig. fol. 118: This saying (who so does not believe
shall be condemned) must in no wise be absolutely understood, but it is to be
understood of those, See Homi^^ in Specim. Contr. art. 27.
who having heard the gospel would not believe. And ibidem in exposit. fidei
fol. 559. he says, that in heaven Christians shall meet many heathens, whose
names he there sets down, and amongst the rest that cruel Theseus, and
Magician Numa, the founder of heathenish superstitions amongst the Romans.
Which opinion of his those of Zurich in Apolog. Gualter. in prefat. tom. 1.
Zuinglij, Simler. in vita Bullengeri, and others seek to patronize and make
good. Now it were folly and madness, to avouch that these men were of the number
of the faithful. They believe then that infidels may be saved. But S. Augustine
was of a far different belief lib. 4. cont. Iul. cap. 3. where he writes
thus: What one of those, who would be accounted Christians, will say an
Infidel is just, be it even Fabritius.

3. Secondly their doctrine touching the predestinate carries with it a
necessary acknowledgement of their Communion with Infidels. For they teach,
that who so is predestinate is always a member of the Church. Hus his first
article condemned by the Council of Constance was this: The predestinate
remains ever a member of the Church. And Luther tom. 2. in Assert. art. 30: I
say the opinions of John Hus are all Evangelical and Christian. Again: I
admit all the condemned articles of John Hus. And tom. 1. in disput. Lypsic.
fol. 254. he maintains openly this article of Hus: The Church is the whole
multitude of the predestinate. Vorstius in Anti-bellarmine page 125: We
affirm that the Council of Constance, which condemned the doctrine of Hus
(that who so is predestinate is always a member of the Church) was surely in
this respect Antichristian. Danaeus in Resp. ad Bellarm. Contr. 4. lib. 3. cap.
2. says: The first opinion (which was the opinion of Hus) is true, and is
ours. Again: our opinion is that the Church is the whole company of men, whom
God has predestined to salvation And cap. 7: It must be answered that Paul
was always (but not always apparently in regard of men) of Gods true Church.
Again: Such Turks and Jews as God has predestined to salvation, are of
the Church, even now at this time in regard they are predestinate and in
respect of God; but they are not yet of Gods Church apparently, and in respect
of us, for as much as they lack yet those marks, whereby God does here show us
men who are of the church. And Cont. 4. lib. 3. cap. 12: The true definition of
the true church is this: The company and multitude of those, whom God has
chosen to salvation. And Iunius lib. 3. de Eccles. cap. 7: Paul was always of
the church according to predestination; from which (says he) the church takes
her being, or formal definition; but not according to the outward form of the
church. What can be more apparent, then that these men teach, that the
predestinate are members of the church according to the true being thereof and
in the sight of God, even during the time of their infidelity.

4. Thirdly this follows necessarily upon that which they teach concerning
infants (especially such as are descended from faithful parents) departing
this life unbaptized. For they affirm, that the children of the faithful are
actually in the Church, as the French Confession article 35: Together with the
parents God accounts also their offspring in the church. And the Zuitzers cap.
20: Why should not they (the children of the faithful) be ingrafted by sacred
baptism, who are Gods proper possession and within his church? Calvin in
Instruct. cont. Anabap. art. 1: Unspotted infants are in the Communion of the
church before they come forth of their Mothers womb. And Pareus lib. 3. de
Iustificat cap. 4. page 884: Calvin on good reason determines, that the
children of the church, are borne citizens of the church. Their doctrine also
has the same issue, who teach that infants (at leastwise the children of the
faithful) are saved without baptism; as the Protestants in the colloq.
Ratisbon. And Zuinglius tom. 2. Declarat. de peccat. orig. fol. 119: Concerning
Christians children we are assured, that they are not damned for original
sin; of others we have not the like assurance: howbeit, to confess
ingenuously, the opinion we taught heretofore, to wit, that we ought not to
judge rashly of heathens children, seems to us the more probable Voritius in
Anti-bellarmine page 542: Zuinglius and some other ghospellers avouch, that all
children whatsoever are by the grace of Christ saved, others for the most part
hold, that at leastwise all the elect, whether extract from faithful or other
parents do even unbaptized attain to salvation. Whereof he says: The opinion
of these later is surely the safest; and yet the first opinion is probable
enough and ought not to be rashly condemned. Now as D. Whitaker says Cont. 2.
quest. 1. cap. 5. and 6: All that are saved are really and actually in the
church. And D. Morton part. 1. Apol. lib. 1. cap. 4: To be of the church in
possibility, suffices not to salvation. Lubbertus lib. 2. de Eccles. cap. 2:
Neither can any one be saved except he be actually and really in the church.
Whence Martyr in 1. Cor. 7. fol. 177. says: Infants must of necessity
appertain unto the church, seeing there is no salvation without it. They teach
moreover, that Infants have no faith, Infants without all faith according to
Protestants.
and consequently that they are infidels, whence it ensues that they account
some infidels to be actually of the church. Calvin. 4. Institut. cap. 16.. 19:
I will not lightly affirm, that they (infants) are endued with the same faith
we find in our selves. And. seq. he says: Infants are baptized for future
repentance and says. Now if they dye before they are of years. God renews
them by the virtue of his spirit, which we do not comprehend, in such manner as
himself alone knows how to bring to pass. Lib. cont. Seruet. page 647. he
says, that that sentence of the Scripture: Whosoever belieueth not in the
Son of God abides in death, and the wrath of God remains upon him,
belongs not to infants, but only to such as are obstinate. And in cap. 5.
Romans v. 17: That you may be partaker of justice, it is needful that you be
faithful, because it is received by says. To infants it is communicated by a
special manner. Bucer in cap. 19. Matthaei page 404: Paul says that says
comes by hearing the word preached, and in the same sort all the Scripture
speaks of says. Seeing therefore infants hear not the word preached, they
cannot have this kind of says. But out of that, that infants want says,
nothing less can be concluded, then (which some think) that therefore they
cannot please God. Infants are blessed by the grace of God and merits of
Christ. But if they be taken hence in their infancy, they shall know God and
reap felicity by some other knowledge then faith. Musculus in locis tit. de
baptismo: Infants have yet no faith. Again: Infants are saved by Gods
election, though they be taken out of this life not only unbaptized, but even
before they have faith. Beza in Confess. cap. 4. sect. 48: It does not appear
to us that infants are endowed with that habit of faith, Infants have not so
much as the habit of faith.
which we said was required to the receiving of the matter and effect of the
Sacraments, nor is it likely that they are. And in colloq. Montisbel. page 407:
Wherefore, though the children of the faithful want says, yet is not
baptism unprofitable to them. And part. 2. Respons. ad acta Montisbel. page
124: All eit infants have no says of their own, especially actual; yet
rightly are they baptized according to the form of the Covenant, I will be thy
God, and of thy seed, which is apprehended by the parents to themselves and
their children. And page 129: I confess that says is required, that infants
comprehended in the Covenant may please God; but I deny, that they can or ought
to be endowed with their own faith inherent in them. Dancus l. 4. de baptismo
cap. 10. page 268. proposes to himself this question: What is the faith
which in baptism we require in infants? and answers: None. Vrsinus in
defens. argument. Bezae. God receives infants into the Church without faith.
Peter Martyr in 1. Cor. 7. page 94: Seeing the holy Scripture does not tell me,
that infants believe, or those miracles are wrought in them, neither see I that
it is necessary for their salvation, I think it is enough that they be thought
to be saved, because by election and predestination they belong to the people
of God, and are endued with the holy Ghost, who is the author of faith, hope,
and Charity. Perhaps they will answer out of Augustins opinion, that they are
saved by the says of others, to wit of their parents. But the Prophet says
that every one is saved by his own says, not by other men's says. Wherefore
we answer more easily, who exact express and actual faith in those that are
of years, but in the children of Christians, who are brought to be Christened,
we say faith is begun in its principle and root, because they have the holy
Ghost firm whence all both faith and other virtues do flow. D. Whitaker Cont.
2. quest. 6. c. 3. page 566: Baptism does not infuse any says or grace into
infants. And he says plainly, that infants have no faith. And lib. 8. cont.
Duraeum sect. 77: Albeit in the Sacraments faith which receives the word of
promise, be necessary, yet that says is not needful in infants, albeit it be
not to be doubted but the holy Ghost effectually works in them after a secret
and wonderful manner. M. Perkins de praedestina^. tom. 1. col. 149: Infants
which dye in the Covenant, we believe to be saved by tenor of that Covenant,
but they were not chosen for faith or according to faith, which set they had
not And (...) ^^rie causar. cap. 25: Elected ^nfants dying in the womb or
soon after they be borne, are saved after a hidden and unspeakable manner
ingrafted in Christ by the spirit of God. Luther tom. 6. in cap. 25. Genesis fol.
322: Unbaptized infants have no faith. Melancthon in locis tit. de baptismo to.
3. fol. 238: It is most true that says is required in all that are of years.
But concern^^g infants (says he) the matter is otherwise. Infants (...)
Kemnitius part. 2. Exam. tit. de baptism. page 89. tells us that some
Protestants are of opinion, that infants are indeed saved by the grace of God,
but without says. Nor does their saying that the seed or root of faith, or
else an inclination or disposition to faith (which some of them affirm infants
to have) help them any thing it all, both because Scharpe cont. 1. de Iustifi.
grants that this seed can neither have the knowledge nor applying of the
promises, and therefore is not Protestant faith, and because Musculus in locis
tit. de fide art. 7. confesses, that they distinguish and put a difference
between faith and this hidden seed. Now if it be no faith, it makes not him
faithful in whom it is. And lastly because (as themselves acknowledge) they
are not assured, whither infants have any such seed or no. For Calvin lib. 4.
cap. 16. 9. cit: Whether they have at all any knowledge like unto faith, I
choose rather to leave it undetermined. And he adds, that the manner of their
renewing is known to God alone. To these allegations you may add, that M.
Perkins in his Reformed Catholic cont. 16. says, a man may be saved by a
desire to have says: And nevertheless confesses that this desire is not
indeed says. And in 2. Galat. col. 91: God accepts the will and desire to
believe, for belief it self. Now as long as a man has not faith but only a
desire thereof, he is an infidel.

5. You might think, that having made this grant of salvation to infidels,
their liberality would rest here, and not pass these bounds; Protestants
challenge Antichrist,
but they go yet further, and bestow it sometimes even upon him, whom they
swear, yea believe as an article of their faith (and that with as great
certainty and assurance is they believe God is in heaven, or Christ is the
Messiah) to be that notable Antichrist foretold in Scripture. For thus writes
M. Powell lib. de Antichristo cap. 33. page 338: I will in no wise say, that
all the Popes from the time wherein Papistry was first revealed to be
Antichristianity, are damned. Howbeit in the beginning of his book he makes
this protestation: I solemnly take God to record, that I as certainly know the
Bishop of Rome to be that great Antichrist, and the Popish church to be the
Synagogue of Antichrist, as I know God to be in the heavens, or Jesus Christ to
be the true Messiah promised to the Fathers. D. Whitaker likewise com. 4. q. 5.
cap. 3. page 694. says: Let us cry aloud and swore by him who lives for ever,
that the Bishop of Rome is Antichrist. And to D. Sanders last demonstration
that the Pope is not Antichrist page 799: We may take that most sacred and
most true oath, and swear by him who lives for ever, that the Bishop of Rome
is the very Antichrist. And nevertheless in his answer to the first
demonstration he says with M. Powell: I will not say, that from the time that
Papistry began to be Antichristianity the Popes themselves have been all damned.
And both he cap. cit. p^g. 679. and 682. and other Protestants ordinarily
affirm that Antichrists Sea shall be in the true Church, among the company of
the saythfull, and that he shall be a citizen, and inhabitant, and Pastor of
the Church. To whom I pray will these men deny salvation, or a place in their
Church, who grant it unto Antichrist the sworn enemy of Christ, whom the
scripture it self styleth: Christ's adversary, the man of sin, the son of
perdition? I see not why they should henceforward upbraid us with Antichrist,
since they themselves claim him for a member of their Church.

6. It is also certain, that they challenge Atheists. For Illyricus in Catel.
lib. 9. col. 1916. D^ Humfrey respons. ad Rat. 3. That they challenge Atheists.
Camp. M. Fox in his Acts printed anno 1596. page 646. allot that Atheist
Machiauel an honorable room among the witnesses and maintayners of the truth.
And Luther apud Manlium in loc. tit. de Eccl. page 483. layth of Valla, that he
gave place to none but Epicure himself, and professed openly, that he held
opinions repugnant to the foundation of says. Nevertheless the same Luther
respons. ad Louan. and Colen. tom. 2. fol. 38. writes thus of him: Valla in my
judgment was either a remanent spark, or some fe^^eli of the primitive
Church, whose like in constancy and unfeigned zeal of Christian faith Italy or
the whole Church had not for many ages. One Epicure then in Luthers judgment
was the remanent spark, and Jewel of the Church.

That sometimes Protestants account all those their brethren, who under the
name of Christians oppose themselves any way against the Pope. CHAP. V.
1. THAT Protestants sometimes acknowledge all those for members of their
Church, who under the name of Christians do any way oppose themselves against
the Pope, I prove: First because some of them do openly so profess. For (as
Ke^nice reports in locis tit. de Eccles. page 122.) Some feign the Church to
be a rabble of all Sects, of Anabaptists, Sacramentaries, Swineseldians, and
others, so they be not Papists. And Capito in Calvin. epist. 6. Some have
brought in a liberty as if all were of the Ghospells side, whosoever have cast
of the Popes yoke. Musculus also in locis tit. de caena page 522. says: I
embrace all for brethren in the Lord, howsoever they disagree from me or among
themselves, as long as they mayntaine not the Popish impiety. Secondly, because
they profess, that the end of their preaching was to lessen the authority of
the Pope, For what end Luther and ^is fellows preached.
and Bishops, and to be contrary to them. For thus Luther writes of himself
epist. ad Frederic. Elect. tom. 2. fol. 330: The Ecclesiastical tyranny is now
weakened and broaken, which only I purposed in writing. Or as Slcidan lib. 3.
reports, He writes, that the Ecclesiastical tyranny is now weakened, and
that, that alone was his design at the first. And epist. ad Waldenses in
Ho^pin. part 2. fol. 8. he says, that he impugned transubstantiation only for
enny of the Papists. And in par^^ Confell. apud e^^^dem fol. 13. that he
impugned the Elevation only to spite the Papists. Calvin 4. Institut. cap. 10..
1. say^h: The end of our contention is, to bridle that infinite and barbarous
Dominion, which those, who would be accounted Pastors, have usurped over
souls. Zuinglius lib. de Auctor. Sedit. ^om. 2. ^ol. 125. affirms, that
there is a sort of Protestants, which for no other cause do hear the doctrine
of the Gospel then because they extremely hate the Popedom, and envy Papists
their felicity and glory. Bucer lib. de regno Christi cap. 4: The greatest part
of men seem to have sought only these things of the gospel. First that they
might shake of the tyranny of the Roman Antichrist, and of the false Bishops
etc. Luther also tom. 2. German. fol. 22. tells what was the end of the
Sacramentaries and Anabaptists: I hear (says he) that some embrace
Anabaptisme for this only end, that so they may spite the Bishop of Rome, even
as the Sacramentaries do only in hatred of the Romish Bishop, deny that there
is any thing in the sacrament beside bread and wine. Of the new Arians end thus
writes Z^nchius lib. 1. epist. page 154: Ou^ Arians have determined to
ouerturne from the foundation whatsoever is in the Church of Rome. And what end
Illyricus had, thus tells D. Whitaker ad. Rat. 8. Campiani: Illyricus went
further then he should, as I think to be the further of from you, whom he
hated.

2. Thirdly, because they call the departure from the Pope and Popish doctrine,
the foundation, a good part, and the sum of the Protestant building. S^ d^el
Respons. ad Arthu. cap. 12: Protestants agree in this foundation, that the
Church ought to be reformed out of the word of God, and that Popish errors
must be removed out of the Church. Seranta epist. dedicat ad Episc. Angliae: It
is to be wondered how much almost all the Reformers please themselves in this
point that they will have nothing common with the church of Rome. Grotius apud
Homium in Specimine etc: Neither can I forebeare to show the fountain and
offspring of this and other calamities; We think that we are so much the purer,
the further we go from points of Romish doctrine without any difference.
Vergerius dial. 1. page 20: We hope, that shortly all matters will be
composed. We could do, by Gods help, that which seemed the chiefest of all
and the hardest and well nigh impossible, that is, pull our selves and rid us
of the Papists tyranny. Wherefore nothing is to be doubted, but we shall
compass other matters of less moment. For a good foundation is laid, yea a
good part of the building is set up. And Zuinglius Respons. ad Billi. tom. 2.
fol. 261. When one objected unto him the dissension amongst the Sacramentaries
in expou^ding Christ's words of the supper, answers: No man ought to be
offended with this diversity, more then with the difference among many
captains, Tertull. praes. c. 41. Athanas. orat. 1. co^t. Arian. Hieron. ad
Cresiphont. August. in Psalm. 80. Beda l. 1. in Job. c. 7.
who go about to conquer a castle, whiles one would have it battered, another
undermined, and a third would have it scaled. For all agree to destroy the
castle, the difference is only about the way, not about the sum of the
matter. And so concludes, that if any Sacrame^taries have erred, They erred
(says he) in the letter not in spirit, in the sum they agree all. The sum
therefore wherein all Protestants agree, is to overthrow the Popish castle, and
Catholic faith, (in which also the ancient heretics agreed amongst themselves
as the holy Fathers do testify) and who attempteth that by what means soever,
erreth not in spirit, but in letter only, not in the sum but in some
circumstance only of Protesta^cy. But with what spirit they are led herein, let
them hear of their own Prophet Luther, defens. verb. coenae tom. 7. l. 411:
What a kind of spirit is that (says he) which has no other end, but to
weaken the adverse party? without all doubt it is no other spirit then the
Devil.

3. Fourthly, because they describe, paint, and name a Protestant by departure
from the Pope and Popish doctrine. The Confession of Wittenberg in Prefat.
describes Protestants to be such, as have changed in their Churches a kind of
(Popish) doctrine, which had been used for many years, and some other ancient
ceremonies. M. Perkins in the Preface of his Reformed Catholic, says: By a
Reformed Catholic (so he terms a Protestant) I understand any one, that
holds the same necessary heads of Religion with the Roman Church, yet so as he
pares of and reiects all errors in doctrine, whereby the said religion is
corrupted. D. Willet in the Preface of his Synopsis: A Protestant is he that
professes the gospel of Jesus Christ, and has renounced the jurisdiction of
the Sea of Rome, and the forced and unnatural obedience to the Pope.
Schusselburg tom. 13. Catal. Haeret. page 23: A Lutheran or true Christian is
he, who has severed himself from Papists etc. And tom. 8. page 363: True
Lutherans are they who embrace the doctrine of the gospel amending Popish
abuses. You see how in all these descriptions of a Protestant, the denial of
the Pope and Popish doctrine is put as a certain difference, which concurreth
to the making and distinguishing of a Protestant from all others. Hereupon D.
Audrews Apol. Cont. Bellarm. cap. 1. says: Saving this Protestation (that they
will not suffer certain Popish errors and abuses) our faith is no other then
yours is, or ought to be. And he adds, that they call their religion
reformed, only because it is purged from certain devises and corruptions,
which had crept into it. And says, that Bucer and Peter Martyr did only pluck
up certain cockle, which Papists had sowed. In like sort Boysseul in his
Confutation of Sponde page 724. says: Take away your Popery and that which
depends thereof, and you and we shall be but one church, because we shall
have but one Confession of faith. Moreover Plessy in the forefront of his
mystery of iniquity, painteth a Protestant with a torch in his hand, setting
fire to the tower of Babylon, by which he understands the Popedom. And
finally Luther in exempl. Theol. Papist. tom. 2. fol. 401. calls himself an
Anti-papist, as of his principal end or office, and says, that he was called
by divine revelation to destroy the Popes Kingdom. D. Humfrey also terms
Ochinus a stout Anti-papist, as if to be a Protestant and an Anti-papist were
all one.

4. Fifthly, because the same opinions which in Papists they detest, in other
who are opposite to the Pope, they dissemble or extenuate. Lubbert. lib. 1.
Replicat. cap. 4. says: The Lutherans dispute not with us about the Canon of
Scriptures, nor we with them. And lib. 4. de Council. cap. vlt: We contend not
with the Churches of Saxony, which keep images in the Churches. And yet they
dispute most eagerly against Catholics about the Canon of scriptures, and
images. The Scots in their general Confession profess to detest Popery, for
maintayning the real presence of Christ's body in the Eucharist, for making the
sign of the Cross, for denying infants without baptism to be saved. And in
their other Confession c. 22. they say they shun the Communion of the Popish
Church, Conf. Augustus ^visit. ^axon. Liturgia. Auglia^. Conference at Hampt.
Court.
because her ministers are not Ministers of Christ, because the permits
women to christen in case of necessity; and yet dissemble, that the Lutheran
Protestants allow all these points; and that the English Protestants admit
Popish Priests for sufficient ministers command the making of the cross in
baptism, and allow women's baptism in case of necessity; but because they are
against the Pope, as well as the Scots, their opposition to the Pope, like sole
faith covers all, and makes that the Scots impute not these matters to them.
And if at any time the Catholics do set before their eyes the errors or
dissentions amongst them, either they impudently La^ko and Erastus in Schussel.
l. 4. Theol. Calvin p. 310. Field l. 3. of the Church cap. 24.
deny them or greatly extenuate them, saying, that they are not about the Apol.
Anglis.
foundation, not of Whit. Co^t 2 q. 5. cap. 8.
weighty matters, of light matters, not of the Bucer in Schussel. lib cit.
Calvin de rat. concord. p. 862.
matter but of the manner, of Epist. Monitor.
things indifferent, of I know not what titles, and finally only of Mart. in
loc. tit. de Euchar.. 65. Hosp part. 2 fol. 134. 163. 109. Bru^sfeld. resp. ad
Erasm.
words. Surely I imagine, as they say, that all sins in the elect faithful
are venial, but in others all are mortal: so they deem, that all errors in
those that are opposite to the Pope are venial and light; but in Papists all
are heinous and mortal. So much the alteration of the person changes the case
with them. Hereupon Q. Elizabeth enacted, not that it should be treason for any
one to dissuade from that religion which she had established, unless it were
done with intention to induce him who was dissuaded, to the obedience of the
Bishop of Rome. And hereupon also some of them openly profess, that they more
esteem Turks then Papists; forsooth because the Turk agrees with them in
hatred of the Pope and Popery, in respect whereof they little regard the
consent in the mysteries of the Trinity, and Incarnation and Passion, and other
articles of Christian faith. Sixthly they make the forsaking of Popery an
evident argument of true religion, and oppose their consent therein, as a
sufficient cloak to cover all their dissentions in other matters. Zuinglius
Prefat. Ecclesiast. tom. 1. fol. 39: It is an evident argument of true Religion
among you, that you cast out all the filth of (Popish) idolatry and bridle the
sloathfull company of Priests and put them from the Church. And when Cardinal
Hosius objected to Protestants their disagreement about the Eucharist, James
Andrews in his answer page 367 says: In what Protestants especially agree.
What is this dissension to you Papists? Be it we truly disagree in this
point, yet in that we especially agree, that with one mind we impugn your
Popery as true Antichristianisme. And Drentius in the Preface of the same
book: Otherwise with one consent they fight against Popery. And to the same
objection Calvin in Confutat. Holland. page 576 says thus: True; yet with one
consent we all teach, that (Popish) idolatry is to be detested. In like manner
Beza in Hospin. part. 2. Hist. fol. 300: I confess; yet in this we all agree
with united minds to impugn your transubstantiation. Sadeel also Respons, ad
Sophism. Turriani page 562: Yet nevertheless this my little book will be
witness with how conjoined strength all our Churches do set upon the Popish
errors. And in in dice Repet. page 808: It is well that all they who conjoined
themselves to the reformed Church, with one consent reject the Popes Primacy.
And D. Whitaker Contr. 2. quest 5. cap. 8. page 521: Yet in the mean time we
all agree against the Pope. And in this unity of theirs to be against the Pope,
they greatly triumph. His majesty in his monitory epistle p. 174: Almost the
half part of the Christian world is gone out of Babylon. And D. Andrews
respons. ad Apol. Bellarm. cap. 14: Almost False of the Christian world is so
far united in one profession, as that they are gone out of Babylon. And when
Becanus had found fault with him, because he said. The King of great Britany
and the Kings of Denmarck and Sweden with the Princes of Germany who are of one
belief with him, are a part of the Lords flock; because the Kings of Denmarck
and Sweden be Lutherans, and therefore are not of one belief, with the King of
great Britany; Burhill in defense of him cap. 15. answers: That, who are of
one belief with King James, is put in steed of who with him refuse to be under
the Pope. They mean then, that all those are of one belief with them, and be
part of the Lords flock, who refuse to be under the Pope. Which kind of unity
is that, which his Majesty in his declaration against Vorstius noted Heretics
to keep, saying page 49: There are in Hungary and Bohemia innumerable Heretics,
who agree together only in hatred of the Pope. But not only Heretics, but also
Jews, Turcks and Infidells agree with Protestants in this point. An excellent
unity surely, and worthy of Christians, wherein they shall have such partners
and fellows. Seauenthly I prove it, because when they be asked, who were
Protestants before Luther, they produce no other then such as were adversaries
to the Pope. Illyricus being to make a role of witnesses, dares not call them
Protestants or witnesses of the Protestant truth, Editio Lugdun.
but simply witnesses of the truth, or witnesses who reclaymed against the Pope
and Popish errors. And in the Preface professes, that he gathers, as far
as he cold, all those, who in any sort did before Luther give testimony to the
truth of Christ against the errors and furies of Antichrist. And l. 20. col.
1951. after he had brought forth all his witnesses, he says of them thus: They
desired a fuller manifestation of the truth, which at last (says he) we in
this sixteenth age have obtained. That is, his witnesses attained not to the
knowledge of Protestant truth, which was revealed but in the sixteenth age.
Nevertheless they seemed witnesses good enough for Illyricus, because in some
sort they were opposite to the doctrine and deeds of the Pope. Beza also lib.
de notis Eccles. page 80. when he had objected to himself, that in former times
their Church was not visible, answers: I say, that from the Apostles time
there was scarce any age, in which as soon as this Antichrist (the Pope) began
to put out his head, God did not raise some, who opposed themselves against his
tyranny. And to the same question thus answea^eth Sadeel in Refutat. art. 6^.
Posnan. page 851: We are ready to show, that there was no age, in which there
were not some, who reproved your false Church. Surely these men imagine
Protestancy to consist in opposition to the Pope and Popery, or they say
nothing to the question proposed. Likewise D. Whitaker Cont. 2. quest. 3. cap.
2. page 474. proves, that the Protestant Church has always been in Popery,
because therein have been some, who though they communicated with Papists, yet
before death rejected their opinions; which kind of proof supposes, that it
suffices to a Protestant to reject Popish opinions.

5. You see then, that the chief ring leaders of the Protestants confess,
that theirs and their followers end was to abate the authority of the Pope;
that they deem the forsaking of the Pope to be the foundation, a good part,
and sum of the Protestant building; that they account the leaving of Popery
an evident argument of true religion; that they define, describe, paint, and
name a Protestant by opposition to the Pope; that they say their faith
differs not from ours, but in denial of some of our articles; that they
deny, dissemble, and extenuate whatsoever they dislike in those, who are
adversaries to the Pope; that they oppose their consent in opposition against
the Pope as a buckler against all objections about their dissentions in other
articles; and finally that being bidden to produce Protestants before Luther,
they name such as any way opposed themselves against the Pope. What do all
these things declare, but that which some of them say in plain words, that the
Protestant Church is a rabble of all sects which are not Papists.

6. But out of all things which have been said What follows of all hitherto
said.
that according as they please they include, or exclude the same men out of the
Church. Who will not (to use S. Augustins words) fear these men, who have
received such wonderful power over men. Secondly we see, that they lib. 3.
cont. Crescon. c. 20. Praescript. c. 41.42. L. 18. de Ciuit. c. 50.
who (as Tertullian says) make peace generally with all, and with whom
division is their very unity. For (as S. Augustine notes) the devil has
stirred up heretics, as if they might be indifferently permitted in the city
of God without amendment, as the city of confusion indifferently had
Philosophers of different, yea of contrary opinions. Thirdly we see, how
infamous a society Protestancy What they mean by a Protestant in tym^past.
Fifthly, we may gather, what Protestants mean, when they say Protestants have
been always, or before Luther. For they mean not, that there have been always
some, who believed at least all their fundamental articles, but that there
were always some, who (as they speak) opposed themselves against the Pope or
his errors, whether they were otherwise Schismatiks, Heretics, infidels, or
Atheists. Of which kind of men I deny not but there have been always some
rabble, but none but a mad man will say, that it was the holy Church and spouse
of Christ. Sixthly we see how little Protestants account Note.
that he can associate and unite together forms so contrary as are light and
darkness, life and death, truth and lies? or that the society in darkness,
lies, and death, as are the societies in Schism, Heresy, and infidelity, can
become one with the society in light, life, and truth, as the Church is? If
therefore seriously they believed their Church to be the church of Christ, they
would never think, that she could become one with the society in Schism,
heresy, and infidelity. And this sometimes Protestants themselves perceive. For
Brentius in Appendice Recognit. thus speaks to the Sacramentaries, when they
desired to be held for brethren of the Lutherans, whom yet they condemned of
heresy: If they iud^e our opinion to be impious, with what face do they desire
to join themselves with that Church which maintayneth impious doctrine, and to
be held of her for brethren? What fellowship (says Paul) is there of justice
with injustice? or what Communion of light with darkness, or what agreement of
Christ with Belial? or what for the saythfull with the infidel? Wherefore if
they desire this sincerely, and in earnest, they manifestly show, that they
make mockery of religion, as if it skilled not which one follow, so he may
pass his life peaceably and quietly. In like manner those of Wittenberge in
their Refutation of the orthodoxall consent page 636. say: We cannot wounder
enough, that seeing they not only accuse the doctors of our Church of horrible
and damned heresies, but also have long since condemned them, to wit, of
Arianisme, Nestorianisme, Eutichianisme, Marcionisme, Manicheisme, and the
Monothelites heresies; nevertheless they dare account us for brethren and
desire our brotherhood. Who that is careful of piety and truth can persuade
himself, that these Sectmasters do in earnest handle religion? For if we be
such as we are judged of them, our friendship and fraternity is to be detested,
not desired. Thus speak the Lutherans to the Sacramentaries, which no whit
less falls upon themselves, because they also challenge the Hussites and
other old heretics, whom they cannot excuse from

That it is necessary for a Protestant to believe with only special faith that
himself is justified. CHAP. VI.
1. ABOVE all things it is most necessary to an invisible or true Protestant in
the sight of God (as they term him) that with only special or peculiar faith
he believe some thing belonging to himself, to wit, that he is justified in
Christ, or (as they use to speak) that with faith he apprehend Christ's
justice, and apply it unto him elf in particular. And to a visible Protestant
in sight of men it is in like sort necessary, that he profess himself to
believe with such a faith that he is justified in Christ. For example; For
Luther to have been a true Protestant before God, it is needful that he have
truly believed himself to be justified by only the foresaid special faith,
which he had of his own justice; which faith they call special or particular,
because it was particular to Luther, no man being bound to believe Luther to be
justified besides himself. And for Luther to have been a visible Protestant in
the sight of men, it was needful in like manner to have professed himself to
have believed that he was justified by only the said faith. The same I say of
Calvin and of every Protestant in particular. That according to their doctrine
it is most necessary to a Protestant that he believe himself to be justified
by only special faith is manifest. First because they teach, that a man is
justified by only special faith, wherewith he belieueth something belonging to
himself alone, not by an universal or Catholic faith whereby he belieueth
the mysteryes of Christian religion common to all, and which every one must
believe, for this faith they call historical, and say it may be in such as are
not just, yea in hipocrites and Devils. Seeing therefore in their opinion no
man is a true Protestant in the sight of God, but only he that is just, nor any
just but who has a special or peculiar faith wherewith he apprehends
Christ's justice to himself, it is manifest, that according to their
principles, none can be a true Protestant before God, unless he have the
foresaid special faith; and in like manner that none can be a visible
Protestant before men, unless he profess to believe justification by only
special faith; because none can be accounted to be of any religion, unless he
profess to believe those means of obtaining justification and remission of
sins, which that religion teaches. Calvin 3. Instit. cap. 2.. 16: None is a
true faithful man, None faithful without special faith.
but he, who with a solid persuasion that God loves him, assures himself of
all things from his goodness etc. And. 39. he says: Without this, Christianity
stands not. And in Romans 1. v. 7: Hence we gather, that none do rightly
account themselves faithful, unless they certainly assure themselves that God
loves them. M. Perkins in his exposition of the Creed col. 780: No man can
believe himself to be a member of the Church, What faith is according to
Protestants.
unless he firmly and certainly persuaded that he is predestined to
eternal life. Besides Calvin in his little Catechism cap. de fide defines
justifying faith, to be a certain and steadfast knowledge of our heavenly
Fathers goodwill toward us. The like definition he has 3. Pareus l. 1. de
Iustit. cap. 11,
Instit. cap 2.. 2, Luther in cap. 4. Ioelis tom. 4. and generally all
Lutherans and Sacramentaries, except that where some define it to be a
knowledge, others say it is an assurance or confidence of Gods favor. Hence it
is manifest, that they account none a just or faithful man, unless he have a
special faith of his justification and Gods favor toward him.

2. Secondly I prove the same out of diverse commendations of Protestants
touching the necessity and excellency of this article. For Luther tom. 1. in
disp. fol. 410. says: In vain he belieueth other articles, who denies that
we are justified by only faith. And tom. 2. lib. cont. Missam fol. 390. he
says, The Sum.
that this article is the sum of his doctrine and Gospel. And lib. de votis
fol. 278. that this is the definition of a Christian, who belieueth to be
justified by the only works of Christ alone, The Definition.
without his own. Tom 3. in Psalm. Grad. fol. 573: That the only knowledge of
this article conserueth the Church. And fol. 576. that it is the sum of
Christian doctrine, The Sun.
the sun which lightneth the Church, which falling the Church falls. Tom.
4. in cap. 53. Isaiae fol. 200. he writes, that it is as it were the
foundation on which the Gospel relyeth, and which alone distinguishes his
religion from all others. Fol. 201. that it is like the lively fountain whence
all treasures of divine wisdom do flow, The foundation.
and the foundation of all the Church and Christianity. And Prefat in Ionam,
that it is the chief of Christian doctrine, and the sum of all the
scripture. Tom. 5. Prefat. in Galat. fol. 269. he affirms, that it is the
only rock of the Church. And 273: The rock.
Who holds not this article, are (says he) either Jews, or Turks, or
Papists, or Heretics. And fol. 274. that in this doctrine alone the Church is
made and consists. And fol. 333. he plainly confesses, that it is his only
defense, Their defense.
without which (as he speaks) both we and heretics together with us, had
long since perished. Tom. 6. in cap. 21. Genes. fol. 265. he terms it the
chiefest article of faith. And tom. 7. epist. ad Liuones fol. 499. avouches,
that it is the only way to heaven, and the sum of Christian life. The only
way.
And finally in the first article concluded at Smalcald: In this article are
and consist all which in our life we teach, witness, and do against the Pope,
the Devil, and all the world. This and much more writes Luther in
commendation of the necessity and excellency of the article touching
justification by only faith. And of the contrary belief concerning
justification by works tom. 5. in cap. 3. Galat. fol. 257. he says: It is the
sinck of all evils. And in cap. 4. fol. 402: That it takes away the truth of
the Gospel, faith, and Christ himself.

3. With Luther herein agree the Lutherans. For the Confession of Auspurg cap.
de discrimine ciborum, says, that this article is the proper doctrine of the
gospel. And the Apology thereof cap. de iustificat. that it is the principal
place of Christian doctrine. And cap. de poenit: the chiefest place and
principallest article about which they fight with their adversaries; and the
knowledge whereof they account most necessary to all. The Conf^ssion of Saxony,
that this article being extinguished, there is no difference betwixt the Church
and other men. The Confession of Bohemia, The su^me of all Christianity and
piety.
that this article is held of them for the chiefest of all, as which is the
sum of all Christianity and piety. The university of Wittemberg. tom. 2.
Lutheri. fol. 248: It is the chiefest article of the gospel. The Ministers of
the Prince Electour in Colloq. Aldeburg. page 1. say, that this article is as
it were the sum and last end, to which all the other articles do look unto.
And those of the D. of Saxony page 132. affirm, that as long as this doctrine
stands, Luther stands, yea Paul, yea God. This doctrine falling, Luther
falls, This falling, God falls.
Paul falls, God falls; and all men are necessarily damned. Those of
Magdeburg in Sleidan lib. 21. call this article the stay of salvation.
Melancthon tom. 2. Lutheri fol. 506. terms it the chiefest article. Kemnice
part. 1. Examen. tit. de Iustificat. page 231: The chiefest place. And in locis
part. 1. tit. de Iustificat. page 216. writes, that it is like the castle and
principal bulwarck of all Christian doctrine and religion. Lobechius disput.
22. The Bulwarck.
page 515. adds, that it is one of the chiefest points of our says, because
the prore and poupe of Christianity is contained therein, and on it hangs the
hinges of our salvation. Scnusselburg. tom 8. Catal. haeret. affirms, it to
be the chiefest article, wherein consists our salvation, and which is the
head of our religion. Finally (to omit other Lutherans) Brentius in Apolog.
Wittemberg. part. 3. page 703. says, The essential difference.
that the essential difference betwixt a Protestant and a Papist is, that of
the Protestant religion these are the first principles: The scriptur, Christ
the Son of God, and says or assurance of Gods favor toward us for Christ's
sake.

4. Neither do Sacramentaries dissent herein from the Lutherans, For the
Confession of Basse avouches it to be the first and chiefest point in
Evangelical doctrine. The French Confess. art. 18. calls it the foundation.
Zuinglius in Isagoge fol. 268. says it is the sum of the Gospel. Bucer
Respons. ad Abrincens. page 613. And Gualter Prefat. in Joan. write, that about
this article is almost all the whole substance of dispute with them and
Papists. Bullinger in Compend. lib. 5. cap. 1. terms it the chiefest point of
holy, Evangelical, and Apostolical doctrine. And lib. 8. cap. 8: The highest
and chiefest head of Christian doctrine and of faith. Peter Martyr in locis
tit. de Iustif. col. 939. says, it is the head, fountain, and stay of all
piety. Tom. 2. epist. ad Peregrin. col. 136: The sum of Summe^.
It is the sum of sums, and chiefest head. Calvin 4. Institut. cap. 11.. 1.
that it is the chiefest proppe of religion, lib. 11.. 17: The sum of all
piety. And Respons. and Sadolet. page 125. that the knowledge thereof being
gone, Christi glory is extinct, religion abolished, and hope of salvation wholly
ouerturned. And lib. de Necess. Reform. fol. 47. that the safety of the Church
depends upon this doctrine no less then man's life depends of his soul,
Pareus in Prooem. lib. de Iustificat: On this alone the hinges of our comfort
and salvation do hang. And lib. 2. cap. 2. affirms that it was the chiefest
cause of the separation of the Protestant Church from Popery. And lib. 4. cap.
2. says: The only doctrine of obtaining justice and salvation by only says
and of loosing them by incredulity, is the sincere and proper gospel; all
other doctrine in the scripture belongs to the law. And those of Geneua
Prefat. Syntag. Confess. avouch, that this article is the groundworke, form,
and soul of Christian religion; The soul.
the sum of Evangelical doctrine, of which men are called faithful and true
Christians, without which the knowledge of other articles has no wholesome
fruit. For it is the substantial, inward, and formal cause of salvation; of
which all Sacraments instituted by God are and were pledges and seals, unto
which article all the other do tend as to their center, and in which man's
felicity consists.

5. Neither do our English Protestants make less account of this their article
of justification by only faith. For D. Whitaker Cont. 2. quest. 6. cap. 3. page
562. says: It seems to be the chiefest of all, and most fundamental, The
Prore and Puppe.
as in which the Prore and puppe of our salvation consists; and who feign any
other means of Justification, do overthrow the foundation and most necessary
heads of Christian religion, and are fallen from salvation and everlasting
life. And Respons: ad Rat. r. Camp. he writes thus of their doctrine of
Justification by only faith: If James, or a heavenly Angel disallow it, he is
impure, wicked, and to be detested to hell. D. Humfrey in his oration de
vitando fermen to calls this article, The chiefest point and hinges of faith.
D. Fulke de Success. page 4. The principal head of the gospel. M. Fox in his
acts page 440: The foundation of all Christianity. And page 770: The foundation.
The only principal origin of our salvation. And finally M. Powell lib. 2. de
Antichristo cap. 5: The sum of the doctrine of says Neither is it to be
merueiled, that Protestants so highly esteem this their article, both because
it is the chiefest bait wherewith they draw men unto them, as also because (as
Luther confessed) it is their chief defense, without which they had long since
perished; and finally because Justification being one principal end of
religion, if special faith be the only means to attain to justification,
undoubtedly it ought highly to be esteemed of that religion, which belieueth it
to be such a means. Protestants esteem of only faith.
Thus we see that according to the common opinion of Protestants, to believe
himself to be justified by only faith, is the chiefest article, the
foundation, the stay, the head, the fountain, the sum, the last end, the
prore and puppe, the hinges, the proppe, the castle, the bulwarck, the
essential difference, the definition, the soul, the form, the formal cause,
the only rock, the only safeguard of Protestancy, and the only way to heaven,
which falling the church, yea God himself falls. But none can be a
Protestant without the foundation, head, soul, form, sum, definition etc.
of a Protestant. Therefore none can he held for a Protestant, unless he
profess to believe to be justified by only special faith. Whomesoeuer
therefore Protestants cannot prove to have held this article, they cannot with
any reason and color challenge for Protestants. And because (as it shall
hereafter appear) they cannot prove that any one before Luther held this
article, nay on the contrary we will prove that Luther first devised it, they
cannot with any appearance of truth avouch, that there was any Protestant
before him. And in like sort, whom we can prove not to have believed this
article, we may evidently conclude, that they were no Protestants.

That it is necessary for a Protestant to believe all the fundamental articles
of Protestancy. CHAP. VII.
^. BESIDE the foresaid article of Justification by only faith, it is also
necessary to the making of a Protestant of a member of the Protestant Church,
V^^^d. l. 3. de Eccles. c. 2.
that he believe at least all the fundamental points of Protestancy, either
explicitly or implicitly, so that he obstinatly deny no one of them. This is
manifest. First because (as I showed before cap. 1.) it is the common opinion
of Protestants, that all those are out of the Church, whosoever deny one
fundamental article. Number. 3.
Again, because themselves say, that the name of a fundamental article does
insinuate, that it sustaineth the Church as the foundation sustaineth the
house. Besides, all Protestants assign truth or purity in doctrine for the
mark of the Church, As the Confession of Ausparg cap. 7. The English Confession
cap. 19. The Sui^zers cap. de Eccles. and other Protestants commonly; and their
meaning is, Truth essential to the Church.
that it is the essential marck. Whereupon D Whitaker Controuers. 2. quest. 5.
cap. 17. page 541. says, that it is absolutely necessary and the essential
marck. And at Rat. 3. Campiani, that it is the substantial note. His Majesty
in his epistle to Cardinal Peron, that in is the substantial form of the
Church. ^
Calvin. epist. 190. The purity of doctrine is the soul of the Church. And the
same say Sadeel ad Sophism. Turriani loc. 1. Author de Eccles. in Danaeo page
1029. Vorstius in Antibellarm. page 145. D. Willet. cont. 2. quest. 3. page
102. Yea D. Morton part. 1. Apos. lib. 1. cap. 6. affirms, that Protestants
account the truth of Evangelical doctrine the chiefest and almost only
essential inseparable and perpetual marck of the Church. And hence it
proceeds, that they put the truth of purity of doctrine in their definition
of the Church as an essential part thereof; as the French Confession cap. 27.
The Magdeburgians Cent. 1. lib. 1. cap. 4 col. 140. Melancthon tom. 1 in cap.
16. Matthae^. D. Whitaker Cont. 2. quest. 5. cap. 20. page 552. Sadeel ad
Sophism. surriani loc. 21. and others commonly. But this purity of doctrine if
it must be in any articles, especially it must be in those which are
fundamental, as is manifest, and the Protestants do grant. For thus writes
D. Morton part. 1. Purity in fundame^tal points essential to the Church.
Apol. lib. 2. cap. 38. Purity in the fundamental principles of faith is
necessary to the being and making of the Church. And D. Field lib. 2. de
Eccles. cap. 3: Purity from fundamental error, is necessarily required to a
Church. And the like has Vorstius lib. cit. page 148. Nay the English
Confession art. 19. defines the visible Church of Christ to be a congregation
of faithful men in which the pure word of God is preached and the Sacraments
duly ministered according to Christ's ordinance in all those things that of
necessity are requisite to the same. And his majesty ep. cit: Whit^k. Cont. 2.
q. ^ c. 18. Sutla l. 1. de Eccl. c. 1. Mort. Apol. l. 2. cap. 3^.
It is needful that the churches be united among themselves in unity of says
and doctrine in those points, which are necessary to salvation. And hereupon
diverse Protestants deny those Corinthians who denied the Resurrection, and
those Galathians, who ouerturned the Gospel of Christ, to have been members of
the Church; because they denied a fundamental point point of Christian faith.
Wherefore unless Protestants will deny their common doctrine in this matter,
reject their own definition of the Church, cast away their only mark of the
Church, and leave no mark of her at all, they cannot avouch any one to have
been a Protestant, who dissented from them in any fundamental point of doctrine.

2. If any one say, that although he, who denies any fundamental point of
Protestancy, cannot be of the visible Protestant Church, yet may he be of their
invisible Church: I answer, that (as shall be showed hereafter) there can be
no Church which is invisible in profession of faith, howsoever it be invisible
in justice and predestination; and therefore none can be of the invisible
Church, who is not also of the visible. Again Protestants will have none to be
of the invisible Church, but such as are just. But how is he just, who denies
Gods faith, and makes him a liar, and that in a principal point of religion?
Besides, Protestants say, that none can be a member of the invisible Church,
unless he be also a member of the visible Church, if so conveniently he may.

3. Moreover the holy Fathers most frequently, Leo. Ierm. 4. de Not. Hier. lib.
3. ^o^t. Ruffi. Aug. l. de haer. and q. 11. in Mat. and 18. de ciuit. c. 51.
Basilius in Theodor. lib. 4. c. 19.
and sometimes also Protestants themselves, do teach, that it is necessary to a
faithful and believing man, that he deny no one article of faith, and much
less a fundamental or principal article. Finally, Protestants are wont to
laugh at Catholics if they prove any Father to have been a Papist, because he
held some fundamental point of Papistry. For thus writes Pareus lib. 1. de
amiss. gratiae cap. 1: It is ridiculous for him to conclude S. Augustine to have
been a Papist, because in this error he agreed with them; no less them if you
infer, that we are Papists, because we agree with Papists in some truth. And
D. White in defense of his Way cap. 45. page 432: His holding of some things
superstitiously which the Church of Rome has entertained, proves not that he
professed the same faith the Church of Rome now does, because the faith of the
said Church comprehends much more then he held; and what he held is now
otherwise expounded and applied then by him it was. And in his Way page 298: If
he would deal faithfully and to the point, he should not say Bernard professed
the Roman faith and was a monk; but he should have showed, that be professed
the present Roman faith, as the Council of Trent and the Jesuits have set it
down, at least in the fundamental points thereof. Let them then abide the law
which themselves have made, and let not them conclude any one to have been a
Protestant, because he agreed with them in one or more points, unless he
agreed with them at least in all fundame^tall points of their doctrine. I add
also, that against Protestants we do rightly conclude, that the holy Fathers
were Papists, if we do show that they dissented from Protestants in one or more
fundamental points. For they will not deny, but that the Fathers were either
Papists or Protestants: But Protestants they were not, if they denied their
doctrine in any fundamental point thereof: therefore they must needs be
Papists. And the like is not of others, whom Protestants cannot conclude to
have been theirs, if they can prove that they were none of ours. Because neither
we will grant, nor they can avouch, that such were either ours or theirs, as
they grant of the holy Fathers. What is necessarily required to a Protestants
Be it therefore certain and assured, that to a Protestant is necessarily
required, that either explicitly, or at least implicitly and vertually he
believe all the fundamental points of Protestancy, and wilfully deny no one
of them. And that therefore Protestants can no way challenge any, who rejected
any one of their fundamental and principal articles. It remains that we set
down the fundamental articles of Protestancy, lib. de vnie. baptism. c. ^^.
because Protestants themselves agree not herein, but as S. Augustine said, that
the Donatists did, concerning sins which they would have to exclude men out
of the Church; so Protestants, in a strange fashion distinguish the
fundamental points of their faith, devising rules of distinction amongst them,
not out of the scriptures but out of their own heads.

Which be the fundamental heads of Protestancy. CHAP. VIII.
1. THAT we may determine which be the fundamental articles of Protestant
religion, we must first show, How much Protestants esteem the Conf. of Ausp.
that all Protestants profess to receive the Confession of Auspurge, at least
in the principal and fundamental articles thereof. Of the Lutheran
Protestants this is manifest. For in their conference at Aldeburg both parties
of them agreed to admit it for a rule of their disputation. And ibidem page
404. those of the Electors side do say: We refer our selves and do look
unto the Confession of Auspurg, as to the foundation of religion next after the
word of God. And other Lutherans in Zanchius in Supplicat. ad Senate.
Argentinens. page 70. The foundation of Religion.
do appoint, that it be taught according to the Confession of Auspurge,
presented to Charles the 5. anno 1530, and the Apology thereof subscribed at
Numberg, and that it be the square and rule of all religion in all articles.
The square of religion.
Heshusius lib. de present. corp. Christi in caelo affirms, that amongst the
Lutherans all that are promoted to degrees and cure of souls, do swear to the
Confession of Auspurg and the Apology thereof. They swear to it.
The same testifyeth Lobechius disp. 1. page 12. and as Lauatherus adds anno
1530: The laws of the university of Wittenberg do straightly forbid to defend
any opinions which are contrary to this Confession. He^^^sius also lib. cit.
writes, The authority thereof most holy.
that the authority thereof ought to be most holy amongst all godly men.
Westphalus cont. Laskum affimeth, that it contains the sum of doctrine
founded in the word of God. Ernestus Regius in vita Vrbani, that it is the
square and rule of controversies in the Church. Lobechius lib. cit. that it is
the rule of says and doctrine distinguishing the orthodoxall Church from the
heterodoxall. Reineccius in armatura tom. 1. cap. 28. Contains the su^me of
doctrine.
affirms, that it was inspired from heaven, and written by instinct of the
holy ghost. Nay some Lutherans, (as testifies Laskus epist. ad Regem Poloniae)
said, that they would rather doubt of the doctrine of Paul, The Rule of faith.
then of the Confession of Auspurg. And with the Lutherans herein conspire the
Sacramentaries. For as Bucer confessed in the Conference of Ratisbon: The
Protestants condemn all writings, Inspired from heaven.
which are repugnant to the Confession of Auspurge and the Apology thereof.
Calvin admonit. vlt. ad Westphalum page 797. says: Surius anno 154^.
Touching the Confession of Auspurg I answer thus, that as it was published at
Ratisbon, there is not one word in it contrary to our doctrine. And epist. 236.
says, that be wittingly and willingly subscribed to it. Beza epist. 1. writes
in this sort: I define those to be our Churches, which hold the Confession of
Auspurg, the French Confession etc. And Apol. 1. cont. Saintem page 297:
Neither is the Confession of Auspurg such, as any pious man may reject it.
Zanchius loc. cit. received the Confession of Auspurge as the square and rule
of all doctrine. And as Vorstius writes Respons. ad epist. Parci page 91: In
the university of Heddelberg they used to swear to no Confession, but to that
of Auspurg. Or as D. Whitaker affirms Cont. 2. quest. 5. cap. 5. page 505:
The Confession of Auspurg is received of all Protestants, unless perhapps it
be in one word or two, rather then in any opinion. And in truth seeing all
Sacramentaries profess to hold the Lutherans, (who follow the Confession of
Auspurg) for their brethren in Christ, and besides, when we object unto them
their dissension in matters of faith, they appeal unto their harmony or
syntagme of Confessions, amongst which the Confession of Auspurg is placed, as
do those of Geneua Prefat. Syntagmatis, the Switzers Prefat. suae Confess. Beza
epist. 1. Sadeel Indice Repetit. Turrian page 808. and respons. ad Theses
Posnan. c. 11. Vorstius in Antibellarm. page 168. D. Field lib. 3. de Eccles.
cap. 12. and 42. D. Whitaker Cont. 2. quest: 5. cap. 8. page 521. D. Andrews
Respons. ad Apol. Bellarm. c. 1. D. Fulke de Success page 287. and 304. D.
White in his way to the Church page 138. and others commonly. When as (I say)
the Sacrame^taries do thus, they must needs approve the Confession of Auspurg,
at least in all the principal and fundamental points thereof. For (I hope)
they will not hold the^ for brethren in Christ, whom they see to dissent from
them in fundamental points of Christian faith; nor say, that those Confessions
agree, which are repugnant in the very foundation of belief.

Which the co^fess. of Ausp. accou^teth fundame^tal articles
2. But this Confession of Auspurg so generally received, and of so high account
with Protestants, as we have rehearsed, has set down and declared which be
the fundamental points of Protestancy. For in the beginning thereof is set
this title; The principal articles; and after that many Protestanticall
opinions are rehearsed, thus it says of them. cap. 21. The su^me of Protest.
doctrine.
This is the sum of the doctrine which is delivered in our Churches. And
^fterward naming certain controversies of Indulgences, Pilgrimages, and the
like, it says of them: These kind of matters we have let pass, that those
things which are the chiefest in this cause might be easierly known. Again:
Chiefest points.
those things only are rehearsed, which were necessary to be told. And finally;
We would present these articles before written, in which our Confession might
be extant, Only necessary.
and the sum of their doctrine who teach us, might be seen. And in another
edition of this Confession in Melancthon. tom. 3. thus is written in the end
thereof: We have comprised the sum of Evangelical doctrine necessary to
Churches. Su^me of doctrine necessary.
Wherefore, unless Protestants will reject their first and most maiesticall
Confession of Auspurg, they must needs confess that the articles thereof are
the sum of Protestant doctrine, the principal articles of their faith, are
they only, which are necessary to be told, and the sum of Evangelical
doctrine necessary to Churches. But surely such are fundamental articles.

3. Neither does the said Confession alone, but also many other great
Protestants acknowledge the articles of it to be fundamental. For thus has
the Apology of that Confession in Melancthon tom. 3. fol. 91: Truth necessary
to the Church.
We have comprised in the Confession of Auspurg almost the sum of all
Christian doctrine. And Melancthon himself in the preface of that Apology
writes, that that Confession is truth necessary to the Church. And likewise in
the preface of his 3. to me: I gathered together the heads of confession,
comprising almost the sum of the doctrine of our Churches The whole form of
the Confession was after sent to Luther, who wrote back that he had read and
allowed this Confession. And tom. 4. Respons. ad Staphylum page 817. says,
that the Confession (of Auspurg) contains the whole body of doctrine. And in
Prefat. 2. tom. Luther 11 The sum of doctrine which our Church preached is
publicly comprehended in the Confession of Auspurg. The whole body of doctrine.
Likewise the D. of Wittemberg in the preface of his Confession speaking of the
Confession of Auspurg says thus: We commanded our preachers to write the
sum of their doctrine. And the Ministers of the Elector in colloq. Aldeburg
scrip. 3. page 21. say: We doubt not but the sum of doctrine revealed from
heaven is dexterously, plainly, and most sweetly contained in the Confession of
Auspurg. And page seq: VV^^^ the Confession of Auspurg we comprehended the
sum of doctrine. Kemnice Praefat. lib. de coena: The sum of wholesome
doctrine is comprehended in the Confession of Auspurg out of the word of God.
Westphalus defens. altera cont. Laskum says; It contains in brief the sum
of Christian doctrine. James Andrews lib. cont. Hosium page 22: The sum of
pious doctrine is contained in the Confession of Auspurg Finally the Lutherans
(as the Sacramentaries of Newstad write in Admonit. de lib. Concord. cap. 4. do
place in the role of heretics as erring in the foundation of says and
salvation all those who find any sault with the Confession of Auspurg, or
dissent from it in any article. And as touching the Sacramentaries themselves,
the Palatin Confession page 198. says thus: That Confession of faith which was
presented at Auspurg, and the Apology annexed thereto, was taken out of the
doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, and the foresaid Creed, as a certain
little sum. Calvin. lib. 1. de Lib. arbit. page 142: When at Auspurg there
was to be exhibited a form of Confession (Melancthon the Author thereof) would
not make any stay, but only in that doctrine, Doctrine necessary to salvation.
which alone is proper to the Church and necessary to salvation to be known.

4. According therefore to the verdict, both of Lutherans and Sacramentary
Protestants, the^e Confession of Auspurg contains the sum and whole body of
Protestant doctrine, and only those things which are necessary to be told, and
that only doctrine which is proper to the church, and is necessary to be known
for salvation. Whosoever therefore dissenteth from the Confession of Auspurg,
dissenteth from Protestants in the sum and body of Protestancy, in things
that are necessary, (...) doctrine necessary to the Church, and necessary ^o
^^^nation. But undoubtedly who o^ssenteth in such things dissenteth in
fundamental points. And th^s manner of examining who is a Protestant, cannot
be disliked of Protestants, because themselves used it against the Anabaptists
in their Conference at Frankentall, wherein they prove, that the Anabaptistia
were not before the year of Christ 1522: For (say they) if you read over all
histories, you shall not find any people from the beginning of the world, who
had a Confession of says like to yours. They are therefore of opinion, that it
is necessary for an Anabaptist, that he hold their Confession. Why then may not
we say the like is necessary to a Protestant. Besides, Sadeel in Refutat. These.
Posnan. page 866. says, that we ought to judge of the faith of the reformed
Churches by the Confessions of their faith; which rule we now follow.

5. And if any Protestant do not think, that the articles of the Confession of
Auspurg be fundamental, let him take the Confession of Saxony, Fundam.
articles according to the Co^fess. of Saxony.
to which many principal Protestants subscribed, and which they composed with
mind to present it to the Council of Trent. For this Confession affirms her
articles to be fundamental saying cap. 23: This is the sum of doctrine,
which with one mouth we preach in our Churches. And soon after: It is true
doctrine and necessary to the Church. And Hospin part. 2. Hist. fol. 215.
says, that the composers of this Confession avouch this in sum, that that
writing contains clearly and fundamentally the princ^pall articles of
Christian faith, and doctrine of Sacraments instituted of Christ. Or if he
please let him take the Confession of Strasburg, According to the Confession of
Strasburg
which in the end thus writes of the articles thereof: These are the chief
points, in which our men have somewhat gone from the common doctrine of the
Clergy Or else the Scottish general Co^^essio^, wherein thus speak the Scots:
We believe, confess, and subscribe, According to the Confession of Scotland.
and affirm before God and the whole world, that this only is the true
Christian says, which pleases God, and brings salvation to men, which is
now laid open to the world and received of diverse Churches and Kingdoms,
especially of the Scottish Church. For these Confessions do affirm, that their
articles are principal necessary to the Church, and their doctrine the only
true Christian doctrine which brings salvation. But surely such articles be
fundamental. Therefore the articles of these Confessions be fundamental
articles in Protestancy. And consequently, that a man be accounted a Protestant
according to the judgment of these Confessions, it is necessary, that he
profess their articles. Or finally let him make choice of the Bohemian
Confession, According to the Confession of Bohemia.
in the Preface whereof it is written thus: We embrace and hold all things
which belong to the true Church and without which she can be no where on earth.
For without doubt such things are fundamental.

6. But if any will not admit either the articles of the Con^ession of Auspurg
or of Saxony (which are Confessions of Lutherans) nor the articles of the
Confessions of Strasburg or Scotland (which are Confessions of Sacramentaries)
not finally the articles of the Bohemian Confession (which is said to be the
Confession of the Waldenses) to be the fundamental articles of Protestancy;
First he shall show, that touching which are fundamental articles, he agrees
neither which Luthera^s nor Sacramentaries, nor Waldenses. Again, besides that
which we have repeated out of Protestants concerning their account of the
Confession of Auspurg he shall herein reject those Confessions to which
Protestants (as themselves say) yield almost as much as Papists do to the
Council of Trent, Vorstiue in Praefat. Antibell. Praefat. Syntagm. Conf
ssionum.
which they hold for authentical writings, and which they say have been sealed
with the blood of many martyrs, and approved of Kings, Princes, and common
wealths, most excellent Deuines, and great servants of God. Assuredly if there
be any certainty or worth in Protestant doctrine, it is in their Confession of
faith. Moreover, he can name no other articles which Protestants by public and
common judgment have agreed to be fundamental, and therefore either they have
not by public consent determined which articles they hold for fundamental, or
certainly no judgment or decree of theirs is to be more esteemed of them, then
that which we find in their Confessions of faith. If Protestants be not
certain which are fundam. articles they are not certain of their Church.
Wherefore either they are to be held for fundamental articles, or else
Protestants are not certain which are fundamental articles of their faith.
And if they be not certain hereof, they cannot be certain what is the essence
or substance of a Protestant, or who is a Protestant, who not, seeing (as I
showed before) the only essential form and substance of a Protestant they put
in the belief of their fundamental articles. Either therefore they have not
yet determined which are their fundamental articles, and consequently they
have not determined what is the substance of a Protestant, or who is a
Protestants who not, who is a member of their Church, who an alien; or that
which they have determined in their foresaid Confessions, is to be taken for
their decree and determination in this matter. Finally, I regard not, what
articles this or that Protestant judges to be fundamental, for I might set
down which Luther tom. 1. in Praefat. Disput. fol. 419. or which Zuinglius
Prefat. Conf. fidei, or which Beza in fine breuis Confess. or which Bullinger
Praefat. Compend. have reckoned for fundamental articles; but I would
determine this matter out of their public Confessions of faith, Sadeel ad
These. Posnan. c 12. Beza epist. 1. Rainold. praelect. 4.
because they cannot deny them, but in denying their faith; as also because
they are of more authority amongst Protestants, and finally because themselves
require us so to do.

7. Let it be therefore assured and steadfast, that according to the judgment
generally of all Protestants it is necessarily and before all matters required
to a Protestant that he believe Justification by only special or particular
faith, What necessary to a Protestant.
because this is the soul, life, definition and all in a Protestant; and
moreover (according to the judgments of the foresaid Confessions) that he
believe at least virtually and implicitly all their articles, and wittingly
deny none of them, because as we see they are fundamental articles of
Protestancy, without which one cannot have the whole essence or substance of a
Protestant, nor be an entire and absolute Protestant, We speak of any who are
Protestants only in part.
but only in part and in some sort. And we (as has been often said) treat here
only of an entire and absolute Protestant, such as at least has all the
substantial parts of a Protestant, and endeavor to prove that Luther was the
author of such a company and of such a faith and religion, and regard not
whither that before his time there were any, who were Protestants only in part
and in some sort, and held only some part of Protestant religion, but not the
whole substance thereof. And hereupon we frame an invincible argument, to prove
that there was no true Protestant or Protestant church before Luther. The
definition of a true Protestant.
Every true Protestant belieueth Justification by only special faith, and at
least virtually and implicitly belieueth the articles of the Confession of
Auspurg, or of Saxony, Scotland, Strasburg, or Bohemia. But there was no man,
no Church before Luther who thus believed. Therefore no true Protestant or
Protestant church. The Mayor is the very definition of a true Protestant,
gathered partly out of the common doctrine of all Protestants, partly out of
the foresaid Confessions of their faith. The Minor being negative is
sufficiently manifest, by that neither Luther, nor any in his time, or to this
day could produce any one man or company who before Luthers preaching had
believed in that sort. This foundation therefore touching the essence and
substance of a Protestant and Protestant Church being laid, to wit, that he
only is a true absolute Protestant, who belieueth Justification by only
special faith, and the foresaid other fundamental points of Protestancy, and
that the Protestant Church is a company of such belieuers, and the Protestant
religion such a belief and worship of God; I will endeavor in this next book
out of Protestants testimonies and Confessions to prove, that Luther was the
first beginner of their Church and Religion.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK. Of the Author, or Beginner of the Protestant Church and
Religion.
CHAP. I. That Protestants confess that the substance of their Church and
Religion was perished when Luther began.
THE first demonstration, wherewith we will prove, that Luther was the author
and first beginner of the Protestant Church and religion we will take out of
Protestants Confessions of the substantial destruction of their Church,
Protestants confess their religion was perished.
religion and principal article of Justification by only faith, before Luther
arose. For of the destruction of their faith and religion thus writes Luther
himself tom. 1. Proposit. 62. fol. 375: Certain it is that our Apostaticall
Bishops reigning, Gods faith perished. Perished.
And lib. de Captiu. Babylon. tom. 2. fol. 77: The Popes tyranny has many ages
agone extinguished the faith. Extinguished.
And lib. de ab^og. Mist. fol. 249. he says to the Catholics: Ye have
extinguished the Gospel. And lib. de pijs ceremon is fol. 387: alias 393:
Destroyed
The doctrine of the gospel lay destroyed by humane traditions. Tom. 3. in
psalm. 1. fol. 126: What think thou was in the Church, but a whirle wind of
Gods wrath, by which we were thrust into so many, so different, so inconstant,
so uncertain, and those infinite, glosses of Lawyers, Christ altogether
unknown
and opinions of Deuines, and in the mean time Christ being altogether
unknown, stumbling into many quick sands, gulfes, and snares of conscience
were knocked together. And in psalm. 22. fol. 345: Christ together with faith is
now extinguished. Christ and faith extinguished.
And fol. 348: Faith lies extinct. And in psalm. 51. fol. 460: The former age
could neither understand nor soundly teach the greatest and weightiest points.
Praefat. in psalm. Grad. fol. 509: God punishes contempt so as he plainly
takes away his word whereof Popery is a notable example, Al knowl^dge of
Christ wholly extinct.
in which we see it has so fallen out. And fol. 568: Faith it self was
plainly extinct. Tom. 4. Praefat. Eccl. fol. 1: The schools of Deuines have
wholly extinguished most assured faith in Christ, together with all the
knowledge of Christ. Tom. 5. in cap. 2. Galat. fol. 306: The Papists with their
impious and blasphemous doctrine have not only obscured, but simply have taken
away Not only observed but simply taken away.
the Gospel, and overwhelmed Christ. And fol 322: Christ's gospel being
obscured, yea truly overwhelmed, the Pope etc. In c. 4. fol. 376: This most
common and most received opinion of the uncertainty (of the remission of
sins) was surely an article of faith in all Popery, Christ shut out of the
Church.
wherewith truly they overwhelmed the doctrine of faith, destroyed faith, and
shut Christ out of the Church. Fol. 400: The Pope has utterly extinguished
Christian liberty. In cap. 1. Petri: The sincere knowledge of faith was
extinct. In cap. 15.1. Cor. fol. 134. Without our help they had never learnt
one word of the Gospel. Without Luther not one word or jot of the Gospel.
And fol. 141: They had not known one jot of the Gospel unless by our
labor and study it had been brought forth into the world. ^om. 6. in cap. 3.
Genes. fol. 43: Wholesome doctrine was by little and little extinct. In cap. 4.
fol. 57: The light of the word was extinguished by wicked Popes. In cap. 17.
fol. 199: That I may say all in one word the Pope has truly buried Christ. In
cap. 48. fol. 643: The Pope has obscured, nay destroyed the doctrine of says.
In cap. 49. fol. 660: The Pope has truly obscured the doctrine and taken away
the Promises, Christ truly buried.
that we knew not what Christ was Fol. 666: He has extinguished the Gospel.
Tom. 7. lib. de Missa fol. 230: The knowledge of Christ was truly abolished and
destroyed This ye Papists ye cannot deny, the matter it self proclaims it.
And fol. 231: All true Worship of God being extinct from the bottom etc.
Epist. ad Fredericum Electorem fol. 506: Knowledge of Christ truly destroyed.
The Pope of Rome has most plainly rooted out the Gospel truly oppressed and
overthrown. lib. cont. Papatum fol. 469: Faith was weakened, choked, and
extinguished, and Christian liberty lost. Thus plainly speaks Luther almost
in all his Latin comes of the substantial destruction of his faith and
Gospel before that (as he says) he brought it again into the world.
Gospel most plainly rooted out.
To which he adds in his 7. Dutch tome in his admonition to the Germans: This
abomination was increased so, that they blotted out and suppressed the words of
this Sacrament and faith, so that neither a letter, nor point of them remained
in all Popery, in all masses, and books. Thus Luther.

2. In like manner the Protestants in Sleidan lib. 1. fol. 258: The Pope made
laws, by which true knowledge was utterly oppressed. Melancthon tom. 2. Lutheri
fol. 192: Scholasticall divinity being received, faith was destroyed, the
doctrine of works being admitted. The Magdeburgians Praefat. Centur. 5: Extreme
abolitio^ of religion.
There was an extreme abolition of true Religion and the word of God under
Popery. Calvin Praefat. Institut: In former ages men had extinguished the light
of God. And 1. Institut. cap. 11.. 9: Many ages since true religion was drowned
and overthrown. 4. Institut. cap. 2.. 2: The substance of Christianity buried.
Under Popery that doctrine without which Christianity cannot consist was all
buried and shut out. Respons. ad Sadolet. page 128. he says, that the
necessity to leave the Roman Church was, That the light of divine truth was
extinct, the word of God buried etc. And p. 130. Chiefest points of doctrine
overthrown from the root.
makes this speech unto God in defense of his forsaking the Roman Church:
There were not a few profane opinions, which even by the ground overthrow the
chiefest points of that doctrine, which thou did deliver unto us by word.
Lib. de necess. Refor. pa. 49: When the word of God was choked with these so
many and so thick darknesses, Luther stepped forth etc. page 62: None prayed to
God with assured says, that is in earnest, neither could they, for Christ
being buried in that manner as he was etc. Word of God ended.
Respons. ad Versipell. page 358: They have extinguished the doctrine of
salvation. In Psycopan. page 388: The word of God being ended by perverse use
and sloth now returns to light. In Romans 11. verse. 22: The truth was taken
away. The light put out.
S. deel. de vocat. Minist. page 552: God suffered that light to be put out
which should perpetually have lightened us in governing our life. Pure worships
banished.
Crispin Prae^at. operum Occolampadij: Both the doctrine of salvation and piety
were taken away, they banished out of the Church all pure worship of God.
Celius secundus Cario de amplitudine regni Dei lib. 1. page 33: True Christ
taken out of the world.
And so by little and little true Christ was taken out of the world, and
Antichrist put in his steed. And Hospin. part. 1. Histor. lib. 4. page 291.
writes, that after 800. years after Christ the light of the wholesome and true
doctrine began to be darkened, till it was utterly put out. The light clean put
out.
Thus foreign Protestants, both Lutherans and Sacramentaries.

3. Amongst English Protestants thus writes M. Bale Cent. 4. c. 6: Wholesome
truth perished from the earth. Cent. 1. page 69: From this time (anno 607)
purity of heavenly doctrine vanished out of the Church. The truth perished from
earth.
In his Apology against Priesthood and vows fol. 3: Two things have chiefly
been the cause of the utter decay and full destruction of Christian religion
etc. Vanished out of the Church.
M. Powell in ^tinerarium Cambr^ae lib. 2 cap. 7. says, that about the year
1189: There was the chief reign of darkness, in so much that not only
preaching of the true word, but also the true religion was banished and scarce
the name of Christianity remained. Utter decay and full destruction of religion.
M. Fox in the Protestation before his Acts, affirms that about the year
1215. and 1080: Christian says was extinguished. And page 840. that Christian
Religion was wholly changed into Idolatry. D. Fulke ad Cauillat. S^apletoni:
Scarce name of Christianity remained.
Scarce could he five hundred years after banish the true doctrine of
salvation out of the Churches of Europe. And finally the Apology of the English
Church part. 5. cap. 13. diuis. 1. says, that Papists have broken in pieces
all the pipes and conduicts, have stopped up all the springs and choked the
fountain of living waters, and by damning up all the fountains of Gods word,
have brought the people into a pitiful thirst. Item: Not a sparck of divine
light found.
With great distress went they scattering about seeking some sparck of
heavenly light to refresh their consciences withal, but that light was already
thoroughly quenched out, so that they could find none. This was a rusull state,
this was a lamentable form of Gods Church. It was a misery to live therein
without the Gospel, Protestants light thoroughly quenched out,
without light, without all comfort. Thus write these learned Protestants both
English and strangers of the destruction of their doctrine, their faith, their
religion, and Gospel before Luther arose, which do so plainly testify the
substantial destruction thereof, as I may well use S. Augustins words in the
like occasion: If I should speak thus, they would resist and cry, Lib. 1. de
pec. mer. c. 9.
that I speak not truly, thought not truly. For in these words, if they were
spoken by others, they would imagine no other meaning, then that, which in the
foresaid (Protestants) they will not understand.

4. Protestants confess their lundam. art. perished.
Neither write they otherwise of the destruction of their principal and most
fundamental article of Justification by only faith. For thus the Confession of
Anspurg cap. 20: When the doctrine of faith, which ought to be principal in
the Church, lay so long unknown, Sole faith unknown
as all must needs confess that there was a most profound silence of the
justice of faith, that in sermons only the justice of works was spoken of in
Churches etc. And tit. de bonis operibus page 25: Horribly overwhelmed.
In times past certain absurd opinions horribly overwhelmed this doctrine, in
which the unlearned feigned that men did satisfy the law of God. In the mean
time there was great silence how Christ is to be apprehended by faith. And page
27: The was no word of faith which is necessary for remission of sins. And
page 19: In times past there was great silence in Churches of the exercises of
says. And Praefat. Apol. Confess: August. in Melancthon tom. 3. fol. 27: All
Churches, Monasteries, schools, briefly all books of late divines, No man
taught etc All Prot. comfort unknown
were before mute of the justice of faith. No man taught sins to be forgiven
by faith in Christ, Sacraments were impiously profaned, after that opinion,
that they justify by the work wrought, was received. And this opinion did wholly
oppress the doctrine of says. Praefat. Conf. Saxoniae: All this comfort,
which is necessary to every one, how a man converted to God is justified, was
unknown. The Protestant Princes and Cities in Sleidan lib. 21. fol. 240: The
contention is about the doctrine of says, and of the true knowledge of God,
which is the chiefest head of Christian life and of pure religion. Utterly
extinct.
And it cannot (say they) be denied, that this doctrine was utterly extinct,
and a new doctrine brought in. And lib. 13. ^ol. 304: It cannot be denied, that
there was no word taught of receiving grace by Christ of remission of sins.
Luther in Catechismo Maiori tom. 5. fol. 627: No man believed justification
without works.
Popery reigning, faith wholly neglected and obscured was in pitiful plight. No
man believed Christ to be a Lord, who had reconciled us to the Father without
our worcks. Tom. 7. in c. 5. Matthae^. fol. 23: The Popish company saying
nothing of the chiefest article of justification by faith in Christ etc. And in
3. Symbol. fol. 140. I have observed, that all errors, heresies, and all
impiety came into the church principally, because this article, or this part of
Christian says in Jesus Christ was despised and neglected or utterly lost. And
in the Epitaphe gr^uen upon Luthers tomb is this verse: He restored to the
world the difference lost before, which is meant of the difference which Luther
taught to be between the law and the gospel, that the law teaches
justification by good works, the gospel by only faith, without which
difference Luther professes that Christianity cannot stand. And in his table
talks cap. de morte he thus speaks: Show me one place of justification of
faith in the decrees, in the decretals, in the Clementines, in all the sums
and sentences, Coccius to. 1. page 1217
in all the sermons of Monks, in the statutes of Synods, in all the Postilles,
in all Hierome, Gregory etc. Thus assured Luther was, that before he preached,
of this principal article of justification by only faith, there was no news in
the whole world.

5. The same confesses his Copemate Melancthon, who tom. 2. Respons. ad Clerum
Colon. page 96. has these words: The doctrine of penance was overwhelmed,
there was no word of faith by which remission of sins is to be received: and
page 97: The doctrine of true invocation and of the exercises of faith lay
dead. If any (says he) deny, that such was the state of the Church be may be
disproued not only by testimonies of honest men, but also by the books of
Monks. And page 99: There was no speech of the hope of free mercy. And lib. de
vsu integri Sacramenti page 188: The Popes have destroyed the true doctrine of
faith. And the same Melancthon or Carrion in Chronico lib. 4. page 418. and seq:
These errors being settled and established by public authority, drew after
them a great ruin, wherewith they wholly destroyed the doctrine of justice
before God, and free remission of sins. And page 439: School divinity qu te
trampled and extinguished the least sparkles of pure doctrine, The least
sparkles extinguished.
touching the law, the gospel faith and justification before God. And page
4^3: They have quite taken away the difference between the law and the
gospel. Vigand. lib. de bonis and mal^s Germaniae: The difference betwixt the
law and the gospel was quite blotted out after the Apostles tym. Quite
blotted out.
The Magdeburgi^ns Pre^. C^^tur. 13. The doctrine of says without works was
extinct. The matter it self showed, that pure doctrine was utterly suppressed.
Kemnice in l^cis part. 2. ^^t. de Iustificat page 246: In all ages the light of
wholesome doctrine touching justification first decayed, after more and more
obscured, and last was plainly lost and extinguished. And page 244: Plainly
lost.
In our time God has restored the doctrine of justification out of most thick
darkness. And Humius Praesat. lib. de libero arbit: The article of
^ustification was by Luther brought into light of out of the more then
Chymerian darkness of former ages. Thus the Lutherans.

6. The like Confession make the Sacramentaries. For thus writes Calvin
Respons. ad Sadolet. page 125: We say that doctrine (of Justification by only
faith) was by you blotted out of the memory Blotted out of memory.
of men. Lib de Necess. Reform. page 46: The virtue of faith was utterly
extinct, the benefit of Christ destroyed, man's salvation ouerthrown. And lib.
de vera Reform. page 322: By these, the Apostolical doctrine was corrupted,
nay destroyed and abolished. Corrupted, nay destroyed.
Iezlerus de bello Euchar. fol. 24: The doctrine of justification was most
sowly darkened and corrupted. Pareus lib. 5. de Iustificat. cap, 3: The doctrine
of grace began to be obscured, and at last to be utterly oppressed in Popery.
Only nam of Christ remained
Finally M. Fox in his Acts printed 1610. page 391. says: In these later days
the only name of Christ remained among Christians. As touching faith, the end,
and the use of the law, of grace and justification by says, of liberty of a
Christian man, there was no mention nor any word almost spoken of. Thus both
Lutheran and Sacramentary Protestants confess, their doctrine of justification
(in which as we have seen they affirm the definition, life, soul, and all
points of a Protestant to consist) to have perished, been extinguished, horribly
overwhelmed, vanished out of the church, no spark thereof to be found, the
light thereof clean put out, and utterly extinct, before Luther start up. And
consequently they must needs also confess, that the substance of their Church
and religion was perished, which could not be without the soul, life,
definition and sum thereof.

7. Neither do they less openly confess that their Church was perished.
Protestants confess that their church perished.
For thus says Luther lib. de Captiu. Babylon, tom. 2. fol 76: But now faith
being not spoken of, the Church is extinguished by infinite laws of works, and
ceremonies. Respons. ad Catharin. fol. 140. after he had said that the Church
is conceived, formed, borne, nourished and conserned only by the vocal word,
he adds: Extinguished.
By the Pope and Papists the vocal gospel being choked and extinct, was
silent through all the world. Tom. 3. in psalm. 17. fol. 285: And now that
common sort of preachers reprobate what proposes it to us in the Church of the
deeds of Saints, but some small works, until faith being extinguished there
become nothing but heathenish superstition where once the Church of God was,
the name only of the Church left, Name only of the Church left.
the substance quite lost. In psalm. 22. fol. 332: This day under the Popes
dominion there is not lest one trace of the Church which appears. And 10. 6.
in cap. 49. Genes. fol. 666: The order of the Church perished.
The Pope has extinguished and swallowed up the Church. Calvin Respons. ad
Sadolet. page 132: The matter came to that pass, that it was manifest and
evident to the learned and unlearned, that the true order of the Church then
perished, the Kingdom of Christ was thrown down, Christ's Kingdom thrown
down.
when this dominion (of the Pope) was erected. 4. Institut. cap. 3.. 4. after
he said that Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets were instituted only for that time
when Churches were to be set up, or to be drawn from Moses to Christ, he
adds: In our time God raises Apostles, or at least Evangelists. For there
was need of such to reduce the Church from the revolt of Antichrist. The French
Confession art. 31: In our days the state of the Curch being interrupted,
State of the church interrupted.
God raised up some extraordinarily which might restore the decayed ruins of
the Church. Or as it is in the French copy: In our days when the state of the
Church was interrupted, God raised up some after an extraordinary manner, that
they might set up the church a new Church to be set up a new.
which was in ruin and desolation. But surely that church, which was in ruin
and desolation, and so as it needed to be set up a new, was substantially
fallen. Danaeus in lib. Augustini de haeresibus cap. 95. About the year after
Christ's passion 574: This slaughter, plague and tyranny of the whole Church
began, Slaughter of the whole Church.
which afterward utterly destroyed the Kingdom of Christ. Kingdom of Christ
utterly destroyed
And lib. 3. de Eccles. cap. 8: The Church was in banishment 350. years.
Aretius in locis part. 3. fol. 25. having said that Luther was immediately sent
of God, adds: God then uses immediate vocation, when there is no Church
founded, or having been founded is so degenerated, No church or only shadow
thereof.
that the only shadow of her remains. Chassan. in locis lib. 2. de Eccles.
page 151: It is false that the Church shall never be broken of. Sadcel. lib. de
vocat. oftentyms says, that the Church was corrupted, decayed, overthrown,
and her foundation shaken and ouerturned. And p. 555, that to restore her we
must do, as men use to do in renewing that building which is quite fallen. And
in Refutat. These. Posnan. cap. 8: When Popish errors had possessed almost the
whole world, nor there appeared openly true fruits of the Church, nay nor true
leaves; we say the Church was in one or two. The Church was in one or two.
Boysseul in Confurat. Spondae^ page 742: It is true that all the Church was
corrupted, all adulteress, all Idolatresse. Soninus in Methodo Theol. page
212: about the time of Gregory the great the Church degenerated more and more,
until at last it lost all purity and plainly fell to dotage yea to madness, and
in the West ended in Popery, and in the East in Mahometisme. D. Whitaker
Controuers. 2. quest. 5. cap. 6. page 512: As men do in a building fallen, that
who will renew it builds not in the old foundation because it is loosed and
not sound, but lays some new foundation; so it was done in the renewing of
the Church (by Luther). Behold the old foundation of the Church put away, and a
new laid. A new foundation of the Church laid.
And page 510. he says, that before Luther the state of the Church was fallen
and quite overthrown, and the church decayed and ouerturned. And quaest. 5.
cit. page 528: Luther took upon him to restore religion corrupted. And
Controuers. 4. quest. 5. cap. 12. page 683: So at last the Curch was oppressed
and extinguished. D. Fulke in his answer to a false Catholic page 35. The
true Church sailed immediately after the Apostles time. D. Morton. Apol. part.
1. lib. 2. cap. 25. Protestant ministers were raised to set up again the
Church being pitifully fallen. Nothing in the Church but pitiful ruins.
The Apo^^gy of the English Church part. 4. cap. 9. diuis. 3: For these men new
after they have left nothing remaining in the church of God that has any
liknesse of his church, yet will etc. Ibidem cap. 14. diuis. 1. and 2: Long
ago has the Bishop of Rome willed to have the whole church depend upon
himself alone; wherefore it is no marvel though it be clea^^ fallen down
long ago. And part. 6. cap. 17. diuis. 1. and 2. When we likewise saw, that
all things were quite trodden under foot by these men, The only name of the
Apostolic Church rooted out from the ground
and that nothing remained in the temple of God but pitiful spoils and
decays, we reckoned it etc. M. Fox loc. cit: The Church being degenerated from
the Apostolic institution above all measure, reserving only the name of the
Apostolic Church but far from the truth thereof in very deed, did fall into
al kind of extreme tyranny etc. And M. Cartwright in D. Whitgifts defens. page
217: When Antichrist had rooted out the Church even from the ground. Lastly
Orhinus one of the four false Apostles of England has these words:
Considering how Christ by his wisdom power, Coccius to. 1. page 983. Quite
overthrown.
goodness, had sounded, builded, settled, his Church, with his blood washed it,
with his holy spirit enriched it, and at last seeing it quite overthrown, I
could not but marvel.

8. To these their plain Confessions of the entire destruction of their Church
we may add that commonly they say, Protestants say that Elias thought the
church was perished.
that Elias the Prophet did think, that the Church had failed in his time, and
that besides himself there was no faithful man or member of the Church.
Luther lib. de Missa tom. 7. fol. 237: Elias thought the whole church of God to
have been extinct, that himself was left alone, and the only Christian. Beurlin
in Refurat. Soti cap: 53: Elias complains before God, that besides himself
there was never a Godly man remaining. Lobechius disput. Theol. 10: Elias
thought the Church had holy perished. Zuinglius lib. de vera and falsa relig.
cap. de Euchar: Elias thought that he was alone. Peter Martyr in Romans 11: Elias
thought that piety was perished, and that all Saints were cut of in Israel.
Calvin in Antid. art. 18. Paris: Elias thought himself alone to remain of the
Church. And in Romans cap. 11. v. 2: He thought that in his nation religion and
worship of God had perished. He condemned the whole nation besides himself of
impiety. He imagined that he had been left alone. Keckerman lib. 3. System
Theol. page 389: Elias believed that he alone remained of the people of Israel,
who could be said to be actually a member of the true Church. Lubbert lib. 6.
cap. 3. Elias thought that besides himself there remained none who was truly
turned to God. Riuet. in Epitome Controuers. tract. 1. sect. 37: Elias thought
that he had remained alone. Vorstius in Antibellarm. page 134: Elias thought
that of the true worshippers of God he alone remained. Boysseul in Confutat.
Spondaei page 247: Elias thought that he was the whole Church of God Nay
Polanus part. 3. These. de Eccles. says plainly in his own person, that the
church failed in Elias his time. The Apology of the English Church part. 4.
cap. 12. diuis. 1. and. 2. says: VVher was that Church then when Ely the
Prophet so lamentably and bitterly made his moan, that only himself was left
of all the whole world, who did duly and truly worship God? And M. Jewel in
Defe. Apol. part. 4. c. 4. diuis. 2. Elias thought all the godly in Israel had
been slain and not one left alive. D. Fulke ad Cauillat. Stapletoni: It sell to
Elias, that he seemed to be left alone of all the number of the Godly, which
sincerely worshipped God. M. Hooker in his 3. book of Eccles. policy page 126:
He took it as though there had not been remaining in the world any besides
himself, that carried a true and an upright heart toward God, with care to
serve him according unto his holy will. D. Sutclife lib. 1. de Eccl. cap. 6.
page 95: The church in Elias his days did seem to him so destroyed, that he
thought he had been left alone. D. Whitaker Cont. 2 quest. 3. cap. 3. page 476:
Elias thought the whole Church of the saythfull was perished in his time. Elias
believed that none remained besides himself. Elias thought that he alone was
left a true worshipper of God. And page 475: Elias said that he was alone left
the true servant of God. I dispute not now, how falsely they impose upon Elias
this blasphemous opinion of the church perishing or destruction, only I note,
how under the name and authority of that great Prophet, they teach that the
church may perish, which sometimes they are ashamed to avouch in their own
names.

9. Moreover they teach, that the Church may consist of one or two, which is in
effect and in other words to say, that it may perish. Luther lib. de notis
Eccles. tom. 7. fol. 148: Protestants Chu^c^ may (...) of (...) child
This is called the Christian society, and it is necessary that there be
always such men in the world albeit of them there be only two or three, or
children alone. Aretius in locis part. 3. fol. 50: Any number, though never so
small, suffices to the Church for extern^ll matters. Iuniu^ cont. 4. lib. 3.
cap. 16: Of any number.
Two men ordered toward God are a Church. D. Whitaker cont. 2. quest. 3. cap.
3. page 474: It is false, which he says, that two men cannot make a Church.
And page seq he grants that Protestants teach that each man is a several
Church. And page 478: Of two only.
If in the most forlorn times of the Church there be one or another faithful
servant of God, it is enough. If one or two.
Which also Bucanus says loc. 41. de Eccles. sect. 14. Nay Luther in cap. 7.
Genesis tom. 7. fol. 107. says: If I were the only man in the whole world who did
hold the word, I alone should be the church. Of one alone.
And Riuet. in Epitom. Cont. tract. 1. sect. 27. The Church subsisteth in every
one of her members. Finally they think, Protestants believe not the co^tinua^ce
of their Church.
that their Church and religion shall not always endure. For thus Luther
writes in cap. 2. Mathae^ tom. 4. fol. 438: We cannot comfort our selves so
as the Papists do, with that consolation, that the Church shall not perish. For
whersoeuer we cast our eyes we are diversely terrified, the fury of Satan and
the world is extreme, wherewith he endeavors to extinguish this doctrine.
But the Popes boast, and that with full mouth, that the Church shall not
perish. In cap. 55. Isaiae fol. 226: There is danger least it shortly fall out,
that the word be again taken from us. Tom. 3. in psalm. grad. fol. 489. alias
508: The Pope obstinatly keeps those promises, with which Christ did comfort
his followers, that he would be with them to the end of the world. That S.
Peter's boat althought it be in danger, shall never be drowned. But the true
(Protestant) Church to which alone that was said, does not so believe that, nor
so cheer up her self with the trust of those promises. Kemnice in locis part.
1. tit. de Iustificat. page 216: I often tremble that Luther oftentimes (I know
not with what abode) repeateth those words, This doctrine after my death shall
be darkened again. The Confession of Mansfeld: It is evident what shall follow
at length, to wit, a horrible destruction of pure doctrine, which suddenly we
shall leese beyond all expectation. The Magdeburgians Praefat. Cent. 5: The
revealed truth is already peri^hed, and that upon the sudden, what remains
but utter abolition of true religion? Calvin in his Catechism: I am so
doubtful touching posterity, that I scarce dare think thereof. Author
Praefat. in Syntag. Confess: We have cause to fear, that matters will return
to the darkness of former times. And Paraeus in Miscellanca Vrsini page 39.
says, that all good and wise men do easily perceive, that there hangs over
their heads some dreadful night and darcknesse. M. Jewel in his sermon in
cap. 1. Aggaei: This Gospel which ye now loath, shall be taken from you. D.
Whitaker cont. 2 quest. 5. cap. 4. page 503: That which he says that neither
Lutherans nor Zuinglians nor Caluinists shall last ever, is uncertain. And
lastly D. Morton part. 1. Apol. lib. 1. cap. 31. says: Protestants say not,
that their Church cannot fail: Thus ye see that Protestants cannot comfort
themselves that their Church shall not perish, that they do not believe that
they shall not be drowned, that a horrible destruction and utter abolition of
their doctrine is to follow, that they dare scarce think of posterity, that it
is uncertain whether they are to last for ever, and that they believe not that
their Church cannot fail.

Consider now diligently (good reader) First how not few but very many
Protestant writers have confessed that their Church and religion was then Note.
that not Scorp. c. 12.
What (as Tertullian says) mean they otherwise then they write, masters of
deceit not of truth?

10. If any demand, how it came to pass, that Protestants should so often and
so plainly say, that their Church and religion was perished before Luther
appeared, Wherefore Protestants say their Church was perished.
I answer, that there were many causes thereof. First because it was so
evident, that their Church and religion was not at all when Luther began, that
(as themselves have confessed) they cannot deny it. It cannot be denied. If any
deny it he may be convinced. Number. 1.4.5.7.
And finally that it is manifest both to learned and unlearned. Secondly, they
said so for to move men to Matthew. 16.
against which (as he has promised) the gats of hell shall not prevail, but
some other Church and religion either first began by Luther, or else restored
and renowed by him after that it was substantially perished and destroyed; then
they mollify and gloss their former sayings, devise strange and violent senses
of their words, and every way seek out shifts and sleights whereby they may
avoid the force of their own testimonies, which we shall rehearse and refute
in the next chapter.

The Protestants shifts for to delude their foresaid Confessions touching the
substantial decay of their Church and Religion refuted. CHAP. II.
1. ALBEIT the foresaid confessions of the Protestants touching the
substantial decay of their Church and religion before Luther arose, be so
plain and evident, as we may well say with Tertullian: Who will not
acknowledge these rather then expound the^? De Resur. c. 21.
Yet because the obstinacy of heretics is so great, as it may be sooner
overcome then persuaded, and is wont to seek out all shifts to avoid the force
even of their own words, I will hear set down their shifts and confute them.

2. Their first shift is, Their first shift.
that the forenamed Protestants by the words of faith, religion, and the like,
when they say that they perished, did not mean the inward faith of the heart,
as if no man in his heart had held the Protestant faith or religion, but only
the outward profession thereof, and so mean only, that the outward profession
of Protestancy was perished, or that none professed it. I grant indeed, that
sometime they speak of outward profession of faith, but this comes all to one
purpose. That they say inward faith perished.
Because the profession of faith can no more perish in the church, then the
faith it self, as hereafter we shall prove by the confessions of Protestants
themselves. But that they speak not also of the inward faith, or of faith it
self, is most false. First, because they say so without then because perhaps
the same Protestants have other where said the contrary, which kind of proof
we hereafter show to be nothing worth. Lib. 2. c. vl.
Again it is light, clarity, religion, worship of God, truth of God, Ca. 1. n.
2. 3.
says, true knowledge, knowledge of faith, Christian faith, knowledge of
Christ, as they have used and we repeated, they meant not faith it self, but
only the That none believed to be justified without works. That the doctrine
of Justification by says, was blotted out of the memory of men, Cap. 1. nu. 1.
2. 3. 4. 5. 6
that wholesome truth perished from earth, and that it was taken from men, that
Christ was buried and taken out of the world and the Church, that all
(Protestant) consolation was unknown, that without Luther one jot had not been
known, that the knowledge of Christ, the knowledge of says, failed, and
lastly that Christ was not understood but utterly unknown. Which words are
manifestly spoken and meant of true or inward faith. I add also, that it is a
rule of civil law approved by Luther and Protestants, Luther de abrog mis. and
epist, ad Amsd. Schusselb. tom. 4. Catal. haeret.
that who cold speak clearly, and yet spoke obscurely, should have his words
expounded against him. Seeing therefore Protestants could have spoken far
more clearly, if they had meant only that outward profession of faith had
perished, we may lawfully expound their words against themselves.

3. To this shift is another like, wherewith they say that the foresaid
testimonies of Protestants touching the destruction or decay of their Church
are not to be understood of their invisible Church, The second shift.
which they say is the company of only true faithful and predestinate men, but
of the decay of their visible Church, which they say is the company of al those
that profess true doctrine, and is the Church not in the sight of God, but
only in the eyes of men. I do not deny, that sometimes they speak of the
visible Church, notwithstanding (as before I said) it comes all to one purpose,
because (as shall be proved hereafter) there can be no invisible Church without
a visible, nor a company of faithful and predestinate men, but they must
profess their faith. The Protestants say the true Church has perished.
But most false it is, that they speak not also of the true Church, which they
will have to be invisible to any but to God alone. For first (as before I
argued) this cannot be proved otherwise, then that perhaps the same men have at
other times said the contrary, Church, they understand not the Catholic
Church, that is, the Church spread throughout the world: Cap. 1. n. ^.
for (as we saw) they teach that the Church may consist or be reduced to one or
two, and that Elias thought there was none of the Church but himself.
Whereupon D. Whitaker Cont. 2. quest. 3. page 608: finds fault with Cardinal
Bellarmine, when he says that there is always a visible Church, by the name
of the Church he understands not one or two, but a multitude. Neither also do
they by the name of the Church, when then say it cannot perish, understand any
true particular Church consisting of a Pastor and flock, as is evident; both
because they say the Church may be reduced to one or two, as also because (as
shall hereafter appear) they think that all Pastors may perish; Cap. 7.
and lastly because D. Whitaker loc. cit. reprehendeth Bellarmine for that by
the name of the Church which cannot fail, he understands a multitude
gathered together, in which are Prelates and subjects. They are therefore of
opinion, that both the Catholic Church spread through out the world, and every
particular church consisting of Prelates and subjects, may fail and perish;
and when they say the Church cannot fail, by the name of the Church, they
understand faith; and mean, that there shall always be faith in some one or
other, as clearly appears by their former words, and also by these of D.
Whitaker loc. cit. page 469: What Protestants mean by the church when they say
it cannot perish.
Hence he gathers, not as our adversaries do, that the visible Church shall
never sail, but that says shall never sail in the whole, but that to the end
of the world Christian religion shall remain in some. This (says he) is the
very thing which we say and maintain. Ye see plainly, that when they say the
church cannot fail, they only mean that faith cannotvtterly fail, but that
it shall be always in some. Wherein there is no contradiction to that which
otherwise they teach, that the Church can fail, because faith and the Church
are different things; neither does faith in whom soever, and in how few
soever, make the Church. Wherefore if they be mad men and no Christians, who
say that the Catholic Church may fail, or that the Church is not to dure for
ever (as D. Whitaker himself says cap. 1. and 2. cit.) certainly these
Protestants are such. For whiles they say, that the Church may be brought to
one or two, and that all Pastors may perish; they manifestly say indeed and
effect, that both the Catholic and all kind of true Churches may fail.
Moreover I perished, because they think that she is made by inward faith; but
this they affirm to have perished, as even now appeared. Besides, the very
name of the When the Church is simply put, or when it is said the Church of
Christ, it properly signifies only the elect. Hereupon also Kemnice in loc.
tit. de Eccles. cap. 3. defines the Church to be the Catholic company. But
the Catholic company is the true Church, as is evident by the Creed, where we
profess to believe the Catholic Church, and is confessed by D. Whitaker
Contr. 2. quest. 1. cap. 2. and 5. by D. Morton Apol. part 1. l. 1. cap. 13. by
Lubbert lib. 1. de Eccl. cap. 4. by the French Catechism Domin. 15. and
others. And therefore most rightly says S. Augustine, that it is a wicked,
impudent, detestable, De vni^. Bapt. c. 14. Conc. 2. in Psalm. 101.
and abominable speech to say the Church has perished; which yet would not be,
unless by the name of the Church were understood the true Church. For what
offense were it to say, that the false Church had perished? Furthermore, when
heretics as the Donatists, Calu. cont. Seruet. pa. 657. Whitak. Cont. 2. q. 3.
c. 2. and 3.
Seruetus, and the like, do say that the Church was perished or banished, the
Protestants themselves understand the^ of the true Church; why then ought not
Protestants to be understood in the same manner, when they use the same words?
Again, because sometimes they say, that the Kingdom of Christ, the temple of
God has perished. Cap. 1. n. 7.
But what can be the Kingdom of Christ and temple of God, but the true Church,
for the false is rather the Kingdom and temple of Satan? Whereupon D. Whitaker
Controuers. 2. quest. 3. cap. 1. page 466. says: The scriptures most plainly
teach, that there will be no end of the Kingdom of Christ. And ad Demonstrat.
17. Sanderi: What other thing is the temple of God, but the Church of Christ,
which is built with lively stones? And M. Powell lib. 1. de Antichristo cap. 3:
The Church is defined 1. Tim. 3. to be the temple of God. Hereto we may add,
that Ochim says, that that Church which Christ founded, washed with his blood,
and enriched with his holy spirit, (which undoubtedly is the true Church) was
utterly destroyed. Number. 8.
Finally because they say, that Elias thought that there was not remaining one
pious man besides himself, that he was the only Christian, the only true
worshipper of God, which was left alive, and actual member of the true Church.
Seeing therefore they will make Elias to think so of the true church, of the
same also ought themselves to be understood, who use to draw arguments out of
Elias his words; especially when as they say, that it suffices if there be one
or two faithful men in the most forlorn times of the Church, which they must
needs mean of the true Church which they will have to consist only of the
faithful servants of God.

That they mean of the universal Church.
4. Their third shift may be, that when they speak of the destruction of the
Church, they mean not of the universal or whole Church, but of some
particular, or part of the Church. But this is easily refuted. First because
(as we have rehearsed) they say there was a slaughter of the whole Church, that
all the Church was corrupted, all became idolatrous, that scarce the name of
Christianity was left, that none believed, that not one jot of the gospel had
been known without Luther, that the whole knowledge of Christ, all pure
worship, all true religion was abolished. Secondly because under the name of
Elias they plainly say, that the whole Church was extinct, the whole Church
failed, he alone was a faithful man, Number. 8.
and actual member of the true Church. Wherefore either they think it not
blasphemy to say the whole Church has perished, or this horrible blasphemy
which calls in question all religion, they most impiously attribute to that
holy Prophet. Thirdly, because they say that their Church was brought to one or
two, and that it is enough to the Church, if there be one or two faithful
persons. But what man well in his wits will say, that one or two are enough
to make the Catholic or universal church. Finally, this shall yet more
appear out of the chapter following, where we shall see, that they teach that
the whole world did fall from the faith.

5. Their fourth shift is, That they mean of a substantial perishing.
that by the words Destruction, decaying, failing, overthrowing, and such
others, they mean not a substantial perishing of the faith or Church, but
only an accidental corruption of becoming worse. But this shift also is soon
refuted. First because Luther says of his faith, dyed, was neglected,
overwhelmed, extinct, blotted out, taken away, overthrown, lost, Cap. 2. n. ^^.
abolished, forgotten, and rooted out. And that he might put it out of all
doubt, that by these words he meant a true and substantial destruction or
perishing, he added unto them most significant aduerbes, saying that it was
truly overwhelmed, wholly extinct, utterly extinct, Ib.
extinct from the bottom, plainly extinct, plainly taken away, simply taken
away, quite taken away, utterly buried, utterly lost, wholly abolished, and
blotted out, and most plainly rooted out. And least any one might also cavil
that these words are not meant of a true and substantial destruction, he said
further, that the Pope has obscured, nay extinguished the doctrine of faith:
They have darckned, nay wholly overwhelmed Christ's Gospel: They have not only
obscured, but absolutely taken away the gospel. Lib. 1. de peccat. mer. c. 4.
Surely (as S. Augustine says) such kind of words needs no Expositor but only a
reader. In like sort other Protestants say of their faith or gospel, that it
was banished, cast out, extinct, ended, choked, buried, obscured till it was
utterly extinguished, Number. 2.3.
that it perished from the earth, and vanished out of the Church. They add
also, that it was wholly ouerturned, utterly extinct, quite changed into
idolatries, ouerturned from the root, and that there was an utter abolition, an
extreme salling away, and full destruction of it, so that not so much as one
little spark could be sound, but it was quite extinct, and scarce the name of
Christianity was left.

6. Besides of their principal and most fundamental article of Justification
by only faith they say, C. 1. n. 4. 5. 6.
that lay long unknown, that there was profound silence of it, that no man
taught it, that it was neglected, lost, blotted out, extinct, and horribly
oppressed, that it was corrupted, nay extinct and abolished, that no man believed
it, that it was utterly extinct, plainly lost, quite lost, wholly suppressed,
wholly oppressed, wholly trampled, wholly dashed out, utterly blotted out, quite
extinct, quite taken away, quite neglected and blotted out of the memory of
men, and not only obscured but quite extinguished. But if this doctrine were so
extinct as no man believed it, and blotted out of men's memory, surely not only
the Profession of their faith but also their faith it self was utterly
perished; and consequently also their Church, whereof this article is the life,
soul, sum, definition, and all.

Number. 7.
7. Of the Church also they say, that it was banished failed, was oppressed,
extinct, ouerturned, fallen, wholly fallen, that it fell to Antichrist, that the
old foundation thereof was removed, and a new laid, that the order of the
Church perished, that there was a slaughter of the whole Church, that Christ's
Kingdom was thrown down and razed to the ground, that in the temple of God
there was naught but pitiful ruins, that the Church was from the foundation
rooted out and overthrown by the ground, and that where it once was there
remained only the name, the substance being quite lost. Surely either by these
manner of speeches is signified a substantial destruction, or that cannot be
plainly signified by any manner of words. Besides the forms of speech do more
clearly signify a substantial destruction, the^ those which Protestants
condemn in some heretics. For Calvin lib. cont. Seruetum page 657. condemns
Seruet for saying, that there had been a long banishment of the Church from the
earth, and that she had been driven out of the world. And yet as we see Danaeus
says, that the Church was banished. Powell, that all true religion was
banished. D. Fulke, that the true doctrine of salvation was driven out. An^
Crispin, that all true worship of God was driven out D. Whitaker Cont. 2.
quest. 3. cap. 3. page 471. and otherwhere, condemns the Donatists and other
Heretics for saying, that the Church perished; and yet Bale says that
wholesome truth perished from the earth. And Lobechius under Elias his name,
that the Church quite perished. Moreover they say, that the Church may be
reduced to one or two, which is indeed to say that the Church may substantially
perish, Number. 8.
for the Church is defined to be a company or multitude in the English
Confession article 19. That the Church cannot consist of one.
in the French art. 27. in the Suitzers art. 17. and in the Flemish art. 27.
But one or two are not a company. Whereupon Danaeus lib. 3. de Eccles. cap. 16.
says: It is written of Vlpia^ the Lawyer in the civil law, that at least
three persons are required to make a College; and if to a College much more
to the Church. And Lubbert lib. 2. Replicat. cap. 3. says plainly, that one
man makes not a Church. And Polanus in Syntag. lib. 7. cap. 1: One man, though
never so holy, cannot be a church. Beurlin also in Refut. Soti: Neither do we
call the solitude of one man, which worshippeth God, the Church. And D.
Whitaker. lib. 1 de Scriptura cap. 11. Sect. 4. How can the Church be in one,
seeing the very name of the Church does signify a company or multitude? If
therefore there be but one, there is no Church. For the Church cannot be
imagined to be but in many. Iuel. Defe^s. Ap. part. x. c. 1. Fulk. de Succes.
p. 89. Beza in Catech. c: 5. Brent. in Prolog. q. 4.
And much less can one or two be the Catholic Church, that is (as the
Protestants themselves expound it) the Church spread throughout the whole world,
because one or two cannot be spread throughout the world. Whereupon the Scots in
their Confession cap. 18. say, that two or three make not the universal
Church. And Zuinglius lib. de vera and falsa relig. tom. 2. fol. 192: Who
says that the Church signifies some few, erreth, like to him who says that
people signifies the King. Surely it should be a notable flock which consisted
of one or two sheep, a worthy Kingdom which had but one or two subjects, and a
strange Catholic or universal Church which contained but one or two faithful
persons. What? can the gates of hell prevail so far against the Church, as
they can reduce her to one or two Christians? What other thing is this, then to
say that the Church can perish? For seeing the Church cannot be imagined but in
company or multitude, who says that the Church can be brought to one or two,
does indeed say the Church can be destroyed.

8. If any reply, that S. Augustine upon the 128. psalm says that the Church
was once in Abel alone, and Tertullian. lib. de poenit. cap. 10. the Church is
in one or two; I answer, that S. Augustine there by the Church understands
those only, whom the scripture by name has canonized, as it has Abel; for
otherwise it is manifest, that in Abels time, there were others that were of
the Church besides himself, to wit Adam and Eve. And Tertullian by the Church
understands, not the Catholic or universal Church as we do, but any number
of Christians, such as were those domestical Churches, which S. Paul sometimes
saluted.

9. The last refuge may be, that what Protestants have said of the destruction
of the Church and faith, they meant not of their own Church and faith, but of
some others. But this is a fond shift. For first, as I have showed, they mean
the destruction of the true Church and faith. Either therefore their Church and
faith is not the true but false, or else they mean of their own. For the true
Church and faith is but one, as the Apostle says Ephesians. 4: One God, one faith.
And the Nycen Creed: I believe one church. S. Cyprian lib. de unit: One God,
one Christ, one Church, and one says. S. Hilary ad Constant: Whatsoever is
besides one faith, is not faith but treachery. And S. Leo sermon. 4. de Natiuit:
Unless it be one it is no faith. Nay Luther lib. cont. Papa^um tom. 7. fol.
461: Christ knows not two kinds of unlike Churches, but one only Church.
Calvin 4. Inst. cap. 1.. 2: We cannot find two or three churches unless
Christ be plucked in pieces. And in his Catechism: As there is one head of the
faithful, so they must all be united in one body, that there be not many
Churches, but one only. And hereupon infers Sadeel in Refutat. These. Posnan.
art. 61. that what is said of the true Church, is said of theirs. Seeing (says
he) the true Church is one and not many, as often as the truth of doctrine
shines openly, so often we say the true Church and therefore our Church was
visible. Secondly because (as we have seen) they speak of the destruction of
their most principal article of justification by only faith, which they
affirm to be the life, soul, and sum of their Church. Thirdly because they
estsoones speak of the destruction of the Gospel: but by the name of the
Gospel they mean their own doctrine, as by the name of Gospellers they
understand themselves, as hereafter shall appear. Finally, because they
profess that by the name of a Protestant, Lutheran, or Caluinist they
understand a true Christian. Sadeel lib. de peccat. remiss. cap. 1: Ours, that
is the true Christian Catholics opinion. D. Fulke lib. de Succest. page 186: I
will never deny that Jewel was a noble Protestant, that is a Christian. And ad
Cauillat, Staplet: The community of Christians, whom ye call Protestants.
Hutten in Expostul. cum Erasmo: Against Lutherans, that is maintayners of the
truth. Schusselburg. tom. 7. Catal. haeret. Pap. 73: A Lutheran or true
Christian, is etc. And lib. 2. Theol. Calvin. fol. 131: Lutherans that is true
servants of Christ. Beza cont. Illyricum page 168: We perceive no difference
between Sacramentaries and Christians. Hospinian part. 2. Histor. fol. 384:
The Sacramentaries, that is the orthodoxall. And Danaeus cont. Bellarm. page
311: The Caluinists, that is Christians. page 169: A Caluinist, that is, a
godly man.

10. Wherefore out of all which has been said in this and the former Chapter, I
thus make my first demonstration to prove that Luther was the Author and first
beginner of the Protestant Church and religion. If the Protestant Church were
not at all when Luther began, he was the author thereof: But it was not at all:
Therefore he was the author of it. The Mayor or first proposition is evident.
For if it were not at all when Luther began, he was the beginner of it. The
minor is manifest by the foresaid Co^fessions of Protestants, wherein they
plainly say, that it was substantially perished.

That every man followed a Church and religion different from the Protestant
before Luther arose. CHAP. III.
1. THE second demonstration wherewith we will prove Luther to have been have
been the Author of the Protestant Church and religion we will take from the
Protestants confessions, that when Luther first began all the world and every
man embraced a different religion. Luther in the Preface of his first come:
Here see even by my case, The whole world.
how hard it is to yet out of errors which are confirmed by the example of the
whole world, and by long custom as it were changed into nature. And to. 2.
this is written in his Epitaph: O Christ, Long custom.
he showed th^e when all the world was overwhelmed with darkness. And lib. 1.
de captiuit. Babylon. fol. 72. being to write against Mass, he says: Neither
let it move thee, that the whole world has the contrary opinion and custom.
And fol. 68: There is almost this day nothing more received or more se^led in
the Church, then that Mass is a sacrifice Again^: So many ages
I set upon a thing, which being approved by the custom of so many ages and
consent of all, is so ingrafted, as it is needful to change almost the whole
face of the Church. Consent of all.
And lib. de ^^r^g. Miss. fol. 244: How often did my trembling heart quake, and
reprehending me objected that their strongest and only argument: Art thou only
wise, what did all err, Only Luther wise,
were so many ages ignorant? Behold how Luthers heart or conscience did tell
him that he alone knew Protestancy, and that for many ages all were ignorant of
it. And in hi^ table talks, fol. 10: These cogitations were very troublesome
to me. Thou only have the pure word of God, all others want it. And lib. cit.
de Missa ^ol. 247: The common people without doubt are most fully persuaded,
that all men are helped by Masses, for it seems incredible, that all the
world should be so forsaken of God. And fol. 256: It seems incredible to them,
that Luther alone should be wise. Contra Cochlaeum fol. 408: The Sophisters and
Monks have seduced the whole world to trust in works. The whole world under the
Pope.
Tom. 3. in psalm. 82. fol. 481: In times past the whole world was under the
Popes Dominion. Tom. 5. ^n 4. Galat. fol. 388: In former ages Paul was unknown
to the whole world. Tom. 6. in cap. 11. Genes. fol. 130: The wicked impostour
(so he terms the Pope) has deceived all the word. in c. 37. fol. 506: The
whole world was horribly brought into madness and solly by Papists. In cap. 19
fol. 238: In the former age all things lay in darkness. Tom. 7. epist. ad D.
Sabaudiae fol. 483: We confess that the world was by the Pope most miserably
seduced and ensnared in those traditions of men, but rather snares of the
devil, whiles all were persuaded that in keeping them they obtained salvation,
in omitting them sell into damnation And sermon. de Simulacris fol. 277: All the
world was filled with the other abuse of images: For who would (have put images
in Churches) if thereby he had not thought that he did service to God. Thus
much Luther.

2. And in like manner speak the Lutherans. The Confession of Auspurg. cap.
20: No man admonished of the difference betwixt humane traditions and Gods law,
no man taught how good works did please. The Magdeburgians Praefat. Centur. 5:
All alike were drowned in the impieties and Aegiptian darkness of Antichrist.
All alike.
And Praefat. Centur. 8: Antichrist had brought under his yok all Europe that
we may (say they) speak nothing of other parts of the earth. All Europe.
Melancthon tom. 4. Prefat. in Act. Ratisbon. page 730: Only Luther durst touch
the errors of the Popes and schools. Our Churches follow him rather then the
consent of so many ages, Popes and schools. Lobechius disput. 29: The Roman
tyranny has overwhelmed the Church and held the Christian world in thraldom.
Huber. in Antibellarm. lib. 4. The Christian world.
cap. 3. Our Church has a new form not used at that time when the Pope
possessed all. Morgestern tract. de Eccles. page 145: The whole Christian world
knows that before Luther all churches were overwhelmed with more then
Cymmerian darkness. All churches.
Hitherto the Lutherans.

3. Amongst the Sacramentaries Calvin 2. Institur, cap. 2.. 4: All, All eue^ to
the common people.
even to the common people are emb^ed with this principle that man has free
will. Lib. 4. cap. 18.. 18: The Abomination of Mass proffered in a golden cup
has made so drunk all Kings and people of the earth from the highest to the
lowest that they put the whole hope of their salvation in it alone. Al people
on earth from the highest to the lowest
Which very words are repeated by Lobechius disput. 26. and by Hospin. epist.
dedicat. 1, part: Histor. and part. 2. fol. 25. And the said Calvin lib. 4.
cit. cap. 10.. 5: The whole world was covered with a most thick mist of
ignorance. And lib. de Coen. page 10: With how thick a mist of darkness was the
world beseiged. Again: When Luther began to teach he so handled the matter of
the supper, as that, what belongs to the corporal presence, he seemed to
leave such as all then received. And lib. de Necess. Reform. page 46: It is
manifest that the whole world was bewitched with these wicked opinions before
Luther appeared. The whole world.
And Respons. ad Sadolet. page 130: All things were stuffed with pernicious
errors. There was none which truly esteemed that only sacrifice (of Christ)
none which so much as dreamed of his eternal Priesthood and the intercession
which depends thereupon, none rested in his only justice. No man so much as
dreamed of etc.
But now whereas all did put their trust in good works when they went about by
good words to purchase thy (God he speaks to) grace, to obtain justice, to
purge their sins, to satisfy thee. All which (says he) do dash out and
annihilate the virtue of the cross of Christ. Respons. ad Ve^^pel. page 354:
Seeing the whole VV^sterne hurch as he calls it defends obstinatly all the
inipiety which we justly detest etc. All the we^terne Church.
And epist. 141: We are comp^^en to make a separation from the whole world.
Bucer lib. ^0 v^^^ ^^^su Ministerij page 602: It is plain, that for many ages
past God revealed to no nation the doctrine of our salvation, and all things
belonging to his Kingdom so far as he h^^^ d^^ in our age: L^b. de Concord.
page 660: This error of the real presence prevailed with all Nations of the
whole world. D. (...) ^it. de Antichristo cap. 26: At length antichrist and his
doctrine overcame, all men holding their peace and shamefully and basely
submitting themselves unto him until John V^i^l^s arose who stoutly opposed
himself against him. S^eidan ep^^t. ^ed (...) H^^tor: The beginning (of
Protestancy) was slender and almost contemptible, One only man.
and one only bare the ha^^^ and brunt of the whole world. Bibliander Orat. ad
P^^^ o^e^ Germ: We put it as a thing known by it self most clear and out of
all doubt, Al people from the first to the last.
that after Gregory the great his death the Pope of Rome was Antichrist, who
with his abom nations bl^sphemies and idolatries did so besot all Kings and
people from the first to the last, that they became more blockish then ^rute
beasts Z^^inglius lib. de vera and falsa relig. cap. de E^char: The whole body
of Christendom.
I think no man will deny this that we all ran to mass as to a sacred refuge.
Daniel Camier. epist. 49: Error possessed no^ one or two small parcels, but
Apostasy turned the very whole body away from Christ. Hospin. Praefat. part. 2.
Histo^: None strove against
From Gregory's time no man strove against superstition, but all added and put
to what strength each one could. And ep. dedicat. part. ^: This most gross and
more then Cymmerian darkness endured in the whole Christian world these 6.
hundred years last past. Viretus in Hospin. part. 2. fol. 224: The whole
Christian Nation The whole Christian Nation.
utterly bewitched as it were with sorceries and alienated from God and true
religion etc. Praefat. Syntag. Confess: When all was covered with most gross
darkness of ignorance and idolatry. Gualter. Praefat. Comment. Epist. ad Rom:
In the point of the real presence the whole Christian world was greatly
deceived. And Praefat. in ^om. 2. Zuinglij: The whole world was before
bewitched with trust in outward signs. Iezler de bello Euchar. fol. 24: The
former age was every where drowned in most thick darkness which no man in his
wits can deny. Brocard in c. 2. Apocal. fol. 41: Al and every member of Christ.
When the preaching of the gospel was allowed in Luther and his first onset
against the Papacy the knowledge of Christ was sound missing in all and every
of his members.

4. Amongst our English Protestants thus speaks the Author of the Apology of
the English Church page 38: We are indeed departed from him, who we saw had
blinded the world for many ages. His Majesty in his M^nitory epistle page 37:
In those ages a thicker and more blind ignorance of truth possessed the world.
Page 100: How many ages was the Christian people held in so great blindness and
ignorance of wholesome doctrine. And page 160: A darck night of Popish doctrine
possessed the world. D. Wh^taker Con^. 2. e^. 3. page 467: The plague (of
Popery) at last went through the whole world. Page 468: That Antichristians
plague raged through all parts of the world, and through all visible Churches.
And Cont. 4. quaest. 5. cap. 3. page 684: In times past no religion had place
in Churches but Papisticall. D. Humfrey ad Rat. 3. Campiani: At length all left
the fellowship of the Church. M. Perkins in Exposit. Symboli: During the space
of 900. years the Popish heresy spread it self over the whole world. And D.
White in his way page 352. compares Popery before Luthers time to a leprosy.
which (says he) possesses every part of man. And in his defense cap. 37 he
says: I affirm Papacy to be a leprosy breeding in the Church so universally,
that there was no visible company of people appearing to the world free ^^om
it. And whether any company at all, known or unknown were free from it wholly
or not, I neither determine, nor greatly care. M. Jewel sermon. in cap. 11. Lucae
page 208: When all the world the people Priests and Princes were overwhelmed
with ignorance, when the word of God was put out of sight: when all schools,
Priests, Bishops, and Kings of the world were sworn to him (the Pope) that
whatsoever he took in hand they should uphold it: When whosoever had muttered
against him, must straight way have been excommunicate and put to most cruel
death as Gods enemy. M. Fox in his Acts p. 391: All the whole world was filled
and overwhelmed with errors and darkness. And finally D. Bancroft in his
survey c. 4. page 60. has these words: Both the Priests of all sorts and
likewise the people became in time to be so drowned in the puddles of Popery,
all of them together from the top to the toe, Al people from the top to the
toe.
forgetting etc.

5. By these confessions of Protestants we see plainly, that all the western
Church, all Europe, all Christian Churches, the whole Christian nation, the
whole body of the Church, the whole world, all, all without exception, all
alike, all even to the last, all even to the common people, all Kings and
people from the first to the last, all Priests and people from top to toe, all
and every one were overwhelmed with Popish and more then Cymmerian darkness.
Secondly we see, that no man strone against Popery, no man admonished, no man
taught, no man believed, no man so much as dreamed of that which is the
chiefest and most principal point of Protestancy, but one only, and Luther
alone was wise. Thirdly that the case was such for so many ages, for 600. yea
for 900. years last past. Fourthly that it is so manifest, that as themselves
confess the whole Christian world knows it, it is confessed manifest by it
self, most clear, and out of all doubt, and no man in his writtes can deny
it. To all which if you add, that very many, and most famous Protestants,
oftentimes, most plainly, most freely, and in all kind of writings have
confessed this, ye shall most evidently perceive, Lib. 1. cont marc. ca. 3. de
carne Chr. c. 5. li. 22 cont. Faust. c. 15.
that unless it be heretical license (as Tertullian speaks) or by some
devilish privilege (as S. Augustins word is) their confessions can be
understood in no other sense, then that when Luther began, there was not one
Protestant in the whole world. Lastly we see hereby, that Protestants herein
imitate the phrases of old heretics: Cont. epist. fund. c. 4.
for Manichee as S. Augustine writes said: Almost all nations are ignorant how
the truth is. And the Donatists: The Church is perished from the whole world.
The Luciferians in S. Hierome: Here Is. 69.
The whole world is become Devils. Whose damned speech says he, does frustrate
the Passion of Christ. Dial. cont. Lucifer.
Nestorius in Vincent. Lyrin. avouched. That the whole Church had erred. And
other heretics there say, Learn true faith which besides us none
understands, Cap. 26.
which lay hid for many ages and now of late is revealed and showed. Marcion
also and Valentinian in Tertullian avouch, Praes. c. 28.
that all had erred, at whom he pleasantly iesteth in these words: Forsooth
truth which was to be freed expected some Marcionists or Valentinians
(Lutherans or Caluinists.) In the mean time men preached amiss, believed
amiss, so many thousands we wrongly Christened, so many works of faith wrongly
done, so many miracles so many graces done amiss, so many Priesthoods so many
functions wrongly executed.

6. If any say that the scripture sometime speaks universally when
notwithstanding it is not to be understood universally, as when it says: All
seek their own: There is not one that does good, no not one, and the like,
and therefore though the foresaid speeches of Protestants be universal, yet
they are not to be understood universally: I answer, that it is found to
affirm, that the foresaid speeches of Protestants ought to be understood
according to certain speeches of the scripture, and those spoken of other
matters, rather then according to their own plain and manifest signification.
Who made this law of expounding Protestants words? Or do they keep it in
expounding Catholics or other men's words? God may speak in scripture as he
thinks best, Protestants ought according to custom, (which as is said is the
law and rule of speech) both to speak and to be understood. Besides, since we
know, that the scripture cannot lie or gainsay it self, and in other places it
says the contrary, we justly limitate its universal speeches in this or that
place. And therefore unless Protestants can show that they have the like
privilege that they cannot contradict themselves as the Scripture has, there
is no reason to expound them according as we do the holy Scripture.

7. If any reply that also Saint Hierome Dial. cont. Lucifer. said that the
whole world meruayled how it was become Arian, and yet meant not that the whole
world was Arian? I answer, that Saint Hieromes example does nothing avail
Protestants. First because Saint Hierome said once so, Protestants very often.
Again, he said so only in heat of dispute with his adversary; Protestants have
written so when they disputed with none. Besides, Saint Hierome in the very
same place expounds himself, that he meant not that indeed the whole world
was become Arian: For he says, that it was evident that the Bishops were no
Arians, but believed a right and abode in the agreement of faith, but only
speaks so because all the Bishops assembled at Arimini yielded to the Arians,
that the word Consubstantiall should not be used. But Protestants say not that
all the world yielded to the Pope about the suppressing of one only word, but
that all from the first to the last, from the top to the toe were drowned in
Popish errors, and none believed or so much as dreamed of that which is most
fundamental and necessary in Protestant religion: Which kind of speeches S.
Hierome never used. Again, Saint Hierome used only this phrase: The whole
world, but Protestants use both that and many more and more plain. Lastly
albeit Saint Hierome had spoken altogether as Protestants do, yet there were no
reason that they should be understood rather according to Saint Hieromes
meaning, then according to their own most proper, most plain, and most
frequent words, especially when as Luther says tom. 1. fol. 414: Many things
are borne withal in the Fathers, who were known to be orthodoxe, which we may
not imitate.

8. Wherefore out of all which has been rehearsed in this chapter I thus frame
my second demonstration: If so be that before Luther arose there were not one
only Protestant in the whole world, but that all and every man followed a
different Religion, Luther was the Author and beginner of the Protestant Church
and Religion. But that is true, as manifestly appears by the manyfold and
open confessions of Luther and many and most famous Protestants. Therefore etc.

That Protestants confess their Church and religion to have been altogether
invisible before Luther appeared. CHAP. IV.
1. THE fourth demonstration, wherewith we will prove Luther to have been the
Author of the Protestant church and religion we will draw out of that which
they confess of the inuisibility thereof before Luther brake out. And by the
way I must advertise the Reader of two things. The one is, that by the name of
the Church is not to be understood only the men who are of the Church, but
their society in religion whereby they make a church. wherefore those
Protestants speak not to the purpose, who to excuse the absurdity of their
doctrine touching the inuisibility of the Church, say they mean not, that the
men, whereof it consisted, were invisible men; for it suffices, that they
confess, that they were invisible worshippers of God, according to the
Protestant manner; or that their society in this kind of worship of God was
invisible. Note.
The other point is, that in these kind of questions: Whether before Luther
the Protestant Church were? Whether it were visible? Colloq. Batisban. Ses.
1.6. 10.17. Iuel. Def. Apol. par. 5. c. 15. d. 1.
VVhither it had Pastors? and the like: the Catholics hold the negative part,
and Protestants the affirmative, and that it belongs to the affirmer, to
prove what he affirms: wherein if he fail, he is overcome: and it is not
needful for the denyer to prove his denial, but is sufficient reasonably to
answer the proofs of the affirmer: which if he perform, he has won the
cause. As if one like Anaxagoras would say, that there were many worlds besides
this: or that such and such things have been done in times past; he were bound
to prove what he says, and he that should deny such matters, were not bound to
prove his denial, but only reasonably to answer his adversaries arguments.
And the reason is manifest, because for to affirm or believe any thing, we
must have reason or proof thereof: bur for the not believing of it, we need no
other reason, then to show that there is no sufficient reason why it should be
believed. Hereupon Luther in his book against Henry 8. King of England tom. 2.
fol. 340 said: He must be taught the principles of disputation, who having to
prove his affirmation, urges his adversary to prove his denial. And Vorstins
in his Antibellarm. page 464: It is enough for the denyer, probably to deny.
Wherefore in these kind of questions Protestants ought to be urged to perform
their part, that is, to prove what they affirm, to wit, that before Luthers
time their Church was, had Pastors, and the like: which if they cannot do, they
must needs confess, that in this debate they have lost their cause. And they
ought not to press us to prove, that before Luther their Church was not, had
not Pastors etc. Because (as I said) herein we are only the defenders and
denyers, Tom. 1. fo. 389. 473.
and therefore it suffices for us to show, that no reasons, which the
Protestants allege convince a reasonable man to believe that there was any
such Church before Luther appeared: which if we do, we have won the cause.
That the Protestants Church was invisible to strangers.
Nevertheless, (that I may use Luthers words in the book before cited) Albeit
it belong not to us to prove the negative, let us do it.

2. First therefore, touching the inuisibility of the Protestant Church before
Luthers time, Protestants confess, that it was invisible to Papists, to
enemies, to the world, and to all that were not of it. For thus says Sadcel in
his Refutation of the 61. article page 538: We deny not that the Godly men
lurcked under Popish darkness; and we give God thanks, that such persons,
families, Invisible to Papists.
and companies, were for a time invisible and unknown to the Pope and all his
Catchpoles, seeing they were for a long time like sparckles covered with much
ashes. The same he says in his answer to Arthur cap. 8. and to the Sophismes
of Turrian loco 10. and to the Repetition of them page 706. Danaeus in his
book of Antichrist cap. 38. writes: That there were very few Protestants and
those dwelling in wildernesses, and also unknown to others. unknown to others.
Iunius in his 4. book of the Church cap. 5. speaks thus of Protestants
before Luther: They professed their says amongst themselves, but not before
dogs and wild beasts who would run upon them. D. Whitaker Cont. 2. quaest.
2. cap. 2. page 458. Was it (the Protestant Church) manifest to all? No: but
to those only who had eyes. And page 468: There was no true Church on earth,
Known only to Protestants
which appeared to all. And quest. 6. cap. 2. page 359: We care not for their
obiecting solitude unto us. For we are not ashamed to have recalled our Church
out of this kind of solitude. D. Fulke to the Cauillations of Stapleton: The
whole form of the Church was for some ages unknown to the ungrateful world.
And in his book of succession page 118: They confessed Christ, but not always
before heretics; but before them^elues and the Church. And in his notes upon
the 11. cap. of the Acts; If by visible you understand that which is seen and
known to the whole world; it is not true, that the Church was always visible.
D. Morton in the 1. part of his Apology book 1. cap. 16. says: They professed
secretly not publicly. D. White in his way to the Church page 95: That they
professed among themselves. Osiander in his Manuel page 59: In the visible
Church of Rome there was the invisible company of belieuers hidden to the eye
of the world. Caelius secundus Curio in his book of the lardgnes of the
Kingdom of God, page 212: It came to pass that for many years the Church lay
hid; and that the Citizen of this Kingdom could scarce, or not at all be
discerned from others. And the Scots in their general confession: We say,
that this is the only true Christian says, which is now revealed to the world.
Thus they acknowledge that before Luthers tym Protestants were unknown to the
Pope and his officers, to their enemies, to the world, to all others besides
themselves, could not be discerned from others, lurcked in deserts, in
darknesses, like sparkles under much ashes, professed not their faith before
the world, or their adversaries, but at most before themselves, and were known
only to those that had eyes, that is, to themselves.

3. The same also they mean, They teach that the church may be invisible to
the world.
when they teach that the church of God may be invisible to the world, and all
that are out of it. Iunius in his 2. book of the church cap. 13: We conclude
that the outward form and visible shape of the Church, may so in common
vanish, that it cannot be pointed at, or perceived of the world. And again:
The Church is oftentimes covered and invisible to the world. Often invisible to
the world.
And cap. 16: The visible fashion of the Church may be hid and fail from the
ungrateful world. And in his Theological Theses cap. 43: Sometimes the church
appears to the faithful alone; sometimes it is known to some godly persons,
not to every one. Besnage in his book of the state of the visible and
invisible Church, cap. 4: The Church is not always known to the world. Sonis
in his answer to Sponde cap. 2. page 32: God sometimes takes away the face of
the Church from men. Lubbertus in his 3. book of the Church cap. 4: We
affirm that the Church may be driven to those straights, that it may lie hid
from the world and persecutors. And cap. 6: We deny that she is always
visible to the world; which he repeateth again cap. 7. Riuet in his Epirome of
Controversies treatise 1. sect. 37: It happens sometimes that the Church has
been invisible, or rather hidden sometimes from the eyes of persecutors,
sometimes from the eyes of the faithful themselves, to wit of some and the
most of them. D. Whitaker Controuers. 2. quest. 3. cap. 3. page 474: We say,
that the Church may be conserved in so few, that it appear not to the world.
And quaest. 5. cap. 6. page 508: It is most false, that the Church shall
always be known, and manifest to the world. D. Fulke to Stapletons Cauillat.
Bullinger, Alphonse, Chytreus, Marlorate and all the rest, do acknowledge that
the Church by the defense of Christ shall be protected in the desert, that is in
places remote from the sight and access of the wicked. Again: The Church is
not always apparent to the multitude of the wicked. And in his book of
Succession page 19: It is not doubted, whether the Ecclesiastical succession
of persons and places ought sometimes to be visible to the world, but whether
at all times. And page 21: Sometyms the Church is unknown to the world. Page
42: God would sometimes provide for the Church in this sort, in striking her
enemies with blindness, that they could not find her. And page 129. The
external policy of the Church is unknown to the world, that is, to the
enemies of the Church. And page 366: I affirm that the Church is sometimes
unknown to the world. D. White in his way to the Church page 86: The question
is only of the outward state of the Church, whether it be always visible to the
world or not, that in every age those congregations may be discerned and
pointed to, which are the true Church; For we say not. Page 87: This number may
be very small, and their profession so secret amongst themselves, that the
world, and such as love not the truth shall not see them, they remaining so
hidden, as if they were not at all. And page 97. The Church may be hid or
become invisible sometime, so that the world cannot see it. D. Morton in the 1.
part of his Apology, lib. 1. cap. 16: Protestants proper defense.
Protestants say the Church is not always known to all the faithful, nor to
her enemies. And this he terms the proper defense of Protestants. And cap.
13: When Protestant say, the Church is sometimes ecclipsed like the moon,
they mean that she is brought sometimes to so sew, that it is not seen but of
those, which are in her, but not openly known by her visibility, rites, or
visible Succession, or to all the faithful: D. Willet in his Synopsis Cont. 2
quest. 1. page 67: A number of faithful people has been always in the world,
but not always visible to the world. Again; If by visible they understand
that which is actually visible, we say it is not so always visible to the
world. Thus we see that for to maintain the inuisibility of their Church, they
teach that the visible form of the Church of God may vanish, mayly hid, may
fail from the world, is often taken away from men by God, is unknown to the
world. That the Church sometimes is unknown or appears not visible to the
world, sometime known only to the faithful, and yet not to all them neither,
but to some and the fewer of them, and that neither, by any visible rites, nor
by visible succession, and that this kind of doctrine they term the proper
defense of Protestants, to wit, for to defend the inuisibility of their Church
before Luther. Which kind of defense has neither truth nor probability, and
though it had, yet would it not suffice to defend the inuisibility of their
Church before Luthers time, when it was invisible not only to the world, to
enemies, to strangers, to some or most of the faithful; but to all and every
one, as shall manifestly appear hereafter.

4. If any say, that it is no marvel if Protestants teach that their Church
was invisible to the world, because the true Church cannot be seen but by
faith: I answer, first that this supposes their Church to be the true
Church, which ought not to be supposed, but proved. Secondly that they teach,
that the Church may be unknown, not only to the world, but also to some or
most of the faithful. Lastly that the true Church may be known two ways, one
way to be the true Church of God, an other to be known distinctly from all
other Churches; The true Church discerned from all other Churches even by
Infidels.
as Christ was known to be the Messiah only by his disciples, but yet he was
known distinctly from all other men by the Jews. And the scripture is known
to be the word of God only by Christi^ns, but is known distinctly from other
writings by Infidels. And in Christ's time his company was known to be the true
Church of God, only by the faithful, but known distinctly from all other
companies or Churches even by Infidels. And the same we say of his Church from
his time unto our days, that it is and ever was known to be the true Church
of God, only of the faithful, but known and seen distinctly from all other
Churches even by the world and Infidels. And of his kind of knowledge and
visibility, wherewith the true Church is known and visible not only to the
faithful, but even to Infidels, and of the opposite ignorance or inuisibility
we speak in this matter, and Protestants also, as appears by their
testimonies already rehearsed, and shall yet more by those which we shall
repeat hereafter.

That they say their Church was simply invisible.
5. Further more therefore Protestants do not only teach that their Church may
and has been invisible respectively; that is, to this or that kind of men, (as
we have already heard,) but also they grant, that it may be simply and
absolutely invisible. Luther upon the 90. psalm. tom. 3. fol. 493: The Church
was and abode in Popery, but truly so hidden, as to one that would judge by the
appearance, the seemed to be no where at all. Seemed to be no where.
And upon the psalm. 22. fol. 344: The Church is brought into the dust of
death, so that no where there appears any show or trace of her. And upon the
first chap. of Micheas tom. 4. fol. 434: No trace of church appeared.
In the former ages there was no true form of religion extant. The
Magdeburgians in the preface of their 10. Century: It is very hard to find,
where and which the Church was in this age. No form extant.
Likewise in the Preface of the 11. Century: Every where was darkness, neither
durst the Church mutter any thing. Gerlachius in his 22. disput. of the Church
page 927. writes, that before Luther: The true Church withdrew it self from
the eyes and sight of men, into lurking holes, and hid her self in darkness.
Zuinglius in his supplication to the Bishop of Constance, tom. 1. fol. 120: The
heavenly doctrine lay a long time hid. Hospinian in the epistle dedicatory of
the first part of his History: From the year 1200. until the year 1515. the
Church lay miserably overwhelmed, as it were, with a most deep and most strong
deluge. Calvin in the Preface of his Institutions: God permitted that in former
ages there should be no face of the true Church extant. No face of the church
extant.
And adds of his own doctrine: It lay a long time unknown and buried.
Again: For some ages all things were drowned in deep darkness. And upon the 23.
chapter of the Acts verse. 6. he says: The Church was hidden from the eyes of
men. And in his Preface upon Isaias: Touching the oueward show of the church,
nothing for many ages appeared, but desolate and confused wast on all sides.
Beza in his book of the notes of the church page 99: The Church lurked in the
wilderness. Pareus in his 4. book of grace and freewill cap. 6: In Constantines
time the church began to wa^ sick to death; notwithstanding the Catholic
Church remained. But where? In the desert, as in the world withdrawn from the
eyes of men. Sadeel in his treatise of the vocarion of Ministers page 533:
After the Church had a long time lurked, the Lord called her at this time into
light. Could not be discerned.
Voyen in his Preface of Catalog. Doct: The true visible Church could not be
discerned: no tract of Gods grace appeared in his Church. The Apology of the
English Church part. 4. cap. 4. diuis. 2. says, that 40. years ago truth
first began to spring, unknown at that time and unheard of. Unheard of.
D. Humfrey unto the 3. reason of F. Campian page 286: Why the picture of the
Church in these later times cannot be seen of our adversaries, or drawn of us
etc. And page 288: If the only names of our Fathers were extant, who either by
teaching, Not so much as their names extant.
or monishing, or writing, did help the Church of Christ, we should see another
rank and progress of the Church, another succession of Bispops, another
picture of Protestants. And page 291: And yet they will object that our Church
was hidden, which they no where suffered alive. D. Whitaker Controu. 2. quest.
3. page 479: When they ask of us, where was our Church in times past for so
many ages, we answer, that it was in a close wilderness, that is, that it was
hidden, lay secret, fled the sight of men. And quest. 5. c. 3. page 499: Luther
brought the faith out of darkness, wherein before it lay drowned. And cap. 4.
page 502: Our Church was then, but you will say, it was not visible. Not
visible.
What then? therefore was it not? No. For it lay hid in the wilderness. M.
Perkins in his exposition of the Creed colum. 788: We say that many ages past
before this our age, that universal defection overwhelmed almost all the
world, Not visible.
and that our Church was not visible at that time. M. Base, in his 1. Century
of the writers of Britanny cap. 4: From Phocas until the renewing of the
Gospel, the doctrine of Christ lay so long in lurking holes. M. Downham in
his 2. book of Antichrist cap. 2: The general defection of the visible Church
began to work in the Apostles time. M. Powell in his 1. book of Antichrist c.
23: Our religion lay long time unknown and buried. unknown and buried.
And M. Cox Chancellor of Oxford in King Edward 6. time exhorting the
university men to Protestantisme, bids them pluck out truth lying long time
lurking in Trophonius den. Thus clearly and thus many ways they simply and
absolutely grant, that their Church was invisible unknown and buried before
Luther arose.

6. The same also they intend, They teach the Church may be simply invisible.
when they say, that the Church either was, or can be invisible. For they would
never say so, unless they knew that such was the condition of their Church
before Luther began. Luther upon the 90. psalm. tom. 3. fol. 495: Sometimes the
Church was most weak and so dispersed as it appeared no where. Hutter in his
Analysis of the Confession of Auspurg page 448: No where appear.
It is certain that it may fall out, that the true Church may ly hidden, and
her visible form not at all times appear to the eyes. Herbrand in his
Compend. of divinity, place of the Church, page 502. writes: That the
faithful sometimes appear not to the eyes, even of the Godly. Not to the
Godly.
Kemnitius in his common places tit. the epistles of the Apostles page 78:
Sometimes the true Church (another bastard and company prevailing and
ouertopping) does so as it werely hid, that Elias may say, I am le^t alone.
Gerlachius in his 22. dispute of the Church, page 946: No surely, if at some
time the Church be not seen with corporal eyes, therefore she is not. Calvin
in the Preface of his Institutions: Sometime God takes away the outward
knowledge of his Church from the sight of men. Sometime the Church has no
apparent form. And in his treatise of the true Reformation of the Church page
332: The Church sometime lies hid, and flies the sight of men. And in his
Antidote of the 18. article of the University of Paris. We gather, that the
Church is not at all times subject to the eyes of men, as the experience of
many ages witnesses. Again: Elias thought himself only left of the Church;
falsely indeed, but that is a proof, that she may lie so hidden. And in his 4.
book of Institutions cap. 1. 3. he affirms, that it is not needful to see
or to feel the Church, and that she may pass our knowledge. Beza in his
Confession cap. 5.. 9: Diverse times the Church seems to have perished
utterly. Iunius in his 3 book of the church cap. 16: The Church shall never
end, but shall lie hidden, according to her visible form. Chassanio in his
common p^aces loc. 2. of the Church page 148: The Church is not always
visible. Danaeus in his 3. book of the Church cap. 2. Bellarmine will have
that only to be the Church which is visible which is most false. Cap. 12: God
oftentimes will have some visible Church on earth, and often times none. When
there is no visible Church, Ofte^tyms no visible Church on earth.
then this precept (of adjoining himself to the Church) cease. And cap. 13:
Bellarmine labors to prove the true Church of God on earth to be always
visible. That being most false etc. And cap: 16: We say, we affirm, we avouch
that the Church may so fail on earth, not that there is none at all, but that
there is none in respect of us, that is, of men, that there be none visible to
us on earth. Again: S. Paul infers generally that the whole Church may
leave to be visible. And lib. 4. cap. 8: The true Church may sometimes fail to
be visible. Son is in his answer to Sponde cap. 2: page 33: The whole Church
may have to be visible.
God makes that the Church is not always visible. Plessy Mornay in his book
of the Church cap. 1: Oftentimes the good corn is hidden under the chafe
without any appearance of the Church. Polanus in his Antibellarm. College
disput. 14: The visible Church may fail. Bucanus in his common places loc. 41.
sect. 9: It oftentimes happens that there is no company of men extant which
publicly and visibly worshippeth God purely. The visible church may fail.
And sect. 12: There is always on earth some number which worshippeth Christ
piously, but this number is not always visible. Trelcatius in his 2. book of
Theological Institutions makes rhis title of one Chapter:: That the visible
church may fail against Bellarmine. Hyperius in his Method of divinity lib.
3. page 548: VVhiles Elias wandered here and there, there appeared no face of
the Church. Sadeel in his refutation of the 61 ^rticle page 531: They are
deceived who think there is no Catholic Church, unless they measure it with
their eyes. And page 535: The true church maybe conserned without any visible
state. And in his repetition of Sophismes page 610: It is plain, Wants
outward form.
that the Church is not so to be tied to any outward form whatsoever, that it
ought to be denied to be a Church, as often as that form shall not be extant.
And of vocation of Ministers page 543: The Church sometime wants the
external form. Again: It is clear that the Church has sometimes been
without visible and personal succession. Page 550: Men's wickedness does
sometimes take from us the visible face of the Church. And again: It is
sometimes so darkened, that it appears not to our eyes. The whole visible
Church may perish.
Scharpe of Justification Cont. 5: The visible Church as such may perish. The
members of the visible Church may perish, yea the whole visible Church, as
such. Bastingius upon the Catechism, title of the Church, page 227: Without
doubt in every age things have been so troubled, as like a grain, covered with
straw, there appeared no face of the Church. Vorstius in his Antibellarm. page
133: A little before the calling of Abraham, no where appeared any visible
Church. And page 136: Hereupon it follows that the visible church of Christ
not only in a great part, The whole visible Church may fail.
but also taken whole in her uttermost extent, may for some time fail from the
true says, and be wholly darkened. The outward church of Christ may perish. And
page 424: Neither did Christ promise, that he would absolutely and perpetually
hinder the perishing and corruption of the outward Church. The Flemmings
Confession article 27: The Church in the eyes of men for sometime seems as
extinguished. And Napper upon the 11. chap. of the Apoc. page 186: They err,
who think that the true Church is always visible. And upon 12. cap. page 195:
The visible Church wholly embraced the errors of merits, of indulgences etc. And
Proposit. 20. page 41: The true Church was invisible, and the true knowledge of
God so covered with darkness, that none could visibly enter. Thus foraine
Protestants. Of our cou^trymen D. Whitaker Contr. 2. quest 3. cap. 2. page 470:
Sometimes obscurity most of all helps the church. For at some time she could
not be safe, unless she lay hid. And cap. 3. page 474: We say that sometime
the Church may avoid the sight of men, and hide it self in corners. Cap. 1.
page 466: We confess, that ever more there is on earth some number of them,
who piously worship Christ, and hold the true faith and religion, but we say
that this number is not always visible. Their (Papists) opinion is, that there
is ever more on earth a visible church. Not always visible.
It may fall out that there cannot be found out and known any true and
certain visible church. And cap. 2. cit. page 468: Our adversary would prove,
that there was always in the world some visible church. And page 469: Hence
infers (Denis the Carthusian) not as our adversaries do, that the visible
church can never perish, The visible church may perish.
or that there is ever more in the world some visible church; but that says
shall never perish wholly, but that Christian religion shall still persevere in
some to the end of the world. This (says Whitaker) is plainly that which we
say and defend. Mark how plainly he professes, that they do not teach, that
the visible Church cannot perish, Note.
or that there is always some visible Church on earth, but only that some
shall always believe the Christian religion. The same doctrine he teaches
page 470. 473. 475. 476. and 479. And q. 6. cap. 2. page 559. And in his third
book against Duraeus sect. 5. 6. 7. 11. M. Perkins in his problem. title of
the church: The ancients do acknowledge, that the church on earth is not
always visible. D. Willet in his Synopsis Cont. 2. q 1. page 67: We say the
church is not always actually visible to the world: nay it may sometyms be so
hid and secret that the members know not one another. Again: In Elias time not
visible.
In the days of Elias the church was not visible. And quest. 2. page 74: A
visible church we define, to be a congregation of men, amongst whom the word
is truly preached, and the Sacraments administered. Such a church has not
always been, neither can we be assured that it shall always be sound upon the
earth. There was a time when as the visible church failed upon earth. The
visible church failed.
This inuisibility of the Protestant Church, which I have hitherto proved by
their manifold Confessions, I will also prove by sequels out of other their
sayings. First therefore D. Morton in his Apology part. 1. book. 1. cap. 31.
disliketh not these words of Bellarmine: Protestants when they say the church
cannot fail or perish, mean the inuisibible church. And many of them in
express words deny, that the Promises of perpetuity, Protestants say the
promises belong not to the visible Church.
which in the scripture are made unto the church, Math. 16. and other where, be
made to the visible church. D. Whitaker Cont. 2. quest. 3. cap. 3. page 468: It
is most false, that it is the visible church, against which the gates of hell
shall not prevail. And Daneus Cont. 4. lib. 3. cap. 13. page 717: There (Math.
16.) is not meant the visible church. To whom assenteth D. Willet in his
Synopsis cont. 2. quest. 2. M. Powell of Antichrist lib. 1. cap. 10. Beurlin in
his Refutation of Sotus, cap. 53. Moulins of the vocation of Ministers lib. 1.
c. 4. and in his Bucklet part. 1. page 49. And D. Morton lib. cit. cap. 13.
adds that those three places Math. 16. and vlt. and psalm. 47. which promise
the perpetuity of the Church, Protestants believe not the visible church.
Are every one of them understood, almost by every Father, of the only company
of the elect, which the Protestants call the invisible Church. Besides, they
all generally teach, that by the Catholic Church, which they profess to
believe in the Creed, they mean not the visible Church, but only the
invisible. Luther in his book of abrogating Mass, tom 2. fol. 247: Who shall
show us the holy church, seeing it is hidden in spirit, and is only believed,
according as I believe the holy church. Zuinglius in his explication of the 31.
article: The church, which consists of those which are known to God alone,
in that which we profess in the articles of our creed. Danaeus lib. cit. page
713: The question is of the true church of God whereof it is said in the creed:
I believe the holy church. Bellarmine will have it to be the visible, we deny
it. The like he says page 789. 717. 718. and 725. Vorstius in his Antibellarm.
page 144: We profess not in the creed to believe the visible church, but the
invisible. D. Whitaker lib. 3. against Duraeus sect. vlt: You see what
Catholic church we believe, not the visible multitude of Christians, but the
holy company of the elect. The same he says Cont. 2. quest. 2. cap. 2.
Brentius in Prolegominis page 2. and others commonly. Furthermore they say,
that the visible Church is not the true Church in the sight of God. For Calvin
in his 4. book of Institutions cap. 1.. 7. They say the visible Church is not
the true Church before God.
and the rest grant, that both wicked and reprobate Christians may be of the
visible Church, but deny that they can be of the true Church in the sight of
God. Now surely if the visible Church be neither the true Church in the sight
of God, nor she to whom he has promised perpetuity, nor she which Protestants
do believe; what reason can they have to believe that the visible Church shall
always remain, or (which is all one) that the Church shall be always
visible. Again, their common doctrine is, that preaching of true doctrine is
the note of the visible Church; for so teaches the Confession of Auspurg cap.
7. the English Confession artic. 19. and all the rest. To which his Majesty in
his epist. to Cardinal Peron, D. Whitaker Contr. 2. q 5. c. 17. D. Morton
part. 1. Apol. l. 1. c. 6. M. Willet in his Synopsis Cont. 2. quest. 3. page
102. Sadeel to Turtians Sophismes loc. 5. Vorstius in Antibellarm. page 145.
and others do add, that it is an essential note of the visible Church. And it
is manifest that they must say so, because they use to define the visible
Church, to be a company, wherein the pure word of God is preached, and the
Sacraments rightly administered. For so it is defined of the English Confession
and of Sadeel lib. cit. of Whitaker quest. 5. cit. cap. 20. of Mela^cthon tom.
1. in cap. 15. Matthew. and of others generally. But before Luther there was no
preaching of Protestantisme, as we shall hear them confess cap. 7. therefore
there was then no visible Protestant Church. Finally, sometimes they say that
not only preaching of the word, but that also a lawful ministry; or, that not
only what true preaching soever, but also such as is made by a lawful
Minister, of the word, is of the essence and substance of the visible Church.
For thus writes D. Whitaker Cont. 2. q. 5. cap. 19. page 550: Stapleton says,
that the preaching of the Gospel by lavvfull Ministers is the proper note of
the church; and we say no otherwise And page 551. That he confesses true
preaching by a lavvfull Ministry to be a note of the church, is no other thing
then that we say and defend. The like has Sadeel in the place now cited: and
the Switzers Confession cap. 17. puts lawful preaching for the chiefest
note of the church; Calvin 4. Institut. cap. 2.. 1. for a perpetual note, and
the conclusions defended at Geneua page 845. for an essential note thereof.
But before Luther there were no Protestant Ministers at all, as we shall
hereafter hear the Protestants confess. Therefore no visible Protestant
Church.

8. By that which has been rehearsed, it is manifest, Sum of the foresaid
confessions.
that very many and very famous Protestants have often and plainly confessed
that when Luther came first (as they speak) to the Gospel, the Protestant
Church and religion was not visible, say hid, lurked, lay in the wilderness, in
lurking holes, indarknesse, in Trophonius his den, was buried, was unknown,
unheard of, appeared to none, cold not be discerned: Her image could not be
seen, no show of, besides a huge spoil did appear; no face, no fashion, no
trace of her was extant, and she was so hid, that he who would judge according
to the outward show, would think her to be no where: And that this is so
manifest, as that the experience of many ages bears witness thereof. With what
words, I pray you, could they say that their Church was altogether invisible,
if they have not said it in these?

9. Moreover it is manifest, that for to maintain their invisible Church, they
do teach, that the Church may be unknown to the godly, and to those who are of
it; that it may be not visible, not appear, not be seen by corporal eyes;
that the external knowledge thereof may be taken from men, that it may consist
of no apparent form, be without any visible condition, without visible
succession, and destitute of outward form. That the visible face thereof may
be taken from us, that it may seem to have utterly perished, that the visible
Church may perish, the outward Church perish, that it may wholly leave to be
visible, and the whole visible Church perish, and finally that there be no true
visible Church in the world.

10. Besides, it is clear, that they teach, that not only some part of the
visible Church, but also (as they speak) the whole and all the visible Church
may perish, and that it may fall out that there be none, De great. and lib. arb.
c. 8.
none at all, no visible Church in the world. Certainly (as S. Austin speaks)
these words need no witty interpreter, but only an attent hearer.

11. Whereby also it is evident, Protestants untrue shifts refuted.
that D. White in the defense of his way cap. 38. and 40. said untruly, that
Protestants imagine not the Church to have been at any time simply invisible.
For as we have heard, they oftentimes profess openly the contrary. Untruly
also D. Whitaker avouches Cont. 2. quest. 3. cap. 2. page 472. that we
slander them, when we say they make such a Church, as sometimes can be seen
of none. For as has been seen, many, Number. 5.6.
and he amongst the rest, have taught so. But D. Whitaker by the name of a
visible Church, understands not a company visibly professing their faith, but
one or two, or some few visible men, who keep their faith secretly in their
hearts. But this, is not the church to have been visible, but the men to have been
visible. Besides that, it is enough for us, that the Protestant Religion and
manner of worshipping God was before Luthers time altogether invisible, and
only secret in the hearts of some few. For thence it will follow, (as shall
appear hereafter) that it is not the religion of God, which can never be kept
so secret and invisible. Untruly also says Iunius Cont. 4. lib. 3. cap. 16.
when he writes: This only we say, the visible manner of the Church may ly hid,
or fail to the ungrateful world, not that it can become invisible in it
self. For that which is so invisible, as the Protestants have said the Church
may be, is in it self invisible. Lastly some do untruly expound the foresaid
words of Protestants, as if they had only said, that their Church had been
invisible in some sort, not simply and absolutely; because their words were
most absolute: and it is sophistical to expound so many absolute speeches,
only in some sort: Besides, hereafter we shall see, that sometimes they
confess, that their church was so invisible, as it employed contradiction to
have it seen, and those who limitate the former speeches, agree not together
in their expositions; For D. Whitaker loc. cit. says they only mean, that the
Church is not always to be seen glorious and of every one. D. White lib. cit.
cap. 37. that they mean that the Church is not always to be seen a part and
free from all error. D. Morton Apol. part. 1. lib. 1. cap. 13. that they only
meant, that the church is not always to be seen publicly of all men by her
visible rites, and visible succession: which shift he calls the Bulwarck of
Protestants. But this Bulwarck is built of him without all foundation, and is
manifestly overthrown by the former Confessions. D. Field says they mean
not, that the Church is wholly invisible, at any time; but that it is not
always to be esteemed by outward appearance. But what more manifest; then that
they teach that the Church may be wholly invisible, as appears by their words
already rehearsed, The Protestant Church impossible to have been seen.
and shall yet more appear by and by?

12. For they not only confess that their Church was altogether invisible
before Luther arose, but also they affirm, that it is a most unjust and
impudent demand, to request them to show it before that time. Hutter in his
Analysis of the Confession of Auspurg page 448: Impudent demand.
It is an impudent demand of the Romanists, to request to have showed unto
them such a church in former ages, which touching the public ministry and
visible form, agreed in all things with Luther. For we have demonstrated that
the true Church then lay hid. D. Fulke in his book of Succession page 19: But
you bid me bring forth those elect (Protestants) which lay hid through all the
world. Good God how unjust a thing do you demand, Unjust.
that I should bring forth them, whom I say lay hid? And Sadeel to the
Repetition of Turrians Sophismes page 766: But I promised not as you say, that
I would answer to this your question, where those invisible remnants lay hid?
as if I had not sufficiently answered, when I said that they lay hid by the
unsearchable counsel of God. And in his answer to Theses Posnan. cap. 8. He
will have them to have layne so closely, that it cannot be known what they
did. And in his book of Vocation of Ministers page 551: At last came that
general Apostasy, which the Apostle foretold. For then the outward light of
the Church being quite extinct, Only shadow and name of visible Church.
there remained the only shadow and name of the visible Church. The same also
intimates Plessy Mornay in the Preface of his Mystery of iniquity, when he
says: We are not bound to show the Church, it suffices that God knew his
own. And John Regius in his Apology page 176: You deny that Luther sound a
company of his sect. I say there was an ecclesiastical company of true
religion, and which agreed with Luther in all points. But when the Jesuits urge
to show a follower of religion, they would that Luther show, that which
implies, Implied to be visible.
and prove the invisible to be visible. Napper upon 12. cap. Apocal. page 294:
From the year 316. God with drew his visible Church from the open assemblies
of men, to the hearts of particular men, and from that time the Church lay hid
and was invisible. The same he says page 188: But if so it be an impudent and
unjust demand to have their Church showed before Luther, if it were withdrawn
from open assemblies to the hearts of some, if her outward light were quite
extinct, and the only shadow and name of the visible Church remained, and
lastly if it employed contradiction that she should be showed; it is most
evident, that she was altogether invisible. The same also they intimate, when
they say, that the Church either has been at any time, or may be thus
invisible. Luther upon the 90. psalm tom. 3. fol. 495: Church no where but in
the sight of God.
The Church was then (in Elias time) but so hidden, as it was no where, but in
the sight of God. Hyperius in his Method of divinity, lib. 3. page 349: Was
not the true Church at that time (of Elias) altogether invisible to men, and
known to God alone? The Switzers Confession cap. 17: The Church hidden from
our eyes, and known to God only, Known to God alone.
does often fly the judgment of men. Besnage in his book of the state of the
visible and invisible church, cap. 4: The Church is eftsoon known to God
alone. Son is in his answer to Sponde cap. 2. page 32: We say the state of
the Church is such, as is sometimes known to God alone. And D. Whitaker Cont.
2. quest. 3. cap. 3. page 478: We say that the external state of the Church
does cease, and that the faithful and godly may be so scattered, that they
worship God only in heart and mind. Worship God in heart only.
But who sees not, that it implies manifest contradiction, that a Church
which is no where but in the sight God, which is known to God alone, which
flies man's judgment, and which worshippeth God only in heart and mind, should
be visible or seen of man? How long the Protestants Church was invisible.


13. If any ask them, how many ages their Church was thus invisible? Luther
upon the 1. cap. to the Galat. tom. 5. fol. 214. says that she lay hid above
300. years. To whom comes near Danaeus in his 3. book de Roman. Pontif.
cap. 8. saying, the Church was in banishment 350. years. But Luther better
thinking on the matter, in his book of the Popery tom. 7. makes her to have
lurked 600. years. And with him agrees Hospinian in his epistle dedicatory of
the 1. part of his History. Melancthon in his oration for Luther tom. 2. will
have this lurking to have been 400. years. But Calvin his book of Scandals,
Perkins and Bale in the places before cited, will have it to have continued
900. years. Parcus above cited will have it to have begone in Constantines time;
and Napper from the year of our Lord 316 With whom consents Brocard upon
the 11. Chap. Apocal. page 110. Fuccius in his Cronology fetches the beginning
of this lurking a little higher, from the year 261. and finally Curio of the
largeness of Gods Kingdom page 33: Almost from the Apostles ages even to our
tym. Which they also intimate, who say that Popery began in the Apostles time.
O Christ most patient Lord (that I may cry out with Tertullian) who so many
years (yea so many ages) did suffer thy doctrine to be turned vpside down
till Luther came to help thee.

14. Luther Author of the visible Protestant Church.
Of all things which have been related in this Chapter, it is most clear, that
Luther was at least author of the Protestants visible Church, and if not the
first which founded it, yet the first which after it was fallen and in
substance perished, did raise and restore it again. For when Luther began
first to preach, there was no visible Protestant Church at all, and by his
preaching there became such a visible Church. Therefore undoubtedly he was the
author thereof. And if any Protestant against so many and so open Confessions
of his Fathers and brethren, will say that there was a visible Protestant
Church before Luther, he shall first gainesay so many witnesses without all
exception in this matter, who having searched all corners, and enquired of all
men have nevertheless confessed, that at that time no such visible Church
appeared. Besides, he shall say that, without all either divine or humane
testimony; which to do of times before his age, is to play the Prophet, or
rather the mad man. For it is not the part of a man in his wits, to affirm
without all kind of testimony, especially such a thing and so manifestly false,
as that so many, and such kind of men, as had most need to affirm it, were
nevertheless forced to deny it. That it wants all sufficient humane
testimony is evident, because neither the foresaid Protestants, nor any yet to
this day, could bring forth any sufficient witness, who would depose that he
had seen such a Church before Luthers revolt. That also it is destitute of
divine testimony, is manifest by what has been before rehearsed. For
Protestants (at we have heard) teach, that the promises of perpetuity, which in
the scripture are made to the church, Sup. number. 7.
are made only to the invisible church, that is to a society of men in election
and Justification, out of which Church they exclude the reprobate and wicked;
and not to the visible Church, that is, to the society in Profession of true
doctrine and lawful use of Sacraments. And in truth they most needs say so,
since they commonly teach, that the invisible Church, whereof the elect and just
alone are members, is the true Church before God: and that the visible Church,
whereof the wicked and reprobate may be members, is but a Church in sight of
men, that is a shadow and outward show of the Church. And it is clear, that
God promised perpetuity to that Church only, which in his sight is the true
Church; and not to her which is no Church, but only in sight of men. When as I
say they teach that God promised perpetuity and continuance only to the
invisible Church, out of his promises they cannot infer, Lib. 2. co^t. Maxim.
c. 3. l 3 c 176
that the visible Church has or shall ever continue. Of whom therefore (that
I may use S. Augustins words) have thou heard this? whence did thou learn
it? where have thou read it for to believe it? whereupon have thou presumed for
to affirm it, where there is neither any authority nor reason? If Protestants
cry out, Whitak. cont. 2. q. 3, c. ^.
that it is most absurd, to say in Elias his time there was any Church visible
amongst the Gentiles beside the Synagogue, which now after so many thousands of
years we cannot name; how much more absurd ought they think it, to say that
before Luther arose, there was a visible Protestant Church, which yet none
neither of that Church, nor out of it, neither at this time, nor at that, could
ever name?

15. It being thus manifest, that Luther was the Author of the visible
Protestant Church, it follows likewise that he was the author of all and
Every Protestant Church. For (as shall be showed hereafter) there can be no
such invisible Church as Protestants mean, that is, such as belieueth and
worshippeth God only in heart and mind, and no way professes outwardly her
faith and religion. Yet before we come to that, we will first refute those, who
when they consider how absurd a thing it is to affirm such an invisible
Church, especially for so many ages, they begin to shufle and either send us to
others, or themselves name us such, as only in part or in some sort held
Protestantisme, but embraced not all the substantial points thereof, and
therefore were but half Protestants. For to us it suffices, that we show
Luther to have been the Author and beginner of whole and true Protestants, such
as held all points that are necessary to the making of an absolve Protestant.

Those confuted who say there were some visible Protestants when Luther arose.
CHAP. V.
What a man Illyricus was.
1. SOME Protestants, when we ask of them who were the visible Protestants
before Luther began, do not themselves name any, but send us to Illyricus or M.
Fox. So plays D. Whitaker lib. 3. against Duraeus sect. 12. Colloq. Aldeburg
Hos^. part 2. fol. ^c 4. Beza epist. 55. in Mat. 20 ver. 15. in 4. Ephe.
S^uitet. Praefat. in tom. 1. Pareus lib. 5. de Am^sl. great. cap. 1 Melanc^h.
tom. 2. Hesk. in Antid. Sch^sselb. Praf. to. 2. Kemnit. loc. p. 261.
and lib. 7. sect. 1 D. Fulke of Succession page 324. Schusselburg in 8. tom.
of his Catalogue of Heretics page 365. Vorstius in his Autibellarm. page 159.
Lubbert lib. 5. of the Church c. 2. and others: These men do manifestly show
that themselves know not of any such visible Protestants. For they would never
lay the burden of answering this question upon others, if they could have
answered it themselves. And besides, they declare that they know no author
worthy of credit, to whom they might send us, for the answer of this so
important demand, else they would never have referred us to Illyricus or M.
Fox. For Illyricus in the judgment of most Protestants both Lutherans and
Sacramentaries, was a vagabond, a hell hound, an heretic, a Manichee,
deceitful, a liar, an impostor, a falsifier, a Cauiller, a sclaunderer, a
singular inuenter of sclaunders, a sycophant in his own judgment, impudently
blasphemous, a broacher of doctrine which brings in Epicurisme and mortality
of the soul, and overthrows all religion; and who had nothing to impugn
truth withal, besides an audacious ignorance, and a very diuilesh spirit. This
and much more write the Protestants themselves of Illyricus; wherefore to send
us to such a man, is plainly to confess that they know no man of credit to
whom they may refer us. And of the like stuff is Fox, a most impudent
patcher of lies, who in his false Martyrologe proposes thieves, traitors,
sorcerers, murderers of themselves, Anabaptists, Papists, professed enemies,
and some then alive, for Protestant Martyrs, as Allen Cope shows in the sixth
book of his dialogues. Beside, those whom Illyricus names before Luther,
himself dares not call Protestants, but VVitnesses of truth; because forsooth
they disliked some doctrine or fact of the Pope. And such witnesses also they
are, as some of them be Popes themselves, as Lib. 19.
Pius 2. some famous Papists, as Lib 15.
Peter Lumbard, and Gratian, whom himself calls the Lib. 15. and 16.
Pillars of the Religion of the Roman Antichrist, and says they renewed Popery
even from the foundation; some professed adversaries of Protestants, as Lib. 19.
Clichtoucus; some of the holy Fathers, who (as before was seen) condemned the
very soul and sum of Protestancy; some those, who only disliked the corrupt
manners of some Popes, as Centur. 6 cap. 1.
Richard Hampell; some Atheists, as Lib. 19.
Machiauell; some who any way Praf. Catal.
gainsayd either the doctrine or deed of any Pope. Surely for Illyricus to
bring such witnesses, after he had searched in all corners, and raked in all
channels, does manifestly bewray, that there can no true Protestants be found
before Luthers time. For Illyricus, though never so impudent, would have been
ashamed to have bragged of such silly witnesses, if he could have found any
true Protestants whatsoever. Besides, such fellowe^, may be only said to have
been Protestants, and can no way be proved to have been simply and absolutely
Protestants, such as we speak of. And we care not whom any one may say to have
been Protestants (for as Luther says, Tom. 2. fol, 437.
what is more easy then to say any thing?) but whom he can prove and convince
to have been such; without which his saying is but voluntary and ridiculous, and
the belief thereof rash and unreasonable.

2. And as for those, which M. Fox produces for Protestants before Luther,
they lived in the year of our Lord 1521. as himself writes page 749. in the
edition of 1596. that is, in the 4. year of Luthers new preaching, and we ask
for Protestants before Luther. Besides they all abiured their faith, as
himself confesses page 750. and soon after dyed for sorrow, or lingered away
with shame; and we ask for Protesters not Abiurers. Moreover no one of them is
found to have held that chief and fundamental article of Protestancy of
Justification by special faith, albeit, as Fox writes page 550: There was
such diligent inquisition made as that no article could be so secretly taught
amongst them but it was discovered. Wherefore these wretched Abiurers were no
Protestants, but some relics of the Wiclifists or Lollards, whereof we will
entreat anon.

The waldenses were no Protestants
3. Others say, that the Waldenses were the visible Protestants before Luthers
rising, but there is no apparent reason to say, that they were true and
absolute Protestants, to wit, such as held all the whole substance necessary to
a Protestant. For first, there is no writer before Luthers time who says that
they believed to be justified by only faith. Neither can any such thing be
gathered, either out of their own opinions, or out of the writings of
Catholics against them at those times. And Illyricus in his Catalogue of
witnesses printed at Geneua 1597. lib. 15. page 544. writes their opinions out
of an ancient Catholic writer, and page 559. out of Aenaeas Siluius, and page
539. relates their Confession out of Sleidan, and himself page 536. reckons
13. of their articles, of which he has these words: These are the articles of
the Waldensis, albeit others part them into more branches, and make them more.
But in none of them is there any trace of only justifying faith. The same I say
of their Confession which the said Illyricus has in his Catalogue printed at
Geneua 1526. yea there col. 1832. he says, that Husse and Hierome of Prage did
add unto the doctrine of the Waldenses the article of free justification by
only faith, as (says he) Syluius intimates: wherein albeit he belie both
Husse and Hierome and also Syluius, Number. 7.
because neither they knew of any such justification, (as shall straight
appear) neither Syluius intimates any such matter; yet it clearly bewrays,
that the waldenses believed not justification by only faith. Moreover Luther
(as we shall now rehearse) confesses that the Waldenses knew nothing of his
imputative justice by only faith: How then can they be said to have been true
and absolute Protestants, who wanted the very soul, sum, and definition of a
Protestant? Secondly they not only believed not justification by only faith,
but believed the contrary; that is, to be justified by good works. For thus
says Luther of them in his table-talkes chap. of Suermers: The Waldensis are
holy workmen and believe not that says without works does justify, and know
nothing at all of imputative justice. Cocciu^ 10.1. lib. 8.
And Bennet Morgenstern in his treatise of the church p. 1^4. speaks thus
unto them: Ye confirm the doctrine of Antichrist, touching good works,
justification, etc. And themselves in their Apology printed at Hanow together
with the history of Bohemia page 256. plainly show, that they believe a man to
be justified by faith, charity, hope, penance, and works of mercy, and do say:
That devout prayer does purge, and penance cleanse a man.

4. Thirdly, the Waldenses are condemned of Protestants, both Lutherans and
Sacramentaries. Melancthon in his Counsels part. 2. page 152. writes: See
Refut. Orthod. Consensus page 418.
I rejoice that you agree with us in the sum of doctrine. I know the
Waldensis are unlike. And in Carions Chronicle printed at Paris 1357. he says
that they sowed errors, denied all oaths, and all form of prayer, besides the
Lords prayer. Morgenstern in his fornamed book page 79. gives this verdict of
them: They have proudly neglected the light of doctrine which is kindled from
heaven in this age; and have with tooth and na^le by writing among their own
men secretly defended those most gross erros, which in the year 1523. were
discovered by Luther. Besides Selnecer (as he reports) affirmed, that they
had gross errors, and such as were not to be borne withal. Leonicus
Antisturmius also in Danaeus in his answer to his Sonde page 1516. pronounces
them to be impious; and Schusselburg in his 3. t^me of the Catalogue of
heretics page 188. rejects them as heretics. Camerarius in his book of the
Church in Bohemia, Poland. etc. page 273. writes thus: We can say that the
Waldensis were never one with our Churches, nor our men would ever join
themselves to them. Whereof he gives these two reasons: because the Waldenses
would not have extant any public declaration of their faith; and for peace
sake did use the Popish mass. For these two causes (says he) our men did not
join themselves to them, neither did they think that they could so do, with
good conscience. Calvin also epist. 278. thus writes to the Waldenses
themselves: We abide in one opinion, that the form of your Confession cannot
be absolu^ely admitted without danger. And M. Jewel also in defense of the
Apology part. page 48. says plainly of the Albigenses: They are none of ours.
D. Humfrey to the third Reason of F. Campian page 371: They are not wholly ours.
And Osiander in his 13. Century lib. 1. cap. 4. Pantaleon in his Chronicle page
98. and Melancthon in the foresaid Chronicle of Carrion, reckon them amongst
heretics: But the Albigenses were all one for religion with the Waldenses, as
D. Fulke says in these words, lib. de Success. page 332: That epistle of the
Archbishops, does prove that the Albigenses and Waldensis were all one. The
same also confesses Illyricus in his Catalogue in 4. to. page 536. Where also
page 561. he speaks in this sort: The Waldensis or Albigenses. Yea the
Waldenses themselves, in the Bohemian Confession (if it be theirs) do insinuate
that they are condemned of the Sacramentaries, whereas they say in the 13.
article, that they, who deny the supper of the Lord to be the true flesh and
blood of Christ, do call them Idolaters, Antichrist, and men branded with the
mark of the beast. Besides Illyricus in his forecited catalogue writes, that
the Thaborites, who indeed (says he) followed the opinions of the Waldenses,
were grievously vexed and persecuted of Rokesana and other Hussites. Wherefore;
since Protestants commonly challenge the Hussites for their brethren, they ought
not to claim also the Waldenles, whose doctrine the Hussites did persecute.
Certainly the Confession of Bohemia (which is said to be theirs) does plainly
distinguish them from Protestants, especially from Sacramentaries. For art. 2.
they say: We must keep the commandments in heart and deed. Art. 5. that those
which repent must confess their sins to a Priest, and ask absolution of
him. Art. 9. that Priests ought to be single. Art. 11. that Sacraments are
necessary to salvation. And art. 13. that the Eucharist is the true body of
Christ, as (say they) Christ plainly says: This is my body; of which word: we
ought to believe the plain sense, not decliming to the right or left.
Whereupon it is no marvel, that Calvin in his 249. epistle denies it to be
lawful for a Christian man, to embrace the Waldenses Confession, in these
words: Consider you whether it be lawful for a Christian man to embrace the
form of the Confession (of the Waldenses) who without any distinction bind up
all in one bundell of damnation, who precisely confess not, the bread to be
presently the body of Christ. Surely we think not.

5. Fourthly I prove the same, because the Waldenses hold many errors, which
the Protestants condemn. Illyricus in his foresaid Catalogue page 545.
relates out of an ancient writer above 300. years ago, that they taught, that
a Priest being in mortal sin cold not consecrate the Eucharist; that every
oath is a mortal sin; that they disallowed matrimony. And likewise out of
Aeneas Syluius, that they said it was lawful for every one to preach; and that
he who was guilty of mortal sin, was not not capable of any secular or
ecclesiastical dignity. Neither avails it any thing, that now in the
Confession of Bohemia (which is said to be the Waldenses Confession) there is
found the article of justification by only faith, because that Confession was
presented in the year 1525. as the very title thereof declares, and in the
Preface mention is made of Charles 5. Emperor, which was after Luther had
preached some years. As also because Hospinian part. 2. Histor. fol. 11. says,
Sacrame^taries have corrupted the Waldenses Confession.
that the Waldenses Confession was renewed or rather corrupted by the
Sacramentaries, as the Waldenses themselves say in the Preface of their
Confession printed anno 1538. as witnesses Schusselburg, lib. 2. Theol.
Calvin. art. 6. fol. 55. Moreover Illyricus in his Catalogue in fol. col. 1502.
writes, that after Luther was known, the Waldensis did greedily purchase
greater knowledge. Morgenstern in his foresaid book page 79. says, that they
borrow the best part of their doctrine from the Lutherans. And D. Fulke in his
book of Succession page 360. that they learnt of those of Basle, to amend
certain errors, which they had received from their ancestors. Why then shall
we not think, they received the doctrine of justification by only faith from
Luther especially since (as I before said) there is no mention of it amongst them
in former times? Again Iurgenicius in the 2. chap. of his war of the 5.
gospel, affirms that the Authors of the Bohemian Confession do profess in
the beginning thereof, that they would never conioyne themselves to the
Waldenses; and therefore the Bohemian Confession is not the Waldenses
Confession. Nor albeit therein be mention of justification by only faith, can
it be inferred, that therefore the Waldenses did believe it. Finally (as I have
often said and it must be always inculcated) I regard not, whom any one says
to have been Protestants, but whom he proves to have been such. Neither whom he
can prove to have been Protestants in part and in some sort; but whom he can
prove to have been absolutely and wholly Protestants, at least for the substance
of Protestancy. Neither will it avail any whit, to complain, that we have
burnt the writings of the Waldenses, by which they might prove that they were
true Protestants. For if they have nor wherwithall to prove they were true
Protestants, they in vain do feign it. Besides, we asked of Luther and his
followers to produce one man, Waldensian or other, who had been a true
Protestant, before Luthers preaching; for which end there was no need of
writings, but of living men.

Wiclif was no true Protestant.
6. In like sort I prove that Wicliffe and his followers were not true and
absolute Protestants. First because the Wiclifists are by name condemned
together with other heretics of Protestants in their Apology of the Confession
of Auspurg, chap. of the Church in these words: We have plainly enough said in
our Confession, that we disalow the Donatists and VViclifists. Secondly because
neither in Wiclifs book, nor of any of his scholars, is there any sign of
sole justifying faith; neither did ever any Catholic writer contend with them
there about. Thirdly, because as Melancthon writes in his epistle to Myconius
in his 1. tom. printed at B^sle page 416: VViclif neither understood, nor held
the justice of faith. Yea Husse his principal follower, (as we shall anon
rehearse) believed that works did justify. And Wiclif himself in Thomas
Walden. tom 3. tit. 1. cap. 7. bid every one hope in the proper justice of his
life, and men to trust in their merits: which thing alone does separate him
far enough from the Protestants camp. Fourthly, because the Wiclifists are
reckoned amongst Heretics of many Protestants, as of Schusselburg tom. 3.
Catal. page 190. of Kemnice in fundament is Coenae page 114. of Pantalcon in
his Chronicle, and of Matthias Hoe disput. 27. they are termed most monstrous
monsters. And D. Cay in his 2. book of the antiquity of Cambridge, obiecteth
Wicliffe to the Oxford men, as a flaine of their university. Fifthly wiclif
taught diverse things, which Protestants dislike. And to omit these things which
Catholics object unto him, Canisius to. 3 antiq. lectionum.
Rokesana Prince of the Hussites, in his dispute with Catholics before the King
of Bohemia, has these words: These are the articles of VViclif: That tithes
are mere alms: That the Clergy ought to have no civil government: If a King
be in mortal sin, that he is no more a King: Which last article Osiander in
his 15. Century repeateth thus: There is no temporal Lord, no Prelate, no
Bishop, whiles he is in mortal sin. And Melancthon in his foresaid epistle:
VViclif does plainly, sophistically and seditiously wrangle upon civil
dominion. And in his dispute of the right of Magistrates: VViclif is mad, who
thinks the wicked to have no Dominion. And in his Commentaries upon
Aristotle's Politiques: VViclif would have those, who have not the holy ghost,
to loose their Dominion. So that I marvel how D. Andrews in his answer to
the Apology of Bellarmine, could say that it is a sclaunder, that Wiclif taught
so, when as not only Catholics, but even Hussites and Protestants do affirm
it. Moreover Wiclif (as Osiander reports in the place aforecited) did
condemn lawful oaths, and taught, that all things fell out according to
absolute necessity. And Melancthon in his said epistle gives this sentence of
him: I have looked into VViclif, but I have found in him many other errors,
Wiclife held not justice of sole faith.
by which one may judge of his spirit. He at all understood not, nor held the
justice of says. He fondly confounds the gospel and politic affairs;
would have Priests to have nothing proper, etc. And in his common places chap.
of Ecclesiastical power: That superstition of VViclif is pernicious and
seditious, which drives the ministers of the Church to beggary, and denies
that it is lawful for them to hold any thing proper. M. Stow also in his
Cronicle anno 1376. writes, that he taught that, Neither King nor lay man
could give any thing to the church for perpetuity. Finally Vadianus in his fi^t
book of the Eucharist, page 168. confesses that in many things he foully erred.

Hussites no Protestants.
7. Husse likewise and his partners we prove, not to have been true and absolute
Protestants. First, because it cannot be proved, that they held the foresaid
article of justification by only faith, and the other fundamental points of
Protestancy. Secondly, because Husse is by name rejected of Luther, who in the
defense of his 30. article tom. 2. thus writes of him: He agrees not with me.
He gave not a little to the idol of Rome. He seems not to repugne against the
Popes Monarchy. And upon the 2. psalm. tom. 3. fol 395: Husse did not condemn
the sacrifice of Mass, as we do. And upon the 9. chapter of Isaias tom. 4.
fol. 108. he says, that Husse held a doctrine most pestilent, most pernicious,
horrible, and wholly impious, yea very devilish. And in his Lypsicall dispute
tom. 1. fol. 260: I know, and that very well, that an evil Prelate is not to
be rejected, and therefore I damn the article of Husse. And both there and
other where, Tom. 1. fo. 30. 291. 292. 251.
oftentimes denies himself to be a Bohemian, by which he meant an Hussite.
And in his table-talkes chapter of S^ermers says: Husse believed that works
with faith do justify; which point alone excludes him from the number of
Protestants. Husse believe not sole faith.
And in the chapter of Antichrist: Husse departed not one jot from the Papists,
but only reproved vices and naughty life. Which also affirms Hierome of
Prage, Husse his fellow, in M. Fox, upon the 11. chapter of the Apocal. Where
also M. Fox himself writes, that Husse agreed with the Papists touching
transubstantiation, Mass, Vows, Predestination, Free will, formed faith,
cause of justification, and merits of works: which plainly declare how little he
held of Protestancy. Lastly when Bellarmine wrote, that there was not in the
world, when Luther began, any religion but Paganism, Iudaisme, Mahometisme,
Grecisme, Nestorianisme, Hussites heresy, and the Roman faith; D. Whitaker
Cont. 2. quest. 5. cap. 3. page 502. denies these to have been all; For (says
he) our Church was then. In which words he professes the Protestants to be a
different church from the Hussites. Iunius also lib. 4. de Eccles. cap. 6.
acknowledges that some Protestant deny Hussites to be of their Church. And
Luther upon the 53. Chapter of Isaias tom. 4. fol. 220. thus writes: There is
no religion in the world which receives this opinion of justification (by only
faith) and we our selves in private do scant believe it, though we publicly
defend it. By which words he shows, that neither Hussytes, nor Waldenses, nor
any Christians besides Protestants, and scarce they also, do believe the
principal and most fundamental article of Protestancy, howsoever openly they
profess it.

That the Church cannot be so invisible, as Protestant confess theirs to have
been before Luthers time. CHAP. VI.
1. BY the name of the Church, we understand not (as I said before) only the
men, but men sociated, or the society of men, in the faith and worship of God.
Wherefore that a church be said visible, not only the men, but their worship of
God must be visible. Neither by this word visible, do I understand here, that
only which can be seen, but whatsoever is sensible; according both to the
vulgar phrase of speech, wherewith we say: See how it sounds, as S. Augustine
notes, and also after the phrase of scripture, Lib. 10. Confess. c. 35.
wherein, as the same holy Doctor observes: All sensible things are called
visible. And Protestants, (as is before showed) do confess that before Luthers
rising their Church was simply invisible, Lib. 1. de mor. Manich. c. 20.
and unseen of any, either of those within or without her. And necessarily
they must say so, because they can name none at all, who before Luther arose,
did see a company of men, who professed to believe justification by only faith,
and the rest of the fundamental principles of Protestancy: yea they affirmed,
that it was so invisible, Ca. 4. n. 11.
as it employed contradiction to have been seen of any.

That the Church cannot be invisible.
2. Now that the Church Militant or living on earth cannot be so invisible, I
prove; first, because it is against an article of faith of diverse Protestants.
And if perhaps any hereupon imagine, that either Protestants never granted the
contrary, or that if they did grant it, their testimonies against themselves
are not to be accepted; let him read what hereafter I write touching that
matter, in the last chapter of this book. Wherefore in the Confession of
Saxony cap. 15. they profess in this sort: God will have the Ministry of the
gospel to be public, he will not have the voice of the gospel to be shut
up only in corners; but will have it beard of all mankind. Therefore he will
have public and seemly meetings and in them he will have the voice of the
gospel to sound. He will also have these same meetings to be witnesses of the
Confession and separation of the Church from the sects and opinions of other
Nations. God will have his Church to be seen and heard in the world, and will
have her divided by many publik marks from other people. And the same they
repeat in the Consent of Polony cap. de Coena. And the same Confession of
Saxony cap. of the Church: We speak not of the Church as of a Platonicall
idaea, but we show a Church, which may be seen and heard. The eternal Father
will have his Son to be heard in all mankind. Wherefore we say, that the
Church is in this life a visible company etc. Secondly it is against their own
definitions of a militant Church. Protestants definitio^s of the Church.
For the foresaid Confession of Saxony defines the Church in this life to be a
visible company. The Magdeburgians in their 1. Century lib. 1. c. 4. col. 170.
do thus write: The Church may be thus defined: The Church in this life, is a
company of those, The church in this life.
who embrace the sincere doctrine of the Gospel, and rightly use the
Sacraments. And the very same definition gives Melancthon tom. 4. in cap. 3.1.
ad Tim. page 398. Hutterus in his Analysis of the confession of Auspurg page
444. says: This Church, which is said to be, and to be believed, The Church
which we believe.
is not a Platonicall idea, but the visible company of those, that are called.
Zanchius also in his treatise of the Church cap. 2: The militant Church is the
company of the elect, and truly saythfull, Church militant.
professing the same says, partaking the same Sacraments, etc. Hereof properly
speak the scriptures, when they call the Church the spouse of Christ, the body
of Christ, redeemed with the blood of Christ, sounded upon a rock. Gerlachius
tom. 2. Disput. 22: Defining the Church, as it is on earth, we say that it is a
congregation of men, Church on earth.
who called by the voice of the Gospel, hear the word of God, and use the
Sacraments instituted of Christ.

3. Thirdly it is against the properties and marks of the true Church assigned
by the Protestants themselves, to be altogether invisible. For thus their
Confession of Auspurg cap. 7: The Church of Christ properly so called, The
proper Church.
has her marks, to wit, pure doctrine, etc. The Confession of Saxony cap. 12:
The true church is discerned from other nations, by the voice of true doctrine,
and lawful use of Sacraments. The true Church.
The French Confession art. 27: We believe that the true church ought to be
discerned with great care. Wherefore we affirm out of the word of God, that
the Church is the company of the faithful, who agree in following the word of
God, and embracing true religion: wherein also they daily profit, growing and
confirming themselves mutually in the fear of God. The Confession of the Low
Countries art. 29: By these marks the true Church shall be discerned from the
false, if in her the pure preaching of the Gospel be of force: by these
marks it is certain that the true Church may be distinguished. The Confession
of Scotland art. 18: It is necessary that the true Church be discerned from the
false, by evident marckes, least being deceived we embrace the false for the
true, to our eternal damnation Again: We believe the marks of the true
Church to be true preaching of the word, etc. Melancthon in his answer to the
Bauarian articles tom. 3. fol. 362: It is evident, that the true Church is a
visible company. And upon the 16. to the Romans tom. 1. page 486: She is the
true Church, who teaches the Gospel aright, and rightly administreth the
Sacraments. Danaeus in his book of Antichrist, cap. 17: The proper definition
of the Church.
This is the proper definition of the Church, that the true Church is the
company of the faithful, who serve God purely, and keep the notes of adoption
instituted by him, such as are the heavenly word, the Sacraments and
discipline. By these 3. marks the false Church is distinguished from the true.
Lubbert in his 4. book of the Church cap. 2: We say that the Church does show
her self to be the true Church, by the sincere preaching of the word of God.
And Beza wrote a book of this title: Of the true and visible marks of the
Catholic Church. D. Whitaker in answer of the 3. reason of F. Campian: That
we judge to be proper to the true Church, that it increase and conserve Christ's
word, that it use the Sacraments enti^rly and purely. These we defend to be the
most true and essential properties of the Church. Take these away and you will
leave nothing but the carcass of the church. Again: They contain the true
nature of the church, which if they be present, they make the church, and take
it away, if they be taken away And D. Field in his 1. book of the church cap.
11: We say, that that society wherein that outward profession of the truth of
God is preserved, is that true church of God, etc. Finally to omit the words of
others, the same teach Wigand in his method of doctrine cap. 19. Gesner in his
24. place of the Church, The Magdeburgians in the Preface of their 6. Ce^tury,
Heshusius in cap. 1.1. ad Cor. Soterius in his method, title of the church,
Pelargus in his Compend. of divinity loc. 7. Sohnius in his Thesis of the
Church, Bullinger in his Catechism fol. 44. Aretius in his places part. 3.
fol. 50. Theses of Geneua disput. 74. Summeoi^ Protest. former Co^sessio^s.
Thus thou see (good reader) that according to the manifold judgment of
Protestants, a part of the definition, of the essence, the mark of the Church
in this life, of the Church militant, of the Church which is believed, of the
proper Church, of the Church whereof the Scripture properly speaks, when it
calls her the spouse of Christ, the body of Christ; of the true Church, of
the Church properly so termed, and finally of the Catholic Church; that (I
say, it is of the definition and essence, a mark of this church, to be a
visible company professing the faith, partaking the Sacraments, mutually
confirming themselves, and that otherwise it is (as they say) but a carcass of
the Church. Wherefore it implies manifest contradiction, that there should at
any time have been a true Church, and not a visible company: because nothing can
be without all its essential parts. The Protestant Church therefore, which (as
we head) was before Luthers time altogether invisible, was no true and proper
Church, but (to use their terms) a Platonicall idaea, or a carcass of a
Church. If any reply, that when Protestants affirm the foresaid definitions,
properties, and marks of the true Church; they mean not by the name of the
true Church that which is simply and absolutely the true Church, but that which
is the true visible Church; I ask, why then do they simply call it the true
Church, if they do not so mean? why are not their words conformable to their
meaning? Besides, the Church whereof they give the foresaid definitio^s and
marks, they call not only the true Church, but also the Church properly so
termed, the spouse and body of Christ, the Catholic church, and such like,
which cannot agree to any, which is but a Church in appearance only, and in the
sight of men, but only to that which is the Church in very deed, and in the
sight of God. Further more, according to the opinion of Protestants these two
terms True and Visible, in the nature of the Church do one destroy the other;
as these two, True and Painted, exclude each other in the nature of a man. For
they imagine that the true Church is a society in something that is invisible,
to wit in justification and predestination. Whereupon they deny any ill or
reprobate Christians to be of the true Church. Wherefore, as he should speak
fondly, who should say A true painted man; so, according to their own opinion,
they speak as fondly, when they say The true visible Church. But as we can
only say, the true picture of a man, attributing the word True, to the picture,
not to the man; so they should only, The true appearance or show of the Church,
g^uing the word True to the show, not to the Church it self. But they are
ashamed to speak so, least when they inquire the marks of the true visible
Church, Why Protestants sometime call the visible visible Church the true Church.
it should appear, that they seek not the marks of the true Church indeed,
but only of the show, shadow, or shape of the Church. And yet in very truth
they seek but the marks of the shadow of the church. For the invisible Church,
consisting only of the just and elect, which alone they will have to be the
true Church; has no certain marks; else we should know certainly who were the
just and elect. And this themselves confess; for thus writes D. Whitaker
Cont. 2. quest. 5. cap. 8: Protestants give no marks of the true and Catholic
Church.
The question is not of the marks of the invisible Church. Again: We say the
marks of the Catholic Church simply so called, are known to God alone. And D.
Humfrey to 3. reason of F. Campian pa. 281. says that the marks do not reach
unto the nature of the true Church. And the reason is manifest, because (as I
said) otherwise we should know who were the just and elect.

4. If any again reply, that when Protestants say, The true visible Church,
they mean the visible Church true in doctrine, in which speech there is no
contradiction according to their own opinion, because they admit, that the
visible Church, (that is, the society in true doctrine and right use of
Sacraments, into which Church or society the wicked or reprobate may enter,)
may be true in doctrine, though they grant not, that such a Church or society
be the true Church in nature or essence. Which perhaps Vorstius meant, in his
Antibellarm. pa. 180. when he said: The outward Church is not without cause
called the true church of Christ by reason of the prosession of true doctrine.
I answer, if they so meant, why did they not speak so? were they ignorant,
that it is one thing to be true in doctrine or in speech, and another to be
true in nature? as a liar is a true man in nature of man, but not true in his
speech. Or if they did know this, why did they abuse the words and their
hearers? Moreover, though in this sense their words did not destroy themselves,
as they did in the former, yet fondly should they (as they use to do) assign
the truth of doctrine for the mark of the true Church in doctrine. For this
were to assign a thing for a mark of it self; as if to know a true man of his
word, one should give this mark, that it is such as speaks truth. Besides
this were rather to define what is a true man, then to give the mark to know
who is a true man. And yet marks are given to know which is the true Church,
not what is the nature of the true Church.

5. If yet any reply, that the visible Church or society in profession of true
doctrine and right use of Sacraments, is termed of Protestants the true Church,
not because this Church or society is of it self the true church or the society
instituted by God, but because always in, or under it there is the true
Church, to wit the society in justice and predestination; by reason that in
every company of them that profess true doctrine and rightly use the
Sacraments, there are some, who are sociated and united in justice and
predestination. Which D. Whitaker intimates, when Cont. 2. quest. 4. cap. 1
page 485. he says: The visible Church, which holds and professes true
says, is the true Church only of the part of the elect and predestined: I
answer, that this supposes a thing doubtful, and perhaps false. For what
certainty can there be, that in every particular company of them who profess
the true faith and rightly use the Sacraments, there is always a company of
the just and elect; when as Christ says: Many are called but few are chosen,
Matt. ^0.
especially, if (as Protestants say) one or two make a church. Surely Danaeus
Cont. 4. page 689. seems to deny this, saying: These visible companies are
sometimes a part of that (true) Church, sometimes none. But admit that in every
company of true professors there be always a company of just and elect, what
reason were this, to term the society in profession of true faith, the true
Church, if in deed the society in justice and predestination be the only true
Church. This would suffice to say, that the apparent Church could never be
separated from the true Church, but not to call that society the true Church,
which indeed is only the outward appearance of the true Church. And much less
would it suffice, to call it the church properly so termed, the spouse and body
of Christ, the Catholic Church, the Church which we profess to believe; as
the Protestants have termed the visible Church. Neither can these epithets or
names be given to any other society, then to that which has the true nature
and substance of the Church indeed; because they signify as properly and
expressly that only Church; as she can be expressed of us by any words
whatsoever. And since Protestants have given them all to the visible church,
they must needs confess that she has the nature and substance of the very
true Church indeed; and consequently that an invisible Church is no true Church
indeed.

6. Fourthly I prove that the Church cannot be invisible, Protestants somtyms
say that the church cannot be invisible.
because oftentimes Protestants do confess it. The Apology of the Confession
of Ausburg chap. of the Church: The Church is principally the society of faith
and of the holy Ghost in the hearts, which yet has her outward marks, that
she may be known. Luther upon the 4. chap. of Genesis tom. 6. fol. 56: The
Church was never so void of external marks that it could not be not known
where God was certainly to be sound. And upon 51. psalm. tom. 3. fol. 474: For
Christ will not lie hid in the world, but will be preached; not between walls,
but upon the house top. Melancthon upon the 11. of Daniel tom. 2. page 511: It
is necessary, that the Church be a visible company. Again: We seigne not an
invisible Church, like to a Platonicall idea. And in the Preface of his 3.
tome, he thinks it so absurd to put an invisible Church, as he says: To what
tends that perdigious speech, Monstrous to say the Church was inuible.
which denies that there is any visible Church. We must needs confess a
visible Church. And upon the 3. chap. 1. Tim. tom. 4. page 398: Others (says
he) setting aside wholly the external show, do speak of an invisible Church,
as of a Platonicall idaea, which is no where seen or heard. Kemnice in his
common places title of the Church cap. 3: God will have us to know, where and
which is the Church. Therefore she must be known, not to God only, but also to
us; and thereupon is defined to be the visible company of them, who embrace the
Gospel of Christ, and rightly use the Sacraments: James Andrews in his book
against Hosius page 210: We are not ignorant, that the church must be a
visible company of teachers and hearers. Again: The Church is, and is called a
company of men, chosen of God, in which the word of God sounds incorrupt,
etc. Hunnius in his treatise of Freewill page 91: God in all times has placed
his Church as in a high place, and has exalted it in the sight of all people
and Nations. Hutter in his Analysis of the Confession of Auspurg, page 430: The
elect are not the whole Church, no if you speak only of the true church. For
the church consists not only of inward says in Christ, but also of the
outward administration of the word and Sacraments. Now as far as this in
outward rite is performed, so far the true Church truly is visible. Beurlin
in the Preface of his Refutation of Sotus: I confess the Church of Christ is
always to be acknowledged visible. And he adds, that all confess the same.
The same doctrine is taught by Gesner loc 24. by Adam Francis in his 11. place,
and by other Lutherans. Amongst the Sacramentaries thus writes Vrsin in
Prolegomenis ad Catechcsin page 2: The Church must needs be seen in this
world, that the elect may know unto what company they must adioyne, themselves
in this life. Iunius Cont. 4. lib. 3. cap. 13. affirms, that it is impious to
say that the Church can wholly want a visible form. Keckerman in the 3. book of
his Theological systeme writes, that the Church must always be sensible, that
other nations may know to what church they ought to adioyne themselves; and
that Confession of sincere doctrine can never fail wholly, nor the visible
church wholly err. Danaeus in his book of the visible Church dares to say,
that who denies the true church of God, and that visible, to have been from the
beginning of the world, he without doubt shows himself to be ignorant in
holy scripture. Amongst our English Protestants M. Hooker in his 3. book of
Ecclesiastical policy page 126: God has had ever, and ever shall have some
Church visible upon earth. D. Field in his 1. book of the Church cap. 10: For
seeing the Church is the multitude of them that shall be saved, and no man can
be saved unless he make Confession unto salvation (for faith hid in the heart
and concealed does not suffice) it cannot be, but they that are of the true
Church, must by profession of the truth make themselves known, in such sort
that by their profession and practice they may be discerned from other men. And
D. White in defense of his Way cap. 4. page 390: I acknowledge the providence
of God, who has left the records of history to confirm our faith, and freely
grant our religion to be false, if the continual descent thereof from Christ
cannot by such record be showed. Moreover at sometyms they not only confess
that the Church is always visible, but also grant that the scripture teaches
the same in those parables of the barn and the net. For out of them Calvin 4.
Protestants confess that the Scripture affirms that the Church is always
visible.
Institut. cap. 1. 13. infers that the Lord pronounces, that the church
shall be vexed with this evil till the day of judgment, to be burdened with
the mixture of the wicked. Of the same opinion is D. Whitaker Cont. 2. quest.
3. cap. 2. page 471. and others. But that church which contains the wicked,
is the visible Church, for the invisible they will have to hold only the good.
The Scripture therefore testifies that the visible Church shall ever be. Yea
Protestants now and then take it so ill, that it should be said, that they
teach that the visible Church perished for many ages, that D. Sutliue in his
answer to Exceptions cap. 7. says that Bellarmine lies in saying so. And D.
Whitaker loc. cit. page 472. says, we slander them, when we affirm they put
such a Church, as at sometimes can be seen of none. And says, that in this
matter there is no controversy about the thing, but about the manner, to wit,
no question whither the Church be always visible or no, but in what manner it
is visible; because forsooth we will have the Church to be at all times visible
clearly, and of all men; and they will have it to be at sometimes visible but
obscurely, and of few. The like says Kemnice in his Common places title of the
Church cap. 3. Reineccius in the 4. tome of his Armor cap. 8. and D. Morton in
the 1. part of his Apology lib. 1. cap. 13. But yet that in this matter we
neither belly nor sclaunder them, is manifest by what we have rehearsed in the
4. chapter before going in the 5. number, and those that follow. To which I
add, that Calvin in the Preface of his institutions sets the state of this
question betwixt us and Protestants in these words: Upon this hinge hangs our
controversy, that they (Papists) will have the form of the church to appear
and be visible at all times: On the contrary we say, that the church may
consist of no apparent form. And I would to God, that Protestants would
constantly agree, which us in this matter of doctrine, that the church of God
is always visible to some, either of those that are in it, or out of it; that
the debate might remain only about the matter of fact, Why Protestants
contradict themselves about the inuisibility of the Church.
whither the Protestant Church before Luther appeared, were seen of any either
Protestant or other. But Protestants standing betwixt truth and lies, whiles
they consider the nature of the Church of God, especially as it is described in
scripture, confess that it must needs be visible, not only to her children but
to others also. But when they look back upon the state and condition of their
own church before Luther began, are compelled to deny the same, as before we
most evidently showed: which thing alone, if it were well considered, would
discover sufficiently, that in their own consciences they acknowledge their
Church not to be the true Church of God.

Inuisibility contrary to the ends of the Church.
7. Fifthly, I prove that the Church cannot be invisible, because that were
contrary to the ends for which the Church was instituted of God: whereof one
was, that men should worship him after that entier manner of worship which man
is to give, which is to honor God not only with heart and mind, but also with
tongue and deed, as it is evident; and Calvin in his Confutation of a
Hollander, many ways proves that the Church must render to God, not only
inward but also outward worship. But an invisible Church worshippeth God only
in heart and mind, as Whitakers words are. Another end of the Church is to feed
her children with the word and Sacraments, to correct and govern them by
discipline, and to defend them from enemies; as also is manifest and scripture
teaches. Which offices, a Church, which neither sees her children, nor is
seen of them, cannot perform. Likewise another end is to convert the world,
and those who are out of her, to the faith and worship of God; which she can no
way do, if neither her doctrine nor example be seen of them. And yet as Luther
says upon the sixth chapter of Isaias tom. 4. fol. 234: The Church is in
perpetual practice of converting others to the faith.

Inuisibility against the nature of human societies.
8. Sixthly, it is against the nature of a society of men amongst themselves, for
to be invisible. For as men consist of a body which is visible by the colors,
and of a soul which is seen by the actions thereof; so it is necessary that
the society in which they join, be visible, either by it self, or by some
other thing. Whereupon well said S. Augustine: Li. 19. co^t. Faust. c. 11.
Men cannot join in any religion true or false, unless they be bound
together by some fellowship of visible signs or Sacraments. And the same,
confesses Gerlachius in his 23. disput. of the Church page 995. saying: We
willingly confess and grant, that the church cannot be, except there be some
outward and visible signs, by common communion and participation whereof
society amongst men may consist. And seauently it is contrary to the example of
all other societies amongst men whither religious or profane, whereof none
consists in a thing which is altogether invisible, and whereby the members
of that society cannot be known the one to the other.

9. Seauenthly, Against the perpetuity of the Church.
it is contrary to the continuance and conservation of the Church on earth to
be visible. For if the Church which was in the former age had not been seen of
that which is in this age, how could the Church of this age have received the
faith? We ask therefore, how the Protestant Church of our age learned the
faith of the Church of an other age, if in the ages before Luther she were so
invisible as you have heard them confess: Protestants scared with this
question like men with a thunder clap, leap a sunder, and every one
answeareth, not what he knows or can prove, but what seems to him least
absurd, that hereby we may perceive, that all their talk of their Churches
being before Luthers time, is but as the scripture says, fables and vain
speeches, or fancies and fictions of men, speaking without either testimony or
reason. Some of them say, that before Luther their Church received the faith
immediately from God alone. During Popery (says Boysseul in his Confutation of
Sponde page 75) the holy Ghost taught faith without a preacher. Protestant
Church taught miraculously.
The same also intimate Iunius Cont. 4. lib. 3. ca. 13. M. Perkins in his
exposition of the Creed Col. 788. The Author of the church in Danaeus Opuscles
page 1029. D. Fulk of Succession page 320. and others, who say, that the Church
Was propagated and received faith by extraordinary means. And they also, who
write, that their Church was preserved miraculously, merueilously, by wondrous
means, or by mere miracle; as Luther of private Mass tom. 7. fol 240. Calvin
4. Instit. cap. 1.. 2. Sadeel ad Repetit. Sophism. Turriani page 763. Danaeus
of Antichrist page 1021. and Son is against Sponde cap. 2. page 36. But this
their assertion they neither do, nor can prove otherwise, then because God can
in such manner preserve the church.

10. Thou see (gentle reader) upon what a vain foundation this imaginary
church is built, for the space of many ages, in which it lay invisible and
lurcking in holes and corners. For they confess, that for many ages it was not
seen of any man; and if at any time they confess not so much in words, in
deeds they confess it always; because they can never name any, whom they can
prove to have seen it in former ages; and nevertheless they will, that for all
those ages it learnt their faith miraculously and immediately from God alone.
When we ask testimony hereof, they produce neither divine nor humane worthy of
credit; when we demand proof, they give us no other then this, Verstius
Antibel. page 468. Fulke de Succes. pa. 74.
that God could so teach it faith. As if God did, or does all that he can do.
We speak of an effect, or a matter of fact, of Gods will; and they answer of
his power. When we affirm any thing, they exact demonstrations, that is,
plain testimonies of Scripture, or at least pregnant proofs deduced thence.
And when they affirm a matter of so great weight and so incredible, as is that
the church was so many ages taught her faith of God alone, they will have us to
believe it, not only without any testimony of God or man, but even contrary to
the testimony of them both, for one silly sophisme, ridiculous to the very
children, and scorned even of themselves in other matters, as shall by and by
appear. Surely that I may use Saint Augustins words: They seem to think,
that they have not to do with men, Co^t. Adimant. c. 4.
but as if they were mere beasts, who hear the^ or read their writings, they
abuse the ignorance or dullness of them, or rather their blindness of mind. Or
as Calvin says: Antid. ^ Conc. c. 15.
These masters need have a heard of Oxen, if they would have auditors to whom
they may persuade what they will. But to their Argument I say with Tertullian
against Praxeas cap. 10: Surely nothing is hard to God. But if in our
presumptions we will so rashly use this sentence, we may feign any thing of
God; as if he had done it because he could do it. But we must not believe he
has done that, which he has not, because he can do all things: but we must
seek whether he has done it or no. Luther also upon the 46. cap of Genesis
tom. 6 fol. 624. says: God can govern the church by the holy Ghost, without
the Ministry; but he will not do this immediately. And upon the 32. chap. fol.
454: He could by the holy Ghost inwardly enlighten the hearts and forgive
sins without the Ministry of the word and Ministers; but he would not. And
the Confession of Suitzers cap. 18: God by his power can immediately gather a
church of men, but he chose rather to deal with men by the ministry of men.
Calvin upon 3. chap. 1. Cor. v. 6: Nothing hinders God that he may not
inspire faith into men asleep; but he has otherwise determined, to wit that,
that faith should come by hearing. And upon 1. chap. of S. Luke v. 37: They
rave peruersely who imagine of Gods power without his word. It is a dangerous
dispute what God can do, unless withal we find what he will do. And 4.
Institut. cap. 17. 24. he says: We ask not here what God could, but what he
would do. The like words he has cap. 1.. 5. lib. 2. cap 7. page 5. and de vera
Eccles. Reform. page 326. Beza in the 2. part of his answer to the Acts of the
Conference at Montbelgard page 97: An argument taken from the power of God
needs no answer, unless his will also appear to us by his word. The Author
of the orthodoxall consent in the Preface: It is ridiculous to urge the
omnipotency of God, where we know not hi^ pleasure. Sadeel of Sacramental
manducation page 272. sets down this as a Theological principle: We may
not in divinity argue from the omnipotency of God, unless his will be before
declared by his express word. Let Protestants therefore produce Gods express
word, wherein he says, that he has, or will for many ages miraculously by
himself alone teach the Church her faith. Danaeus also in his 4. book
deamiss. great. cap. 15: It little avails to prove Gods power, unless his will
also be proved. And D. Whitaker cont. 2. quest. 6. cap. 1 p. 617: What a kind
of argument is this? This may be done, because nothing is impossible to God,
therefore it is done, or sometimes has been? Does our faith rely upon such
foundations? Finally Casaubon in his 7. Exercitation against Baronius: It is a
saying of the Fathers that Gods power is the refuge of Heretics. Thus thou
see how vain, even by the Protestants judgment, is this proof of the
Churches learning immediately from God. They are wont to scoff at the Miracles
done by Saints, albeit we prove them by sufficient testimony of man: and
themselves feign a continual miracle, yea so many miracles, as they feign
men, whom they say for many ages learn^ their faith immediately of God; which
they can prove by no sufficient testimony, either of God or man. Yea we will
most manifestly herafter disprove it. Here I will only note, that those
Protestants seem to have been some Enthusiasts or heavenly Prophets, as Luther
scoffingly termed some, who in his time challenged such immediate learning from
God; and that the Protestants themselves do sometimes condemn this immediate
learning from God, as Fanaticall, Anabaptisticall, Suenckfeldian, and
Enthusiasticall.

11. The Confession of Auspurg art. 5. Protestants reject immediate taeching of
God.
(as Fabritius relates out of the original copy) says thus: They condemn
the Anabaptists and others, who think that the holy Ghost comes to men without
the outward word. Martin Luther upon Genesis tom. 6. fol. 117: The holy ghost
does not teach new revelations besides the ministry of the word, according as
the Enthusiasts and Anabaptists true Fanaticall Doctors do dream. And in the
8. art. of Smalcald: In this we most constantly stand, that God will not
otherwise deal with us then by the vocal word and Sacraments. Schusselburg
also in the 10. tom. of his Catalogue page 30. rehearses it is an error of
Suenckfeld, that men may be saved without the outward word of God and
Ministry. And Melancthon in his answer to the Bauarian Articles tom. 3. fol.
372. affirms, that it is the opinion of Suenckfeld and the Anabaptists: That
God communicates himself to men without the ministry of the word. Kemnice in
the 2. part of his examen title of the Sacrament of Orders page 391: Justly we
disallow of Enthusiasts and Anabaptists, who imagine the exercise of the outward
ministry not to be needful. And title of P^nnance page 316: The Enthusiasts
are condemned, who feign that God forgiueth sins immediately, and without the
use of the ministry. D. Whitaker Cont 2. quaest. 3. c. 11. page 328: We wholly
reject revelations, which are besides the word, as Fanaticall, Anabaptisticall
and altogether heretical. And in his 1. book of the Scripture cap. 3. sect.
1. page 44: We must expect no more immediate revelation. It is so. And he
adds, that Protestants hiss out all those who pretend these kind of
revelations. And in the 2. book cap. 10. sect. 4: Why are the Anabaptists held
for Heretics, if the church do know matters of faith without all external
means by the only instinct of the holy Ghost? Pareus in his 3. book de
Iustificat. cap. 3: The exception which they make of special revelation, is a
mere jest. For besides the Prophets, Apostles, and some few Apostolical men,
God does not deal, nor has dealt with special revelations; but with
ordinary, and will have the Church to be content with the word and the holy
Ghost working in the hearts of the faithful. And cap. 8: God will not have his
church to be taught and confirmed by Enthusiasticall revelations; but by
bearing of his word and ordinary use of the Sacraments. Finally Beza in the
Conference of Montbelgard page 407. says: That we have no testimony in
scripture of extraordinary means of infusing faith. Besides, it was the
fashion of both old and new heretics to boast of special revelations. Of old
heretics witnesses S. Augustine in his book of heresies; and Calvin in his
book of true Reformation page 322. Of Munster, Carolstade, and the
Sacramentaries Luther testifies the same upon the 22. of Esaiae tom. 4. fol.
280. Of Gentilis, Calvin in his book against him. Of Storcke, Manlius in his
Common places page 482. Of Peucer and Bergius, Schusselburb. lib. 4. Theol.
Calvin. art. 1. page 172. that I may say nothing of Luther, The Protestant
Church not taught by ordinary means.
Zuinglius, and Calvin.

12. Others therefore teach that the Protestant church before Luther, received
the faith, not by any extraordinary way, but by ordinary means, to wit, by
hearing some true doctrine of Popish preachers, and some by reading scriptures:
Thus D. Whitaker Cont. 2. quest. 3. cap. 2. page 424. Behold new fables and
fictions (for we are like to hear no other kind of stuff of Protestants in
these matters of fact) not only less proved then the former, but also less
probable or possible. For it was at least possible, that God alone should have
taught his church; but that before Luthers revolt either Popish or
Protestanticall preachers, or the Scripture should have taught Protestancy,
has neither show of probability nor possibility. Not Protestant preachers,
because before Luther there were none at all, as hereafter both D. Whitaker and
others shall confess. For the present it may suffice, that Luther upon the 22.
psalm. tom. 3. fol. 344. writes: That there was lest only the scripture, and
that comprised not in voice, but in letters, by which we might restore our
selves to the faith. And Against Catarine tom. 2. fol. 140. he says, that the
vocal gospel, being choked and extinguished by Papists, was silent in all
the world. Neither could the Scripture teach Protestancy, not only because it
teaches no such doctrine, but also because it plainly professes, Romans 10.
that none can come to faith but by bearing of preachers lawfully sent, as
hereafter we shall see Protestants do confess. In the mean time it may
suffice, that Danaeus in his book of the visible church page 1069. writes,
that S. Paul says that faith comes by hearing, not by private reading; and
that we open a gap to Fanaticall spirits for to contemn their Pastors, if we
say that reading alone will suffice to get faith; which Protestants have
experienced. For thus writes Luther in the Preface of his Catechism tom. 5.
fol. 645: There are found some this day even of the Nobility, who dare say, we
need no more Pastors or preachers; that books suffice out of which every one
may learn the same things by himself without any man's teaching. And Calvin
upon the 2 Thessalonians. cap. 4: Certain phanaticall fellows do brag, that they
need no more the help of teachers, because reading may abundantly suffice.

13. Neither could those imaginary Protestants learn Protestancy of Popish
preachers. First, because Protestants, (as before his showed) complain, that
Papists had extinguished all their faith. Again because now no man learneth
Protestancy of Popish preachers, and besides because Papistry and Protestancy
are directly opposite, as Luther says in cap. 3. Micheae tom. 4. fol. 446. and
tom. 7. epist. ad Eslingenses, and against King Henry tom. 2. fol. 497: Or (as
Brentius speaks in his Apology of the Confession of Wittenberg page 703) they
differ in the very principles: or (as Beza writes in his Confession cap. 7.
page 56) In the very sum of salvation. And as D. Whitaker affirms in his
oration that the Pope is Antichrist, Protesta^cy and Popery quit opposite.
Papistry is more repugnant to Protestantisme, then hot to cold, black to
white. How then is it possible that they should have learnt Protestancy of
Papists, who teach so contrary doctrine. Lastly because Protestants themselves
deny it. For Luther upon the Graduall psalms tom. 3. fol. 516. thus writes:
In Popery there was never heard one pure word of sin, of grace, of the merit
of Christ. And fol. 568: Under the Pope all pulpits, all Churches did sound out
nothing but wicked doctrine. And in cap. 2. ad Galat. tom. 5. fol. 297: Seeing
Papists know not what faith is, it is impossible that they should have faith,
and much less teach it to others. And the Apology of the Confession of Auspurg
in the Preface: No man taught, that sins were remitted by says in Christ.
Calvin 4. Instit. cap. 2.. 2. says, that in Popery the doctrine without which
Christianity cannot stand, was all buried and cast out. And in Respons. ad
Versipellem page 360: In Popery there sounds the bare and empty name of
Christ. And upon the 2. cap. 2. Tim: There is a horrible destruction of the
gospel in Popery. Wherefore none learnt the Protestant Gospel either in
Popery, or of Popish preachers. Besides although they cold have learnt the faith
of Popish preachers, yet they should be ashamed to say, that they had learned
it of them, whom they account the bondslaues and ministers of Antichrist.

14. Ninthly, Nothing can make the church invisible.
I prove that the Church could not be invisible, because there is nothing which
can make that the Church profess not her faith. For if any thing, most of all
persecution. But as the waters did lift up the Arck of Noe, which was a figure
of the church; so do persecutions raise up the church, and make her more
known. And as the heaven in day time all shines, but at might glittereth in
the stars, so the church in time of peace flourishes in all her members, but
in time of persecution is most glorious in her constant soldiers. And there are
many and most excellent testimonies of the holy Fathers, how that the Church is
by persecution made more pure, more famous, and more plentiful, which one may
read in SS. Justin, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Gregory Nazianzen, Hilary, Ambrose,
Hierome, Augustine, Leo, Theodorete, Gregory the great, and others. I according
to my purpose will allege only the testimonies of Protestants. Luther upon the
1. psalm tom. 3. fol. 125: The faithful, whiles they are killed do increase,
while they are diminished do multiply. And upon the 9. of Isaias tom. 4. fol.
84: The Church is made fruithfull with the blood of the Godly, and increases.
Calvin against Seruet. page 595: The true and proper church rising under
persecution, flourished under the same. The like he has upon the 2. Tim. cap.
2. and Philip 1. Lubberia lib. 5. de Eccles. cap. 3: The true Church grew under
suffering persecutions. And the Apology of the English Church in the end: This
flame the more it is kept down, so much the more with greater sorce and
strength does it break out and fly abroad. D. Fulke of Succession page 255: I
acknowledge that the Church is so far from being extinguished by the
persecution of the material sword, that I grant it gives her occasion to
delate and extend her bounds. For so, as Tertullian says well, the blood of
M^rtyrs is the seed of the Church. This all that are not starck blind do see to
have happened to our Church. For how much the more Antichrist raged with fire
and sword, so much the more famous she became. And D. Whitaker Cont. 2 quest.
5. cap. 4. page 501: Persecutions destroy not the Kingdom of Christ, but make
it more famous. And Cont. 4. quest. 5. cap. 2. page 669: When tyrants ra^ed
against the church, religion suffered no loss; yea then most of all flourished
How then could the Protestant church, if it were the true church of God, become
invisible before Luther arose, by persecution?

15. If any reply, that this is true of violent persecution of the heathens,
but not of persecutions by fraud and deceit, as is the persecution of
Antichrist, which made the Protestant Church in former tyms to become
invisible: I answer that first he speaks voluntary without all proof.
Again, that the English Apology and D. Fulke speak namely of Antichrists
persecution, meaning the Pope, which they say has since Luthers time made
their church more famous. How then could it before his time make it invisible?
Moreover, the scripture and holy Fathers teach, that Antichrist shall rage most
cruelly against the Church: and Protestants affirm that the Pope, whom they
will have to be Antichrist, has been so cruel against Protestants, as any
Herod, Nero, Domitian, may seem to have been mild if they be compared to him.
Finally, heretics do by fraud persecute the Church, and nevertheless the
Apostle says: There must be heresies, 1. Cor. 10.
that those who be tried may be made manifest. So far is fraudulent
persecution from making the Church invisible, as it makes the tried faithful
to be manifest. And both S. Augustine oftentimes, and others observe, that
heresies have been occasion of great increase of knowledge unto the Church.

16. Tenthly I prove, Protestants infer an invisible Church to be no Church.
that the Church cannot become invisible, because Protestants do often infer
such and such a Church or company not to have been, because it was not seen; as
in the Preface of the Protocoll of Frankentall, they prove the Anabaptists were
not before the year 1525. Because (say they) if you read all stories you shall
find no people from the beginning of the world, who had a Confession of faith
like unto yours. But by the same manner it were easy to prove that Protestants
were not before Luther. For as Spalatinus in his relation of their Confession
of Auspurg boasts: One shall not find such a Confession neither in any
history, neither in any ancient Father or Doctor. In Luther tom. 9. German.
And Fox in his Protestation before his Acts says, that of their Church there
is no mention made in Histories. Luther also upon the 3. chap. ad Galat. tom.
5. fol. 358. writes that of his principal opinion nothing is read in books of
Monks, of Canonists, of Scholmen, yea nor in the books of ancient Fathers.
There was a wonderful silence of it for many ages in all schools and
Churches. Likewise, when one said, that the Roman Church was a member of the
Catholic Church, Calvin in his Answer ad Versipellem page 359. said: I do not
gainsay that the Roman Church is a member of the Catholic, if he could show a
Church at Rome. Which supposes that no Church is where it cannot be showed.
When Bellarmine said, that beside the Synagogue of the Jews there were in
Elias time Churches amongst the Gentiles, D. Whitaker Cont. 2. quest. 3. cap. 3.
page 475. thus answered: If they say that God had other Churches, let them show
them, and tell which they were, and where they were. And D. Rainolds in his 12.
Prefection upon the scripture col. 106. infers, that none of the Synagogue
did believe those books of Scripture which they deny to be canonical, because
we cannot name any. When D. Harding said that there was such an heresy, M.
Jewel art. 2. diuis. 8. page 75. denying it, says: It must needs be a very
straung heresy that never had neither beginning nor ending, nor defender nor
reprouer, nor mouth to speak it nor ear to hear it, nor pen to write, nor
tym to last in, nor place to rest in. And if an heresy must be heard of,
certainly much more the Church of God. When Beza impugned the Arians, thus he
discourses epist. 18. page 98: If their opinion be true, we bid them show where
there Church has been, since from the propagation of the gospel it is easy to
demonstrate, that never any one held any such thing, who was not condemned by
the perpetual consent of the Church. And he adds epist. 81: Certainly there
has been no true Church, if these men teach truth. When the Bohemians would
prove that they had borrowed nothing of the Anabaptists, thus they write in the
Preface of their Confession: Our Congregation was long time before any thing
was heard of the Anabaptists, or their name known in the world. Finally M.
Bancroft in his Survey of the pretended discipline cap, 2. avouches, that the
Geneuian discipline began of Calvin, because before him it was never seen or
heard of. And if they think that a discipline, or an heretical company could
be, and not be seen or heard of in the world; how much more ought they to
think the same of the Church of God?

17. Lastly I prove that the Church of God could not be invisible, Absurdities
follow of the inuisibility of the Church.
because thereupon would ensue many and great absurdities. For first, if the
visible Church should fail, it is manifest that it is not the Church of
Christ, against which he has promised, that the very gates of hell shall not
prevail. And if it be granted, that the visible Church is not the Church
instituted by Christ, it must needs be but a humane society instituted by man.
How then should it come to pass, that one cannot be saved, unless he be in the
visible Church, if so he can be, as commonly all Protestants do teach? Who
contemn all ordinances of men as unnecessary to salvation, why make they such
account of this humane institution? At the last the Protestants have felt this
mischeife, as ye may see in Calvin in his 3. homily in his Opuscles page 548.
and Danaeus in his book of the visible church; where they bring many reasons
to prove, that it is necessary to be of the visible church. But seeing
themselves do teach that the visible church is not the true Church in the sight
of God, and consequently a humane institution, how can they prove, that God
has commanded, or men can appoint so strictly to observe this one humane
Institution, under pain of damnation? Another inconvenience is, that Christ's
promises touching the continuance of his church are exposed to the laughter and
mockery of Jews and Infidels. For since (as the Law says, and Protestants
acknowledge) among men, there is no other account made of things that appear
not, then of things that are not; what man will reasonably persuade himself,
that Christ's Church has ever continued in the world, if she for many ages
appeared in no one corner of the world? Surely this seems so incredible, that
I think not, that any man well in his wits belieueth it, howsoever for to
defend the Protestants Church he may say it. But farewell rather such a Church
which cannot be defended but by such improbable paradoxes.

18. The 3. inconvenience is, that the church of God should have been much more
miserable then has been the Synagogue of the Jews, even since it has been
forsaken of God. For the Synagogue has ever since Christ's time been visible
unto the world, and professed her faith both before her own and others. Lib.
12. co^t. Faust. c. 11.
The Jewish nation (says S. Augustine) whether under Pagan or Christian Kings,
has not lost the sign of her law, wherewith it is distinguished from other
nations and people. The same testifies S. Hierome epist. 129. ad Dardan. And
Peter Martyr in his Common places title of the Jews. 47: The Hebrews, albeit
subdued of the Romans, yet never took their laws, rites and customs; they
keep their own yet as well as they can. And Sadeel in his Answer to Theses
Posnan. cap. 8. grants the same. And the Magdeburgians in every Century make
special mention of the Jews. To this some Protestants say, that it is no
marvel that the external condition of the Church was more miserable the^ of
the Synagogue. Iunius and Daneus l. 4. de Eccl. c. 5.
But whosoever shall read the Prophesies of the glory and amplitude of the
Church, will think this strange. But besides, not only the external, but also
the internal state of the Church was more miserable then the Synagogue, if the
Synagogue durst in all ages, even before her enemies, profess her faith; and
the Church of Christ for long time durst mutter nothing even before her own
children; yea (as we shall hereafter hear the Protestants teach) adored
Antichrist, and observed Antichristian and idolatricall rites and worships. The
4. inconvenience is, that if we say that the Church may be, and yet not be
seen of any, we give occasion to every new start up heretik, to say, that his
church has ever been: neither can we refute this his dotage, unless we do
maintain that the church must be evermore visible, and profess her faith;
which (as we have seen) Protestants themselves do suppose, when they prove
that any Church or company has not been in former times.

19. Out of all which has been said in this chapter, it appears evidently,
that whither we put the form of the Church in some visible thing or invisible,
whether we say that the only elect and just be of the church or not they alone;
of what kind soever (I say) the form of the Church be, and whosoever be of the
Church (of which matter I disput not now) it is evident I say, that the Church
of God never is at any time, but she professes her says before her children
and before the world; and consequently that the Church her profession of faith,
or (which comes all to one) that the Church according to her profession of
faith, is evermore visible, or sensible, which suffices to my purpose; because
before Luther arose, there was no Church visible in profession of Protestant
faith. Wherefore I frame my 3. demonstration for to prove Luther to have been
the Author of the Protestant Church in this sort: Whensoever the Church is,
she is visible in profession of her says: (whether this profession be an
essential form, or a property or accident inseparable) But the Protestant
Church immediately before Luther arose was not visible in profession of her
says: Therefore immediately before Luther she was not at all. And by his
preaching became to be: Therefore he was the Author thereof. The Mayor or first
proposition of the Syllogism is evident by all that has been laid in this
chapter. And the Minor or second proposition by all the verbal Confessions
which we have reheased in the former chapter, and by real confessions of all
Protestants whatsoever, who neither in Luthers time nor since, could bring
forth any man worthy of credit, who had seen any company professing
Protestancy before Luther began to preach it. Then the which yet nothing had
been more easy to do, especially in Luthers time, if any such company had been
extant.

That Protestants confess, that before Luther their Church had no Protestant
Pastors. CHAP. VII.
1. THE 4. demonstration for to prove that Luther was the Author of the
Protestant church and Religion, we will take out of that Protestants
acknowledge their Church before his time to have wholly wanted Pastors. First
therefore they confess, that their Pastors in former times were unknown to
the world, Protestants Pastors unknown to the world.
and to Protestants themselves. D. Fulk in his book of Succession page 26: God
has raised up Pastors in all ages, howsoever they were unknown to the world.
And page 22: I deny (says be) this Succession (of Pastors) to be always
notorious to the world. And in his answer to Stapletons Cauillat: who will
acknowledge that she alone it the true Church, who can show her Pastors in a
continual succession? D. Humfrey to 3. Reason of F. Campian p. 288.
confesses, that not so much as the names of the Pastors, who taught their
Church, were extant. D. Whitaker Cont. 2 quest. 5. cap. 6. page 508. thus
writes: What then? was the succession of our Pastors always visible? No. For
this is not needful. Though therefore our Pastors were not in times past
manifest, neither can we name then, yet etc. D. Morton in the first part of his
Apology lib. 1. cap. 21. says, that the Catholic church cannot always show
the ordination of Pastors. D. White in his way to the church page 410: I have
showed the teachers of our faith do lawfully succeed, and so always have done,
though not outwardly and visibly to the world. The like he has page 411. and
436. Sadel wrote his book de vocatione Ministroru^ against such Protestants, as
thought that their ministers wanted all lawful calling, because (said they)
they have no perpetual visible succession from the Apostles unto these times.
And himself there page 560. confesses, that visible succession has been
broken of, for many years in the church. Thou see (good reader) how they
plainly confess, that before Luther start up, their Pastors were unknown to
the world, not manifest, their succession not always visible, their names not
extant, nor they can be named of Protestants. And indeed and effect they all
confess the same, when as none of them can produce any one man worthy of
credit, who heard any Protestant preacher, who before Luther arose preached
justification by only faith, and the other fundamental points of Protestancy.

2. Secondly Luther either complains or boasts for sometime he alone
preached Protestancy. In his Preface upon his 1. tome: At first I was alone.
Luther alone.
And in his book of the captivity of Babylon tom. 2. fol. 63: At that time I
alone did role this stone. And against the King of England fol. 497: I alone
stood in the battle. I alone was compelled to cast my self upon the weapons
of the Emperor and the Pope. I stood alone in danger forsaken of all, helped
of none. And upon the graduall psalms tom. 3. fol. 5^5: In the beginning of my
quarrel I took all the matter upon my self, and did think that by Gods help I
alone should sustain it. And otherwhere, (as before is reported) he says,
that without him others should not have known one jot of the Gospel.
Melancthon in the Preface of the Acts of Ratisbon tom. 4. page 730: says:
Luther alone durst meddle with the errors of the Popes and schools. Zuinglius
in his Exegesis to. 2. terms Luther Ionathas, who alone durst set upon the
camp of the Philistians. And Calvin in his Admonition to Westphalus page 787.
says: Luther alone doubted not to set upon all Popery. Besides, Luther (as
before we have rehearsed) writes, that the only scripture was left, whereby
men might recover the faith. But if at that time there had been other Protestant
Pastors, the scripture had not been alone; and without Luther men might have
learnt the gospel. Neither had Luther been left alone and forsaken of all, The
Protestant Ministry wholly perished.
but some of them would have stepped out and seconded him especially after they
saw that the preached without all danger.

3. Thirdly Protestants do sometime plainly say, that their ministry was wholly
perished before Luther arose. Taken away.
Luther in his book of private Mass tom. 2. fol. 249: Papists have taken out
of the Church the true Ministry of the word. And of the Institution of
Ministers fol. 372. Aboloshed.
he writes, that Protestant ordination was by Papists abolished and
extinguished. And upon the graduall psalm. tom. 3. fol. 568: The Church had no
true Ministry under Antichrist. No true Ministry
Upon the 25. of Genesis tom. 6. fol. 319: In our time after those Popish
monsters the true knowledge of the word, and of divine ordination was
extinguished. And upon the 49. chap. fol. 655: Extinguished.
We are not the church for any ordinary succession. Calvin epist. 290: Because
the true rank of ordination was broken of, by the tyranny of the Pope, now we
need have new help to raise again the Church. Broken of.
And in Answer to Sadolet page 132. he writes, that when the supremacy of the
Pope was set up, the true order of the Church perished. Perished.
And of true reformation p. 322: Not without cause do we avouch the Church of
God for some ages to have been so io^ne and scattered, that is it was destitute
of true Pastors. Beza in his Catechism, Destitute of Pastors
title of the Church, cap. 5 sect. 18: In our time it came to pass, things
being so fallen down, that there was left no place for ordinary vocation. And
epist. 5. page 39: In our time ordinary vocation, Ordinary vocation no where.
which no where was, neither could, nor ought to be expected. And Epist. 24: Ye
know, being taught by fresh examples, how the public ministry being as it were
overwhelmed for a time, yet the church of God remains. And epist. 81: The
matter came to that pass, Ouerthrown to the ground
that the Ecclesiastical order was wholly overthrown even to the foundation,
the vain names thereof only remaining. And lib. de Notis Eccles. page 82: They,
who in our memory have freed the church from the tyranny of Antichrist, had
none of whom they might lawfully ask or receive imposition of hands. And
epist. 86: It is mani^est, that for some ages lawful order was quite abolished
in the Church; Quite abolished.
none not so much as the slenderest shadow of the chiefest part, of
ecclesiastical calling, remaining. The French Confession art. 31: Sometimes,
as in our age, the state of the Church being interrupted, it was needful, that
some (Pastors) should be extraordinarily raised of God. Sadeel also de Vocat.
Ministrorum p. 556. says, that true Order (of Pastors) was interrupted. D.
Whitaker Cont. 2. quest. 5. cap. 6. page 510: We say, that our men's calling
was not ordinary, but extraordinary; Wholly corrupted
because ordinary calling was wholly corrupted. Again: The state of the Church
was fallen and wholly ouerturned. And page 612: When ordinary succession was
corrupted, God found an extraordinary way, by which the Church might be
restored. For God would that this restoration should be made, not in the old
foundation, that is in succession of Bishops, but after a certain new
extraordinary manner. And D. White in defense of his way cap 49. page 421:
Finding no other kind of Pastors, says, that the Protestant Pastors were even
those, who lived in communion of the Roman, Greek, Armenian, and such like
Churches; and adds that his adversary does deceive the reader when he
intimates, that Protestants go about to show any other kind of Pastors.
Finally all those, who affirm that the vocation or Mission of Luther and their
first Ministers was extraordinary, must needs say, that there were no former
Protestant Pastors, of whom they could have been sent or approved.

Protestants say the Church may be without Pastors.
4. The same also they insinuate, when they teach, that the Church may be
without Pastors, which they affirm, that thereby they may defend the being of
their own Church before Luther, when it had no Pastors. Luther in cap. 4. Oseae
tom. 4. fol, 295: As if the Church were tied to any certain order (of
Ministry) The Confession of Saxony cap. 12: God estsoones restores the
Ministry. Calvin of true Reform. page 332: I grant indeed that it can never
fall out that the Church perish; but when they refer that to Pastors which is
promised of the perpetual continuance of the church, in that they are much
deceived. For the Church does not perish straight, if Pastors he wanting. Beza
of the notes of the Church page 55: Ordinary succession and vocation of Pastors
was not always needful or perpetual. Sadeel in Answer to the abiured
articles page 533: It is false that the outward Ministry must be perpetual.
The same he has in Repetit. Sophism. Turriani page 763. Iunius and Danaeus
lib. 4. de Eccles. cap. 8. Bucan. in his 41. place de Eccles. quest. 19:
Sometime the outward and usual ministry of the church being interrupted, the
Church is extraordinarily nourished of God, as it were in the desert. Keckerman
in his Theological Systeme lib. 3. page 397: The Church is often pressed so,
that the order of succession (of Pastors) must be somewhat interrupted. And
Vorstius in his Antibellarm. page 158: The ordinary succession uses oftentimes
to be interrupted for some time. Lu^bert in his 5. book of the church cap. 5:
We say that the church may for a short space be deprived of Pastors. D.
Whitaker c. 6. before cited, page 510: I gather that true and lawful
succession may be broken of, and that it is not a true, but only an accidental
note of the Church; because it pertains not to the essence of the Church; but
only to her external state. And page 512: We say that ordinary succession
has oftentimes been interrupted, and cut of, in the true Church. D. Morton.
lib. cit. cap. 17. writes thus: The matter of the proposition, to wit, where
there is no succession there is no Church, ye know to be weak. And cap. 18. he
affirms this saying to be false: Succession of doctrine cannot be divided
from succession of persons. And cap. 23. says: Succession of faith may be
without succession of doctrine; and succession of doctrine without succession
of persons. D. Fulke lib. de Succes. page 319: Yea even the very public
preaching of the word may be silent for a time; and the Church being deprived
for a time of this ordinary means of her salvation, may be preserved so long
of God. And D. White in his way to the Church page 87: All the external
government of the Church may come to decay, in that the local and personal
Succession of the Pastors may be interrupted. And page 403: For the external
Succession we care not; it is sufficient that in doctrine they succeeded the
Apostles and primitive Churches, and those faithful witnesses, which in all
ages since embraced the same.

5. By the foresaid Confessions of Protestants it is most clear, that when
Luther began to play the Pastor, there was no Protestant preacher at all. For
they acknowledge, that they are no Church for any ordinary succession; that the
true order of the church perished, that the true Ministry was taken out of the
Church, true knowledge of divine ordination was extinguished, and ordination
abolished and decayed: That the Church had no true Ministry, and that she was
destitute of true Pastors. And that they mean these words both of a
substantial and universal destruction of true Ministry, is manifest both by
the self same words and others also. For they add withal, that the state of
the church was quite overthrown, ordinary vocation wholly corrupted, that
ordinary vocation was no where, no place left for ordinary vocation, and there
were none, of whom those who freed their Church from Popery, might receive
imposition of hands: that the state of the Church was so interrupted, that God
must raise up Pastors extraordinarily, that the true rank of ordination was so
cut of, as that their needed a new succor and a new foundation; lastly that
the Ecclesiastical order, the vain names thereof only remaining, was
overthrown from the foundation, and lawful order quit abolished: that there
was not left so much as the slenderest shadow of the chiefest parts of
ecclesiastical vocation. In which words either they say that there was never a
Protestant Pastor at all, or that can be said by no words whatsoever. And such
was the state and condition of the Protestant church, not for a small time, but
as themselves say, for some ages. And for this cause usually they call Luther
and his first partners, their Plessie l. 1. de Eccl. c. 11. Napp. in 14. Apocal.
first ministers, first Sadeel de Vocat. page 556.
teachers, first G^alt. Praefat. in ep. ad Rom
restorers of the gospel, first Perk. in ^. Galat. cap. 11.
preachers of the gospel, first restorers of the house of God, Apostles and
Evangelists.

6. Finally I prove that there was no true Protestant preacher before Luther,
out of the real confession of all Protestants. For none of them all can by any
sufficient testimony or argument prove, that there was any such Pastor.
Wherefore this is rashly affirmed and fondly believed. (...) Marc. ^
Either prove (says Tertullian) that which thou belieuest, or if thou prouest
it not, how do thou believe it? And that common argument of theirs,
wherewith they use to prove, that they had a Church and Pastors at all times,
because they bring the Scripture to prove their doctrine to be true; we shall
hereafter show to be a most vain Sophisme. And besides themselves do overthrow
it, in teaching as we have seen, that the Church may be without Pastors;
whereby it would not follow that they had Pastors, albeit they could by the
Scripture prove that before Luther they had a Church. Moreover then those who
endeavor to name some Protestant preachers or Pastors before Luthers time, do
plainly show that there was no true and absolute Protestant Pastor, to wit such
as taught justification by only faith, and the rest of the fundamental
opinions of Protestancy. For the Apology of the Church of England page 103.
says, That they gave not so clear a light, but lightened as it were some
sparck. The Confession of Saxony cap. 12: That they joined stable unto the
foundation. Cruciger and Rorarius in Luther. tom. 1. fol. 202: That they had
some little light. D. Fulke of Success. page 131: That perhaps in all points
they knew not the Apostolical doctrine. And D. Whitaker de Scriptura lib. 2.
cap. 8. sect. vlt: Howsoever they were environed with most gross darkness,
yet they told some sparckes of truth, and showed them to others. And what other
thing I pray you is this, but to confess, that such were but Protestants in
part and in some sort. Yea they name some, whom they confess to have
reprehended only certain abuses amongst the Papists, as Melancthon in his
Answer to the Bauarian articles tom. 3. fol. 369. and Illyricus in his
Catalogue lib. 15. confess of Hilten. It remains yet for the accomplishing
of this demonstration, that we also show by the Confessions of Protestants,
that the true Church of God can never want Pastors, as they have confessed
theirs to have wanted for the space of some ages.

That the true Church cannot be without Pastors. CHAP. VIII.
1. THAT the Church can never be without Pastors, I prove first out of the
Confessions of the Protestant faith. For thus profess they to believe in the
Confession of Saxony cap. 12: The Son of God has given ministers of the
Gospel unto the Church, to the end it do not quite perish. Again: He would
have always a company in mankind, in which the Son himself appointed and
conserved the Ministry of keeping and spredding his doctrine. The Confession
of Suitzers cap. 18: God has always used ministers for to setle and gather
him a Church, and also for to govern and preserve it; and uses the same now,
and further will use them whiles the Church shall be on earth. The French
Confession art. 25: We believe the Church cannot consist if it have not
Pastors, who have the office of teaching. The Confession of the low Countries
art. 30: We believe that the true Church ought to be governed and ruled by
that spiritual policy, which God has taught in his word, so that there be
Pastors and ministers in it. And the Confession of Strasburg: Seeing the church
is the Kingdom of God, it has diverse functions of ministers.

2. Secondly I prove it, because for the church to be without Pastors, is to
want some part of the essence and definition given by the Protestants
themselves. For Luther Proposition 15. to. 1. fol. 385. thus defines a Church:
It is a number of baptized persons and belieuers under one Pastor. And tom. 2.
fol. 366. he says: The public Ministry of the word whereby the Mysteries of
God are dispensed, must be instituted by holy ordination, as the thing which in
the Church is the chiefest and principallest of all. Kemnice in his Common
places title of the Church page 146: The Church consists of Pastors and
learners. Gerlachius in his 22. Disput. page 966: The Church is not a company
meeting by chance or disordered, but called by the voice of the cryers of the
word for to hear the doctrine of the Gospel. Calvin 4. Institut. cap. 2.. 7:
The Ministry is the chiefest sinew and soul of the Church. Beza of the Notes
of the Church page 9: By the name of the Church properly taken, it is certain
that not only Pastors but also stocks are understood. Iunius Cont. 5. lib. 1.
cap. 15: God instituted orders in the Church, for the essential outward
constitution thereof. D. Whitaker Cont. 2. quest. 5. cap. 6. page 508: The
Church cannot subsist without Pastors of whom it is taught. For doctrine does
make and constitute the Church, and is her soul and life. And cap. 18. page
546: The Church is no other number, then that which holds the pure preaching
of the word and right use of the Sacraments. And cap. 17. dag. 541: Sincere
preaching of the word and lawful administration of the Sacraments do make the
church; in so much as whersoeuer they be, there the Church is; and where they
be not, the Church is not. D. Field in his 2. book of the Church cap. 6: The
Ministry of Pastors and teachers is absolutely and essentially necessary to
the being of the Church. And lib. 1. cap. 10: Bellarmine labors in vain in
proving that there is and always has been a visible Church, and that not
consisting of some few scattered Christians without order of Ministry or use of
Sacraments; for all this we do most willingly yield unto. Yea the Philosophers
by the light of reason perceived, that it is impossible they should be a Common
wealth without Magistrates. This same also is manifest by many other
definitions which Protestants have made of the Church, and we have rehearsed
them before, in which they place true preaching and administration as
essential parts of the true Church; which yet cannot be without Pastors.

3. Besides, this were against the definitions of the Church given by the holy
Fathers. For thus writes S. Cyprian epist. 79: The Church is the people united
to the Priest, and the flock cleaving to the Pastor. And this he proves out of
those words of our Savior Math. 16: Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I
build my Church. S. Hierome also in his dialogues against the Luciferians: It
is no Church which has no Priest. S. Ignatius in his epist. ad Trallianos:
Without these (Priests) the elect Church is not, no congregation without
these, no meeting of Saints. And whereas Danaeus lib. 4. de Eccl. cap. 8.
says, that these Fathers define only a visible church, that avails nothing:
because indeed there is no Church on earth which is not visible in profession
of faith. Again, Pastors shall be at least of the essence of the visible
Church, and consequently the Protestant Church, which before Luther wanted
Pastors, was no visible Church. Furthermore, S. Cyprian proves his definition
out of those words of Christ Matt. 16. which (as is certain and Protestants
confess) are spoken of the true Church in the sight of God. And S. Ignatius
says, that there is no elect church, no congregation of Saints, without
Priests: which he must needs mean of the true Church. And Saint Hierome simply
says it is no Church, which has no Priests: which he could no ways say, if
the true Church in the sight of God could be without Priests. And hereby also
is refuted Sadeel in Repetit. Sophism. Turriani page 652. when he says: The
definition of S. Cyprian is not essential, nor properly teaches what the
Church is, but what a one it ought to be. For S. Cyprian infers out of his
definition, that if one be not with the Bishop, he is not in the Church. And
Saint Hierome pronounces one Hilaries sect to have perished with him, because
he left no Pastor behind him. And for this cause the Fathers do still object
unto heretics the want of succession of Pastors, as an evident mark that they
are not the Church; as even Protestants themselves confess. For thus writes
D. Whitaker Cont. 2. quest. 5. cap. 6. page 509: The Fathers rebuked heretics
that they wanted succession of Bishops. Sadeel of Vocation of Ministers page
546: S. Augustine oftentyms opposed this succession against the Manichees and
Donatists. Zanchius of the Church page 138: I admit that succession of true
Bishops is a mark of the Church; and of this speak the Fathers. The like
confess Calvin Respons. ad Versipellem page 358. and 4. Institut. cap. 2.. 3.
Beza epist. 1. Plessy de Eccles. cap. 3. Fulke de Success. page 36. D. Morton
Apol. part. 1. lib. 1. cap. 13. James Andrews cont. Hosium page 89. and others.
Neither is it true which D. Whitaker and Sadeel say, that the Fathers did not
think that they convinced the Heretics not to be the Church, because they
wanted succesion of Pastors. For S. Irenaeus says that hereby he confounds
heretics, and that this is a most full demostration. S. Augustine writes, that
this argument of succession held him in the Church. S. Athanasius calls it a
notable and admirable argument. And Sadeel himself loc. cit. says that with
this battering ram S. Cyprian did especially vanquish the Nouatians. And
Peter Martyr in his Common places tit. de Schismate, writes that S. Augustines
argument taken from the succession of Pastors was very evident against the
Donatists.

Protestants confess necessity of Pastors
4. Thirdly I prove that the Church cannot be without Pastors, because eftsoons
the Protestants confess it. Luther upon 10. chap. of Genesis tom. 6. fol. 125:
The Church cannot consist without continual use of the word. And of the Notes
of the Church tom. 7. fol. 151: The Church cannot be without Pastors.
Melancthon upon the. 3. cap. of Math. tom. 1. fol. 258: God will always have
some public Ministry. He will not suffer the public ministry to be
destroyed. And in cap. 16. page 489: There is no Church where there is no true
Ministry. And ibideth in his sermon upon the rock page 176: The Church is
built upon the Ministry. And tom. 1. in loc. cap. de Eccles. fol. 227: We
must not seigne a Church without the Ministry. And cap. de numero
Sacramentorum. fol. 334: The Ministry cannat be quite destroyed. And in his
dispute of Ecclesiast. policy tom. 1. Lutheri fol. 442: The Church cannot
exist. this ministry being extinguished. Kemnice in his Common places tit. of
the Church cap. 4: There are promises extant of the perpetual conservation of
the Ministry in the Church. Gerlachius Disput. 22. page 940: The public
Ministry is always conserved. James Andrews against Hosius page 330: No man
denies that the Church cannot be without Bishops Oecolampadius upon the 62.
cap. of Isaias page 30^: God raises up at all times Apostles and preachers.
Bolanus in his Syn^agme lib. 7. cap. 11: The function of ordinary Ministers
after the Ecclesiastical order is one settled, is perpetual, and to endure to
the end of the world: Calvin 4. Institut. cap. 2.. 4: For neither the light and
heat of the Sun, nor meat and drinck are so necessary to cherish and sustain
the present life, as the Pastoral function is for to conserve the church on
earth. And. 3: God has settled forever the way of governing and holding his
Church by Ministers. And. 4: The church can never want Pastors and teachers.
Beza de Notis Eccles. page 60: The church can never want either the seed of the
word, or sowing, or sowers. Vorstius in Antibellarm. page 197: The Ghospellers
acknowledge the 3. other orders to be perpetual in the Church, to wit,
Pastors, Priests, and Deacons. D. Whitaker cont. 2. quest. 3, cap. 2. page 469:
I answer that there were always Pastors and sheep, and that there shall be
ever Pastors to the end of the world. And quest. 5. cap. 6. page 508: I
confess the succession of Pastors to be necessary. Again: I answer that the
Church cannot stand without Pastors. D. Fulke de Succes. page 22; I grant that
the succession of Pastors is necessary in the church. And page 95: The true
doctrine of Christ and the Apostles never wanted cryers. D. White in defense of
his way cap. 35. page 381: The Church shall never want Pastors. And his Majesty
in his Monitory epistle page 61: Neither can hell stand without some order and
distinction. The Devils are divided into Legions and have their Princes, how
then can any compa^^on earth stand which is confused and disordered without all
difference of orders or dignity. You see how confused a thing Protestants
account the Church to be without Pastors, and that they speak far otherwise of
the Church, when they consider the true nature thereof, then when they look
upon the condition of their own Church in former times before Luther. Neither
do they only sometimes confess that the Church cannot be without Pastors, but
also acknowledge that Scripture ^o^h teach so. For thu^ Melancthon in his
foresaid dispute fol. 483: Scripture requires. Pastors.
Where the Church is, there must needs be lawful ordination of Ministers;
which ordination is one of the proper gifts of the Church, according to that
of the 4. chap. to the Ephesians: He has given Pastors etc. Kemnice in the 2.
part of his examen tit. de Sacramento ordinis page 192: The Son of God
himself will conserve in the Church with perpetual calling the Ministry of
those who teach the Gospel. So says Paul Ephesians. 4. Calvin. 4 Institut. cap.
3.. 2: In these words (Ephesians. 4) he shows the Ministry to be the chief
sinew, wherewith the faithful hung together in one body, and insinuates also
that the Church cannot otherwise be safe, unless it be propped with these
helps, in which God would place her safety. The like he has in cap. 4. Ephesians.
and 1. Cor. cap. 6. and 12. and 1. Tim. cap. 3. D Whitaker Cont. 2. quest. 5.
cap. 19. page 549: This place of Esaias cap. 59: My spirit etc. shows that the
true preaching of the word shall be perpetual in the Church. D. Whitgift in
his Answer to the Admonition page 17: The place of Matthew 9. shows that
Ministers are necessary in the Church. D. Fulk ad Cauillat. Stapl: You do that
which is done already, whiles you prove out of the Apostles writings that the
continuance of the Pastors and Doctors is of no less certainty, then the
continuance of faith and doctrine. And de Succes. page 180: The Scriptures
promise perpetual succession of Pastors and Doctors.

Preaching necessary to faith,
5. Fourthly I prove this same because Protestants sometimes do teach, that
preaching (which cannot be done without Pastors) is necessary to ingraft faith
in men. For, as before we rehearsed, they condemn the Anabaptists and
Suenckfeldians in that they teach, that men can come to faith without
preaching. And Luther tom. 1. fol. 54. writes that the administration of the
word by a Priest is needful for faith. And Cont. Caterin tom. 2. fol. 140.
says, that by the vocal word the Church is conceived, formed, nourished,
begotten, and conserved. And de instituendis Ministris fol. 372: Seeing the
church is brought forth, nourished, and conserved by the word of God, it is
manifest that she cannot be without the word; or if it be without the word,
that it leaves to be a Church. In cap. 17. Ioannis tom. 5. fol. 203: For God
has not determined to conserve them (the faithful) without outward means,
albeit he could do it. Also upon the 1. chap. of Zacharias: Although God can
teach men the Gospel without sermons, yet he will not do it. And of the Notes
of the church tom. 7. fol. 149: What could or would the people of God believe,
unless the word of God sounded there. Melancthon in locis tom. 3. cap. de
libero arb. fol. 311: God gathers a true Church by the voice of the Gospel
and not otherwise. Kemnice in the 2. part of his examen tit. de Sacramento
ordinis page 391: God by his certain counsel has determined, that he will
dispense those things, which belong to the matter of our salvation, not
immediately by infusing new and peculiar reuel^tions into the minds of men
without any means, but by the outward Ministry of the word. Calvin. 4
Institut. cap. 1.. 5: Howbeit Gods power be not tied to outward means,
nevertheless be has tied us to the ordinary means of Preaching. Many are pusht
on by pride, disdain and emulation to persuade themselves that they can profit
enough by private reading and meditating. And. 4: The knowledge of her (the
visible Church) is profitable to us; yea necessary, for we cannot come to life
unless she conceive us in her womb, bear us, nourish us with her duggs. And
in 1. Tim. cap. 3: The office of preaching which God has left in his church,
is the only instrument of truth, that it go not out of men's minds. The
Ministry of the word being taken away God truth will fall down. Beza epist.
20: It is clear that faith comes of hearing, and therefore preaching must go
before faith. Taye in his Enchiridion disput. 60: The necessity of
ecclesiastical Ministry appears in that without it we can not know the word
of God, nor his will therein revealed unto us. D. Whitaker lib. 1. de Scriptura
cap. 9 sect. 9. page 106: The ministry being taken away, neither faith, nor
Charity, nor obedience, nor any virtue will remain safe. And cap. 2. sect. 6.
page 37: We cannot at all believe without the Ministry of the church. And lib.
3. cap. 15 sect. 20. page 478: I affirm, determine, and hold, that there is no
entrance to salvation without the Ministry of the word. Again: by the Ministry
of Pastors we believe the Scripture, neither is it to be hoped that without
this Ministry says can grow in our minds. And cap. 5. sect. 2: I confess the
Ministry of the Church to be most necessary. And Cont. 2. quest. 5. cap. 19.
page 550: We never come to faith without preaching of the word. D. Fu^ke de
Succes page 30: The peoples salvation cannot be procured without preaching. And
page 162: No Christian will deny preaching of the word to be necessary for the
edification of the church. M. Latimer in his sermons fol. 38: Take away
preaching and take away salvation. Fol. 99: The office of preaching is the only
ordinary mean, whereby God has determined to save us. M. Cartwright in M.
Hooker lib. 5. of Ecclesiastical policy p. 41: Reading may set forward, but
not begin the work of salvation, says may be nourished therewith, but not
bred; herein men's attention to the Scriptures and their speculation of the
creatures of God have like efficacy, both being of power to augment, but
neither to effect belief without sermons. And the Puritans in D. Whitgifts
Answer to the Admonitions: Reading is no feeding. How then could there be any
Protestant Church or faith at all before Luther, when (as we heard before)
there was then no Protestant preacher? Scripture requires preaching
And in like sort sometimes they confess, that the Scripture it self
teaches, that preaching is necessary to have faith. The Confession of Auspurg.
cap. de potest. Eccles. page 59: Everlasting justice, the holy Ghost, eternal
life, cannot be had but by the ministry of the word and Sacraments, as Paul
says. The Confession of Bohemia art. 10: They grant that none can attain to
right says, unless he hear the word of God, according to that of S. Paul;
Faith is of hearing. And again: How shall they believe in him of whom they
have not heard. And the Protestants in their conference at Marspurg agreed, as
reports Hospinian part. 2. Histor. fol 77: That the holy Ghost, if we speak
of the ordinary course, gives faith to none, unless preaching or the vocal
word go before; but by and with the vocal word he works and makes faith,
where and in whom it pleases him, Rom 10. Calvin also 4. Institut. cap. 1..
5: God inspireth faith into us by the instrument of his Gospel, as Paul
admonishes, that says is of hearing. Again: We must hold that which I have
set down out of Paul, that the Church is not otherwise edified but by outward
preaching and in 1. Tim. cap. 3: Paul means simply that which in other words
he delivers Romans 10. because faith is of hearing, that there will be no says
unless there be preaching. The like he has 1. Cor. 3. v. 6. Heb. 4. v. 12.
and Ephesians. 4. v. 12. Beza in the Conference at Montbelgard page 407: The
ordinary manner whereby faith is infused, is by hearing the word, Romans 10. And
Bucer in cap. 10. Rom: The Apostle knew that God could call men without the
ministry of men, nevertheless he absolutely wrote: How shall they believe in him
of whom they have not heard. Hyperius also upon the same place: That is, that
all believe and call upon God, it is needful that before they hear the
Gospel and be taught. D. Whitaker lib. 1. de Scrip. cap. 2. sect. 4: That of
the Apostle, how shall they believe without a preacher, conuinceth this much,
that preaching is necessary to conceive assured of faith God. And c. 10. sect.
4: The Apostle does plainly say, that faith is of hearing. And Cont. 2. quest.
5. c. 19. page 549: This place (of Isay 59.) shows that true preaching of the
word shallbe perpetual in the Church. M. Perkins in his exposition of the
Creed col. 787: I answer that place Romans 10. Faith is of hearing, to be
understood of justifying faith. So that neither the visible nor invisible
Church could ever have been without preaching.

6. Out of all that has been said in this and the former chapter I thus make my
fourth demonstration, for to prove that Luther was Author of the Protestant
Church. If before Luther the Protestant Church had no Pastors, she was not then
at all: But then she had no Pastors at all: Therefore then she was not at all:
And by him she came to have both Protestant Pastors and sheep: Therefore by him
she had her beginning. The Mayor is evident by those Confessions of Protestants
which we have rehearsed in this chapter; and the Minor by those that were
repeated in the former.

That the Protestants Church and Religion before Luther was no where. CHAP. IX.
1. THE first demonstration, for to prove that Luther was Author of the
Protestant church and Religion, Protestants name not the place.
shall be taken from want of place; to wit, that it was no where before Luther
began. And this I prove, first, because they oftentimes say, that before
Luthers time their Church was in the desert, in darkness, in lurking holes, in
Trephonius den; nevertheless they tell not where this desert, this darkness,
this lurking hole, this den was. Secondly, some of them confess, that they
know not where their Church was in time part. D. Whitaker Cont. ^^ quest. 3.
cap. 3. page 475: Know not the place.
They are angry with us that we cannot show, and as it were point with our
finger where our Church was in times past. The same insinuates Sadeel ad
Repetit. Sophism. Turriani page 766. saying, that he answered this question,
Where there Church lurked, when he said, That it lay hid by the unsearchable
judgment of God; as if he said: It lay so close hid, that it cannot be known
where it lay. Also D. Hall in his Rome Irreconcilable sect. 1. when he calls
this our demand, Where their Church lurked, an idle demand of Pettifoggers.
But that it is no idle demand, is manifest. For first, what man in his wits
sees not, that she, who is pretended to be the Catholic Church, that is,
spread over the world, was not at all, if no place can be found where she was
for many ages. Again, because the holy Fathers and Protestants themselves
demand this of heretics. Who are ye (says Tertullian) when, Praes. 32.37.
and whence come ye? where lurked ye so long? Again: Let them bring forth the
o^spring of their Churches. S. Athanasius: Whence came these things? yea what
hell has vomited them out? Lib. de Nicen Synod. and de Syn. Selenuc. Lib 3 de
Bapt. c. 2.
And S. Augustine: Where appeared Donatus? Out of what ground sprung he? Out
of what sea arose he? from what heaven fell he? And Beza epist. 18. demands
the like of the Arians saying: If their opinion be true, we bid them show then
where was their Church. Besides, the Confession of Saxony chap. of the Church,
professes, that the true Church knows where the is. And Kemnice in his
Common places tit, de Eccles. cap. 3: God will have us to know which, and where
is the true Church. Wherefore it is no idle but a most necessary thing, to know
where the Church is: and if Protestants immediately before Luther arose, knew
not where the Church was; it must needs follow that she was not the true Church.

Catholics always asked where was the Protestant Church.
2. Thirdly I prove it, because even those who take upon them to tell where
their Church was in former times, do show indeed, that they know no place where
she was. For as M. Jewel says art. 1. diuis. 7. page 10: Eckius, Pighius,
Hosius and others have often cried out a main in their books and pulpits,
where was your religion before Luther first began to preach? And that the same
has been demanded by Catholics, confesses Peter Martyr in locis tit. de
discessu ab Eccl. Romans col. 1492. Beza de Notis Eccles. page 78. and in his
132. question. D. Whitaker Cont. 2. quest. 3. cap. 3. M. Perkins in his
Reformed Catholic tract. 22. cap. 1. and others. And it is manifest by the
writings and speeches of all Catholics. Yea Luther in cap. 19. Isaiae tom. 4.
fol. 125. writes, that this was our first argument against them, and will be
our last: Art thou alone wise, or do thou think that all our ancestors
saw nothing? Did all those, who were before thee, err? Because he saw, that
this argument did most press him, and that he could never answer it. Let us
see therefore, what they answer to this our first and last demand so often
and with such earnestness and so great cries proposed of us. D. Whitaker cont.
2. quest. 3. cap. 2. proposes their answer in these words: Protestants
answer.
Stapleton says that Calvin and we say, that the true Church was in Popery,
but that Popery was not the church: That indeed we all say. And the same in
substance answers Luther lib. de seru. arbit. tom. 2. fo. 438. in psalmos
graduales to. 3. fol. 589. And de Missa priuata tom. 7. fol. 236. James
Andrews cont. Hosium page 326. Herbrand in Compend. Theol. loc. de Eccl. page
502. Hunnius Praefat. tract. de Iustific. Huberus in Antibellarm. lib. 4. cap.
2. Hutter in A^alysi Confess. August. p. 447. Gerlachius disput. 22. p. 952.
Lobechius disp. 10. page 202. Gesnerus loc. 24. Reineccius lib. 4. armaturae
cap. 3. And amongst the Sacramentaries Calvin 4. Instit. cap. 2.. 11. Peter
Martyr, Beza, and M. Perkins locis cit. Sadeel in Refut. These. Posnan. cap. 8.
Polanus part. 3. These. de Eccl. Daneus de Antichristo cap. vlt. Iunius lib. 4.
de Eccl. cap. 166. Vorstius in Catechism. quest. 54. art. 2. Sohnius in method.
Theol. page 213. Bucanus loc. 4. de Eccl. and others commonly.

3. But this answer satisfies not our question, for many causes. First,
because to say that the Church was in Popery, but Popery was not the Church,
does not seem an answer, but a ridle, and perhaps put of purpose, because as
Bucer said: Lib. 1. epist. Zanchii.
Protestants mysteries must not be expounded to Papists. Secondly they agree
not among themselves what they mean by Popery. For Boysseul in his Co^futation
of Sponde page 723. will have it to be Popish doctrine, saying: He knows not
what we call Popery. He imagines, that it is men. But we say, that it is
heresies and errors, the abuses and idolatries of the Roman Church. And D.
White in defense of his way cap. 32. page 305: The Papacy is nothing else but a
disease or excrement breeding in the Church. Moulins of Arnolds flights cap. 6:
Popery is a mass of errors, and corruption of Christianity. And Calvin in 1.
Galat. v. 9: Popery is a horrible overthrow of the Gospel. Others by Popery
understand the company of Papists. Schusselburg tom. 8. Catal. heret. page 480.
writes that Popery signifies a company. And James Andrews Cont. Hosium page
326. says: Popery, that is, the Pope, Bishops, and they who consent to their
impiety. Thirdly Popery whereby you understand such a company, or such
doctrine, is no place; and we ask for the place wherein Protestants were before
Luthers time. Fourthly, because we ask not where only they say their church
was, (for what can they not say?) but where they prove their Church to have
been. Lib. 1. co^t. Gaud. c. 33.
Wherefore that I may imitate S. Augustins words, I demand whither God told
them that their Church was in times past in Popery, or man? If God, let them
read it out of the Scripture. If man, let them bring him forth that we may
judge, whither he be worthy to be believed or no. If neither God nor man told
them this, then it is, 2. Pet. 1.
(as the Scripture speaks) an unlearned fable, which cannot be proved by any
divine or humane testimony, a fiction, a dream, which they would be ashamed to
utter, if they were not compelled by necessity to say somewhat. But (as S.
Hilary says) he is not ashamed of folly, who has lost religion. Fifthly I
prove this, Lib. 7. de Trinit.
because Protestants even by their manner of speech do be wray, that they are
not certain that their Church was in Popery. For D. White in his Way cap. 33.
page 338. says: It is more then probable. Osiander in his Manuel englished
page 65. says: It is Credible. Gerlachius tom. 2. disput. 22. says: How many
shall we think there were. Others confess, that they know not those
Protestants whom they say to have been in Popery Luther in psalm. 45. tom. 3.
fol. 447: Under Popery there were always and yet are some belieuers, whom we
know not. Know not.
D. Whitaker Cont. 2. quest. 3. cap. 3. page 476: We say there were in times
past many thousands of men in Popery, who professed our faith and adored not
the beast; whom albeit we cannot name, Can not name.
yet God knew. Besides, some of them say, that there was no face or show of
their Church in Popery. D. Whitaker loc. cit. p. 477: We say, that there were
so few good in Popery, as they appeared not. Appeared not.
And Cont. 4. quest. 5. cap. 3. page 682: We surely say, that in times past
the Church lay hid in Popery. And Luther upon the 90. psalm. fol. 495: The
Church was in Popery, but truly so hidden, as to him, that would judge of the
outward appearance, it might seem to be no where. Calvin also 4. Institut.
cap. 2.. 12. speaks in this sort of his Protestants, who^e ^he imagined in
Popery: In whom all things are so out of order, as there may rather seem the
face of Babylon then of the city of God. By what appearance then judge they,
when then say that their Church was in Popery.

4. Sixthly, What kind of Persons they challenge.
I prove that the Protestant church was not in Popery; by the Persons whom they
challenge. Luther cont. Caterin. tom. 2. fol. 140. writes thus: Where ye see
no gospel, as we see none in the Synagogue of the Papists, there doubtless is
no Church; unless you except infants and simple folk. And fol. 155: whom in
all the world has not the Pope subdued, Infants and silly ones.
except perhaps infants and silly persons, saved by an unknown Counsel. M.
Bale Cont. 1. cap. 74. writes, that their Church since Phocas the Emperors
time, Was in lurking holes and amongst idiots. Gerlachius disput. 22. Idiots.
says that Infants were no small part of their Church Osiander loc. cit. page
65. that they were a great part. And as Lobechius adds disput. 10. page 202:
The noblest part. A worthy Church undoubtedly, which for many ages consisted of
infants, idiots, and such silly persons. And they more silly who give credit to
so silly an affirmation of Protestants without all proof; and they most silly
of all who relinquishing the Catholic Church, adioyne themselves to such a
childish and silly Church, so sillily affirmed and without proof. Seauenthly
Protestants themselves do plainly profess that the entire substance and
essence of their Church was not in Popery, but only some part thereof. And we,
(as has been often said) speak not of a Church in part, or in some sort, but
of a Church which has all the essential and substantial parts, The whole
essence of a protestant Church not in Popery.
and may be simply and absolutely termed a Church. Calvin 4. Institut. cap. 2.
after he had said. 1. that it is certain there is no Church where lies and
falsity have gotten the upper hand; he straight says. 2: Seeing matters go so
under Popery, We may gather how much of the Church remains there. And
adds, that under Popery. That doctrine without which Christianity stands
not, is all buried and thrust out. And Respons. ad Sadolet. page 128. writes:
That in Popery there appears scarce any scattered and torn remnants of the
church. Scarce any remnants. Only rubbish.
Peter Martyr in locis tit. de discessu a Romans Eccl. col. 1493: Now there are
left among Papists only some rubbish and parcels of old walls, together etc.
Sonis Resp. ad Spondeum cap. 2. page 32: Antichrist has left nothing in all
the building, but some old walls. But old walls.
Sadeel Praefat. lib. de Verbo scripto: The Roman Church is so depraved and
corrupted, that whiles we seek the Church, in the church; we are forced to
behold only ashes of the Church. Only ashes.
The Apology of the Church of England part. 4. cap. 9. diuis. 3: These men now
have left nothing remaining in the Church of God that had any likeness of his
Church. Naught but ruins.
And part. 6. cap. 17. diuis. 1: When we saw that nothing remained in the
temple of God but pitiful spoils and decays, we etc. Finally Luther in
Psalm. 22. tom. 3. fol. 132. No trace.
says, that in Popery there was no trace of the Church. And in psalm. 17. fol.
285: They have brought matters to such pass, Name only.
that where the Church of God was heretofore, there is naught but heathenish
superstition and the name only of the church remaining; the substance is quite
lost. The same also mean those, who say that in Popery were some small
footsteps, some relics, and parcels of the church, albeit they had not this
exclusive term, Only. But if in Popery the doctrine without which Christianity
cannot stand were wholly buried and shut out; If therein scarce appeared torn
parcels of the Church, only ashes thereof were seen; if nothing remained but
old walls, rubbish and ruins; nothing entire and like to a Church; and the name
only remaining, the substance were quit lost, doubtless there was no absolute
and true Protestant Church in Popery, but only in part and in some sort. Which
Daneus plainly intimates when he says Cont. 4. lib. 3. cap. 13. page 387:
Some footsteps of the Church remain yet in that (Popish) company, as if the
ruins of a house cast down and the bare walls were called a house
equiuocally. Or as Calvin speaks Respons. ad Versipellem page 357: In some
part the Protestant Church was heretofore in Popery.

5. That I may therefore gather together all that Protestants say of their
Church in Popery before Luthers time; Concerning the persons whereof it
consisted, they were infants, idiots, silly ones, and perhaps not they neither;
Concerning the substance, it was only ruins, rubbish, old walls, ashes, and
name only of the Church. Concerning the number, it was Luther in psalm. gr^^t.
f. 368 de Missa loc. 7. fol. 236. Gerla. disput. 22. Acontius l. 1. Strat. p.
25. Sade^l ad Sophis. page 596. ad These. Posnon. 18.
Very small, slender relics, few remnants, and scarce a few relics, so
small relics, one or two persons. Touching the place wherein she was, that
was lurking holes, or rather none at all. For so says D. Whitaker Cont. 2.
quest. 3. cap. 2. page 468: The holy and pious men were together with their
Pastors dispersed into this or that place without any certain abode or
Succession. And quest. 5. cap. 4. page 503: Our men were in times past
scattered here and there. Touching the state of their Church, that was ^up. c.
2.
quite fallen down. Mouching the face or show thereof, that was rather of
Babylon then of the Church. As for the Condition, it was afflicted of
Antichrist, with sauadge domination, was miserably brought to naught, and all
her affairs most desperate. For profession of faith, she made none at all. For
external rites and worship, she was compelled to keep very Babylonicall,
heathenish, idolatricall, and Antichristian rites. For piety, that was all
driven out. Touching faith, that was quite extinct. As for her Conservation,
that was by marvelous and miraculous means, and by mere miracle. And lastly
for the testimonies whereby either her being, are any of these points are
proved, they are pure Pythagoricall, that is, their own words, which is (as
themselves say) arguments of fools, or rather lies, for who so speaks of
himself speaks lies.

6. My eighth reason is, because Protestants should have said that their Church
had been in any company rather then in Popery. For Luther lib. co^t. Regem
Angliae tom. 2. fol. 334. writes, that Popery is the most ^^stilent
abomination of Satan, which has been, or hereafter shallbe under heaven. And in
cap. 25. Genes. tom. 6. fol. 342: Popery is a Congregation of devils and of
most wicked men. And lib. cont. Papatum. tom 7. fol. 479. says: It is the last
mischeife of the world, and to which all the Devils with all their cunning and
power cannot bring a greater. Calvin ad Vs^ sipel. page 360. Whitaker. cont. 2.
q 6 c. 1. Ochin. di^l. 25. Horn of the su^r. p. 101.
Others say that Popery is the body of Satan and Antichrist, the dungeon of
errors and heresies, that it is worse the^ any sect of heretics, yea then
Paganism, or Turcisme; And almost all of them cry that it is the Synagogue of
Satan and Antichrist. Moreover Luther in Actis exustionis decretalium tom. 2.
fol. 123. pronounces, that it were safer living in the wilderness, to see no
man, then to converse in the Popish Kingdom. And in cap. 2. Galat. tom. 5.
fol. 327: Whosoever is earnestly affected toward Godliness, let him tremble at
the name of Popery. And Protestants commonly gather out of that saying of the
Apocalips: Go out my people, that it is the commandment of God, that all
pious men should go out of Popery. If then Popery be the Synagogue of Satan
and Antichrist, and worse then any heretical, Turkish, or heathenish company;
or any other, whom all the devils which all their cunning could raise; If all
pious men ought to tremble at the hearing of the name thereof, and rather live
in a desert then therein; If finally it be the Commandment of God, that all
godly men should go forth of Popery, how came it to pass, that in former
times the godly (forsooth) Protestants lived in Popery, and in Popery alone,
and that for so many ages? Would godly men abid in that company, and only in
that company, and so long time, which was the worst that could be, before which
they should have preferred the wilderness, have shaken at the name thereof, and
were commanded to come out from thence by Gods express commandment? Surely
the Protestants must not only have been children and simple, but also impious
and ungodly. What I could not, or would not the spouse of Christ lurk for so
many ages, but in the stews of the devil? Could Christ be no where, but with
Antichrist? Would only Antichrist for so many ages affoard Christ and his
church a harbor or lurking place? l. 1. de mor. Manich. c. 16.
O straightes (says S. Austine) O incredible absurdities! For what greater
straights, what more incredible absurdity can there be, the^ to thrust Christ
and his Church into the devils stews, and that for many ages together? 4.
Instit. c. 16.. ^^.
But as Calvin himself says: There is no marvel if these reprobate spirits,
as if they were frantique, do thrust in most gross absurdities for to defend
their errors, for God justly punishes their pride and obstinacy which such
giddiness.

7. Ninthly, I argue, and ask what is the meaning of the foresaid ridle: The
Church was in Popery but Popery was not the Church. First, I suppose that by
Popery here, they mean not (as did Boysseul) popish doctrine; as if the sense
were, that the Protestant Church consisted of Popish doctrine, as we say that
the Popish Church consists (to wit formally) of Popish doctrine; the Jewish
Church of Iudaisme, and the Turkish of Turcisme; because this sense were too
far from the question, which demands the place, and not the form, or
doctrine of the Protestant church in former tyms. Besides, it were too too
absurd to say that the Protestant Church consists in the contrary doctrine,
which he condemns. Supposing therefore, that hereby Popery they understand the
company of Papists, their meaning cannot be, that their Church was in the
company of Papists, as in a multitude of men amongst whom they lived only, but
did no way participate of their doctrine or worship; both because in this
manner, it had been known to Papists, which notwithstanding they deny, as
before we showed, and anon shall be proved to be false; as also because in this
sort their Church may be said to be in Iudaisme, Turcisme, and the like, if
they live among Jews or Turcks; which is so absurd as Protestants deny their
meaning to be such. For thus Beza epist. 10. quest. 4: The Church was in
Popery, which can no way be said of the Turks. And M. Perkins lib. cit. after
he said that the Church was long time in Popery, adds, Which cannot be
likewise said of Turks and other Infidels, that the Church was conserved, or
that yet any hidden Church is conserved among them. Neither can their meaning
be, that the Protestant church was in times past in Popery, as a part in the
whole, to wit, because it consisted of some that believed both Protestancy and
Popery, or if they did not believe Popery, yet they professed it; because after
this manner Popery should no less have been the Church, the Church should have
been in Popery. For as the church should have been in Popery, because it
consisted of such a part of Popery; so Popery should have been the church because
such a part of Popery had been the Church. Besides, it implies contradiction,
that one should believe both Popery and Protestancy, which as Protestants say,
are right opposite in many fundamental points. If any reply, that those Papists
in whom the Protestant Church of old time did consist, did not believe all
fundamental points of Popery, nor were absolutely Papists, but only in part
and in some sort: first he mocketh the Reader in saying absolutely, that the
Protestant church was in Popery, because Popery absolutely taken, does signify
absolute Papists or Papistry. Besides he feigneth and deuiseth those Papists in
part and in some sort, and cannot prove by any sufficient testimony that there
were any such; Whereas according to S. Augustine, He must prove, not speak at
random. Nor can he say, 2. Cont. Petil. c. 18.
that the Protestant Church consisted of such, who though they believed little
or no Papistry at all, yet outwardly professed it. For if outwardly they
professed only Papistry, how know you that inwardly they believed Protestancy?
Will you, as S. Augustine said to the Donatists, Lib. 2. de Baptis. c. ^
judge of men's hearts and not of their open deeds? Besides such Papists are
feigned and not at all proved. And if there had been any such, they should have
been termed Denyers not Protesters. Lastly such men cold not have been the
visible Church of Protestants, because they denied their faith and professed
Antichristianity; and consequently were no holy men, of whom only their
invisible Church consists.

8. Tenthly I argue by enquiring the manner, how the Protestant church in
former tyms was in Popery; to wit, whether it professed the substance of the
Protestant faith, or no: and whether it communicated with Papists in their
Popish worship or not? Protestants, like men uncertain answer diversely to
this question. D. Whitaker Cont. 2. quest. 3. cap. 3. page 474. says: Our
Churches were always in the midst of Papists churches, distinct from Papists
in Communion and Profession. But this is soon refuted. First, because it
cannot be proved. Cont. Parmen. ca. 38.
And to cast out words and prove naught, what is it (as S. Augustine says) but
to dote? Besides if the Protestant Church had professed Protestancy, she had
been known to Papists; and the same had also been if she had not communicated
with them. For as D. Andrews writes of the Catholics in England: They come
not to service, they hear not sermons, they refuse to take the Communion,
without this or any other oath one may know them to be Papists. But she was not
known to Papists, because not only all Papists, but also Protestants deny
that. Besides otherwise Catholics would not have so earnestly enquired of
Protestants, where their Church had been heretofore. Moreover Catholics had
persecuted them as they persecuted Luther, so soon as he was known for a
Protestant. Lastly, because Protestants cannot name any Papists, who knew of
their Church before Luthers time. Others therefore say, that those imaginary
Protestants professed their faith, if not at other times, yet at least at the
point of death. D. Whitaker loc. cit. page 473: Many at the point of death, if
not before, prosessed their faith. The same says Luther of private Mass tom.
7. fol. 237. and Lobechi is Disput. 10. To which D. White in defense of his way
cap. 4. page 424. adds, that they renounceth Papistry also in the agony of
their conscience. And Hunnius before cited, not knowing what certainly to
determine, says: that they did either openly gird at Papistry, or secretly
with themselves detest it, or at least in the last examen of tentations (the
stuble of error being fired) did hold the foundation of salvation. But to
speak with S. Augustine: Who says this, but he that says what he will, lib.
5. cont. Iul. c. 4.
and will not hear what is true? They say that in the Scripture alone that
saying of Pythagoras Scholars (he said it) takes place. Bulling. in Compend.
fidei ^. 1. c. 3.
But if they used not this Pythagoricall privilege, they would be more dumb
then fishes. What man or devil told them this profession of their men at the
hour of death? How learnt they that, which at that time no man could fish out?
Again, if only at the hour of death they professed Protestancy, they were
Protestants no longer then they lay a dying; and consequently the Protestant
church endured no longer then some of her children were dying. A strange Church
certes, that lived no longer then her children dyed; nor at any time drew
breath, but whiles they gave up the ghost. Wherefore they find out other
devises to say, that those feigned Protestants communicated with Papists and
professed their faith in things lawful, as in Baptism, reading of the
Scriptur, and such like; but not in things unlawful. Thus Reineccius in the 4.
tome of his armor cap. 4. Thou see reader, that as these Protestants had
their being only by these men's imaginations, so they did, or did not, what, or
in what manner they will have them. O great fabulosity, (that I may cry out
which S. Epiphanius) of them, who utter these things? so manifest it is, that
this is a shop rather of iuglers, then of those who have the shape of the
promise of life and of understanding. For who besides his own imagination,
told Reineccius, that those Protestants divided thus their Communion with
Papists? who besides himself heard ever of such a halfe-communion?

9. Wherefore others of them do absolutely say, that their imaginary Protestant
Church in Popery communicated with Papists, How impious their church in Popery
was.
and professed their faith. For thus writes Luther in psalm. Grad. tom. 3.
fol. 568: The Church under Antichrist had no true Ministry or worship, but was
forced to keep the very Babylonicall and heathenish rites of Papists. The same
he intimates tom. 7. lib. de Missa priuata fol. 236. and 237. and lib cont.
Papatum fol. 456. Osiander also in the epist. dedicatory of his 8. Century
says of those Protestants, that although from their heart they disallowed the
Popish errors, yet they durst not profess their own opinions; but neglected
not the external rites, and were carried away with the common custom as it
were with a torrent, for to do those things which others did; whose weakness
(says he) God did bear withal and pardon. And the same pardon Luther de
Missa priuata fol. 237. bestows upon them saying: No sin could hurt them;
but God must pardon the miserable, afflicted, oppressed and captive Church.
Thus these men have Gods pardon in their hands, that when they please, God must
pardon those, who all their life time denied their faith and served Antichrist
and idolatry. Iunius also lib. 4. de Eccl. cap. 5. says, that the Church in
former tyms was all one with the Roman. Again: She communicated with the Roman
Church in worship of God every where, so long as she was suffered to
communicate in pure worship, in right faith, and good conscience. Forsooth the
Synagogue of Antichrist, (as they account the Roman church) uses pure worship,
or the Church of Christ communicates with her in right faith, and good
conscience. And D. Whitaker Cont. 4. quest. 5. cap. 3. page 682. writes, that
those feigned Protestants, Perhaps used Popish ceremonies for customs sake.
And page 689: Antichrist deceived the elect and seduced them. The very elect
erred. And Cont. 2. quest. 3. cap. 3. page 474: In Popery there were many
(Protestants) who communicated with Papists. Gerlachius tom. 2. disp. 22: They
were driven into the common opinions with an universal and fatal ouerflow of
superstitions. And Casaubon epist. ad Peron page 10. writes, that the godly
communicated with Babylon. D. Field lib. 3. de Eccles. cap. 13: The authors of
those (Popish) errors, and those that were free from them were of the same
Communion. D. White in his way page 171: The children of God abode in the
communion of the Roman Church. And in the defense cap. 44. page 394: We do not
hold a definite number of persons, distinct from the members of the Church of
Rome, and living apart in another society by themselves in secret, as it were
the 7. sleepers lying hid in a mountain: but we affirm this company lived in
the midst of the Church of Rome it self, and were the visible Prosessors
thereof. This also is that, which Calvin would, when 4. Institut. cap. 2.. 12.
he says, that his Churches in Popery were profaned with sacrilegious impiety,
corrupted and almost killed with pernicious doctrines; in which lay half
buried, the gospel overwhelmed, godliness banished, and all things so out of
order, as there seemed rather the face of Babylon then of the city of God. And
upon the 23. of the Acts: We complain that the Church was corrupted of them
(Papists) the temple of God profaned, Li. 2. cont. Cresc. c. 17.
that it differed little from a swinescot. See. says S. Augustine, to what a
precipic^, the difficulty to find where to get out has brought these men. They
said their Church was in Popery, and afterward found not how to creep out, but
by this most steep and craggy precipice. For what steeper precipice, what
greater absurdity can there be, then to say that the church of God (which the
Protestants will have theirs to be) for many ages denied her faith, professed
infidelity, forsook Christ, worshipped Antichrist, or to use their own words,
Did use very Babylonicall and Antichristian rites, was corrupted with
pernicious doctrine, profaned with sacrilegious impiety, Epist. 40. Epist. 27.
and out of which godliness was banished? God forbid (says S. Cyprian) that a
company of fallen persons should be called the Church. Again: God forbid, and
his mercy and invincible power never permit, Epist. 1.
that a company of fallen persons be called the Church. And Beza himself: The
Church is a community of Saints, not a company of excommunicated or
sacrilegious persons. And shall we think, that before Luther arose the Church
of God for many ages was nothing else but a company of fallen, sacrilegious,
hypocrites, denyers of Christ, and worshippers of Antichrist? Is such a company
the holy Church? Is the Communion of such, the Communion of Saints which we
believe in our Creed? Is such a society the spouse and mystical body of
Christ, the wife of the lamb, the Kingdom of God? Surely a fit Church for
protestants, and a fit company, to which the forsakers of the Catholic Church
may adioyne themselves, and most worthy to be eschewed and detested of all that
love Christ's or their own honor. For who is he, either pious or well in his
wits, who will make himself of that company which for many ages consisted all
of lapsed Hypocrites, denyers of Christ, and worshippers of Antichrist? The
whole Scriptures and Fathers say that the spouse of Christ is honest and chaste,
and cannot be deflowed. But this protestant harlot did for many ages prostitute
her self to Antichrist.

10. Moreover this kind of company which thus communicated with Antichrist and
professed his doctrine, could not be the visible Protestant Church. Conf.
Anglic. art. 19
For her they define to be a company which professes Christ's true doctrine,
and rightly uses his Sacraments. But this foresaid company, as themselves
write, Durst not prosesse their opinion, had no Ministry, and did observe
Babylonicall and heathenish rites. Nor were they their invisible Church, which
alone they will have to be the true Catholic and proper Church, because she
according to all their opinions, is the company of Saints and elect only. The
Confession of Auspurg. art. 7: The Church properly so called, is the
congregation of Saints, who truly believe and obey Christ. And D. Whitaker
cont. 2. quest. 1. cap. 3: Thus we define the Catholic Church; It is a company
of holy men, whom God has chosen in Christ, to everlasting life. This
definition (says he) excludes all hypocrites. But those who worshipped
Antichrist were no Saints, obeyed not Christ, were hypocrites. Therefore they
were no Catholic or true church. Again, it is the common doctrine of
Protestants that naughty and great sinners are no me^ ers of the true church.
For thus the Confession of the Low Countries art. 29: Hypocrites belong not
properly to the Church. Calvin 4. Ill me^ not the true church by Protesta^^
Institut. cap. 1.. 7: Into that Church, which is indeed before God, none are
admitted but such as both by grace of adoption are the sons of God, and by
sanctification of the spirit true members of Christ. Peter Martyr in his places
tit. de Eccles. col. 1368: We affirm that such (wicked) men are not indeed
and before God members of the Church. Arctius in locis part. 3. fol. 50: The
Church, properly so called, consists only of the true members of Christ.
Bucer lib. de vi and vsu Ministerij page 558: The true Church consists only
of those that are borne a new. D. Whitaker cap. 3. cit: We all believe that
Catholic Church, which we profess in our Creed, to consist of no evil or
reprobate persons, but only of the elect, just, and holy. And c. 7: We deny
ill men to belong to the Church, which is the body of Christ. M. Perkins in his
exposition of the Creed col. 795: An ill man cannot be a member of the Church.
Ada^ Francis loc. 11. de Eccl: Ill men are only in name members of the Church.
And finally Musculus in locis tit. de Eccl. page 299: Not so much as the name
of the Church ought to be given to the wicked. But they who were such as the
Protestants before described, were no Saints, were not just, were not
sanctified; but ill, wicked, hypocrites, if ever there were any: therefore they
could not be the true Catholic and proper Church before God. Furthermore
Protestants use to teach, that those who communicate with Papists do cut
themselves from the true Church. The French Confession art. 28: We think all
those who adioyne themselves to these (Popish) actions and communicate with
them, do separat themselves from the body of Christ. Luther in cap. 13. Genes.
tom. 6. fol. 163: Who acknowledges the Pope for master, he has no part with
Christ. And in cap. 28. fol. 396: If the Pope must be worshipped, Christ must
be denied. And de Missa priuata tom. 7. fol. 475: Whosoever is under the Pope
and obeys him cannot be saved. Calvin against Seruer. page 607: Is it not a
profanation of the sacred unity, to profess one God and faith with an impious
and profane company? And Respons. ad Versip. page 362: How wicked and soul
treachery is it to abide in that sacrilegious company (of Papists)? And D.
Whitaker ad Rat. 3. Campiani: None abide with the lamb in the mountain, who
have any commerce with Antichrist. And Calvin in Confutat. Hollandi and lib. de
vitandis superstitionibus, brings many proofs to show that the faithful may
not communicate with the false Church, and thereto cites the letters of
Melancthon, Bucer, Peter Martyr, and those of Zurich: and the same is commonly
taught of Protestants. How then did not those Protestants separate themselves
from the body of Christ? how were they saved, who in times past communicated
with papists? How were they saved unless God be an acceptour of persons and
tyms, that he will cut of some from his body, and from hope of salvation, who
communicate with Antichrist, and not others, at these and not in former times.
Again, Protestants teach that the Church ought to profess her faith, as
besides the testimonies before repeated, the Preface of the Confession of
Saxony says: They that are demanded must needs tell the doctrine. And the
Confession of Bohemia art. 2: They teach, that they must undoubtedly believe
all the articles of the Creed, and confess them with the mouth. Luther in 1.
Petri cap. 2. tom. 5. fol. 464: If any now, as the Emperor or other Prince,
should ask me my faith, I must plainly confess it to him. And de Scru. Arbit.
tom. 2. fol 432: Truth and doctrine must always be preached openly, and never
kept secret or crookt and turned awry D. Field lib. 1. de Eccl. cap. 10: For
seeing the Church is the multitude of them that shall be saved unless he make
confession unto salvation, for faith hid in the heart and concealed does not
suffice, it cannot be but they that are of the true Church must by the
profession of the truth make themselves known in such sort that etc. And the
Preface of the Syntagme of Confessions: When every one ought, according to the
Apostles precept, give a reason of his hope; how much more the Church? And D.
Whitaker Cont. 4. quest. 6. cap. 2. page: 696: True says can no more be
separated from confession with the mouth, then fire from beat, or the sun
from its brightness and beams. What faith then had those protestants, which, as
is said, durst not profess their mind? And Cont. 2. qoest. 3. cap. 2. page
472: It is not lawful for the godly to dissemble true Religion, or make show
of false; nor to conceal what they think of Religion, if they be examined of
them who have authority to ask them of their faith. But it is not credible
that in so many ages, in no part of the Christian world, no Catholic
Magistrate should ask any protestant of his faith, especially if it be true
that Luther writes in psalm. 22. tom. 3. fol. 344. that Papists do so examine
the body of the Church, that all her bones may be counted, that is, none of
them can by hid. Wherefore we must not imagine that there are any hidden bones
of Christ, all are bewrayed and counted, wheresoever they are, either by the
espials of secret confession, or by the tortours or examiners. Which shows,
that if there had been any true protestants heretofore, they would have been
discovered.

11. Finally they are brought to these straights, that sometimes they say, that
the protestant church, (which they imagine was heretofore in popery,) did
consist of those who were papists both in opinion and profession. This Calvin
intimates in the words before cited, when he says that his church was
corrupted with pestilent doctrine. And Luther de Missa priuata tom. 7. fol.
231. saying: The very elect were seduced in that great darkness. And in cap.
9. Isaiae tom. 4. fol. 95: Behold (says he) the whole face of the Churches
under Popery. Did not they all who truly felt the burden of sin imagine that
they should by good works satisfy for their sins? Which thing alone would
suffice to blot them out of the role of protestants. D. White in defense of his
way cap. 36. page 350. says those imaginary protestants were corrupted, some
more some less, with those errors, which (says he) now we fly. And cap. 40.
page 394. grants, that they were infected with damnable heresies. D.
Whitaker lib. 2. de Scriptura cap. 8. sect. vlt. says: They were beset with
most thick darkness. Napp^r in cap. 12. Apocal. page 195. that their visible
Church in times past: Wholy embraced the errors of merits and indulgences etc.
And Morgerster^^ tract. de Eccl. page 41: These things were in times past to be
forgiven the godly, that they believed the Pope to be ^hrists vicar, and head
of the church, Popery to be the church, Saints to be prayed unto, Mass to be
the Lords supper. Are these men (think you) in their wits, who call them godly,
and say they must be pardoned, who believed Antichrist to be Christ's vicar,
Antichrists Synagogue to be the Church of Christ, and horrible idolatry (such
as they account Mass and prayer to Saints) to be service of Christ? The same
also they mean, when they challenge the simple and ignorant Papists for
theirs, or confess the vulgar Roman Church to be the true Church, or (as
others of them speak) grant the Roman Church, but deny Popery, the Popish, or
Roman Popish Church. For they imagine, that the simple Catholic people neither
does now, nor in former tyms did believe those points of faith, which
themselves deny. But this they feign of the simple Catholic people, and
cannot prove it. Besides, there is no Catholic ^o simple, as does not
vertually believe all points of Catholic faith, which Protestants deny, since
he actually professes to believe whatsoever the Catholic Church teaches.
Neither is there any at all, who does not believe justification by good works,
which point alone would suffice to make them no Protestants. Besides, Calvin 4.
Institut. cap. 8. says that we affirm him to be no Christian, who does not
undoubtedly agree to all points of doctrine, as well affirmative as negative.
And the same says D. Whitaker Cont. 2. quest. 5. cap. 8. page 519. D. Morton
part 1. Apol. lib. 1. cap. 9. and D. Willet in the Preface of his Synopsis.
Yea, as before we rehearsed, Cap 2.
they confess that before Luthers revolt all from head to foot were drowned in
the pudles of Popery, that none dreamed of that which is the chiefest point of
Protestancy. Wherefore Schusselburg tom. 8. Catal. Haeret. page 440. seems to
say. That before Luther arose Popery was the true church like as the Synagogue
of the Jews was before the coming of Christ, for thus he writes: Popery, as
Iudaisme heretofore, signifies that company, which at least in her time had
the true Church with it. Such were the Jews before the coming of Christ, and
the Papists before the coming of Luther. His meaning, (as I suppose) is that
as the Christian Church is in state another church from the Synagogue; because
it has other Sacraments, other Sacrifyce, and more points of faith, and Christ
another founder of the Church distinct from Moses; so the Protestant Church is
a distinct Church from the ancient Christian Church, and Luther not only
another Elias, as they call him, but also another Messiah, a founder and
beginner of another Church, distinct from that of Christ, at least as far as
his church differed from the Synagogue. Behold Christian Reader whereto all
their winding, turning, and doubling about the being of their Church in Popery,
is come. Surely (as S. Augustine said, L 20. cont. Faust. c. 12.
against the Manichees) their imaginations have lost all ways. For they are
nothing, b^^ the visions of frantike men. For their remains no probable way
to defend, that their Church was heretofore in Popery. It is mere frenzy to
think, that it wa^ in Popery virtually and implicitly, like as a plant i^ in
the seed, or a man in a child, at the Christian Church once was in the
Synagogue, or that it wa^ openly distinct in Communion and Profession from
Papists: or that it consists of such, which either i^ heart, or at least in
Profession were Papists; or finally that the Church of God (such as they will
ha^^ the Protestant to be) was for many ages in a different, yea a most
opposite church; where neither by divine nor humane testimony it can be proved
to have been; neither can there any way be imagined, by which it may with any
appearance or probability be said to have been there, Thus (says S. Augustine)
do they dote, lib. 20. co^t. Faust. c. vl.
who not abiding true doctrine, turn to fables.

12, And out of these, wherewith we have showed, that the Protestant Church
heretofore was not in Popery, is refuted also Zanchius Praefat. lib. de Natura
Dei, where he says that their brethren in times past lived in some obscure
valleys and Mountains, and met at night. And D. Fulke lib. de Succes. page
324. saying, that in Europe the Church was by Antichrist thrust into obscure
places; but least they should be tript in their lying, they name neither those
mountains, nor vallyes, nor places, nor their night-owle-brethren, nor finally
prove any thing. L. 14. cont. Faust. c. 9.
But as S. Augustine said of Faustus: They say it and away, they never seek to
prove it. Or as Christ said of the adversary man, they sow cockle and depart.
It suffices for these new Pythagorians, to power out lies like oracles: for
they assure themselves that with retchlesse men they will find credit of
themselves, and like weeds grow without tilling. Hence also is refuted the same
Fulke in cap. 10. Apocal. Where he affirms his brethren hertofore have lived
in the Alps, in the Appenine Mountains, and in the Hereinian Forest. He might
better have said they lived in the Wilderness of Vtopia, for he proves nothing.
L. 16. cont. Faust. c. 26
O man (that I may cry out which S. Augustine) thincking only of his own
talk, and not thinking of any gainesayer! Again: Do thou not know, lib. 4.
cont. Cres. c. 54.
or do thou not feel with the heart of what man soever, that in dispute
where truth is sought, where proof follows not, the talk is vain and
foolish. Wherefore now let us hear their arguments, or rather Sophismes,
wherewith sometimes they endeavor to prove, that their Church was in times past
in Popery.

The Sophismes, wherewith some Protestant make show to prove that their Church
was heretofore in Popery, refuted. CHAP. X.
1. THE first argument, wherewith Protestants would seem to prove, that their
Church in former times was in Popery, is grounded upon that saying Apocal. 18:
Go out of her (Babylon) my people. Therefore Gods people were in Babylon, that
is, (say the^) in Popery. Thus argues Luther in cap. 12. Genes. tom. 6. fol.
144. And in cap. 19. fol. 234. The Magdeburgians in Praefat. Centur. 8. Plessy
lib. de Eccles. cap. 10. and others commonly. Yea M. Perkins in his reformed
Catholic tract. 22. writes that by this commandment, it may be gathered that
the true Church is, and was long time in the Roman Church. Wherein he speaks
more truly then he meant. For the true Church is and was always in the Roman;
but the Protestant, neither is, nor was there. To the argument I answer, that
this place can be no sufficient ground of faith among the Protestans, because
their Angel, their Apostle, and Evangelist Martyn Luther, denies the
Apocalipse to be Canonical Scripture. Again, though indeed it be canonical
Scripture, yet for the most part it is so obscure, as but very few places
thereof are fit to ground any point of faith; as is evident both by the book it
self, which is well nigh all Mystical and allegorical, and by the judgment
of the Fathers and confession of Protestants. Eusebius. l. 7. cap. 20.
For thus says S. Denis Patriarch of Alexandria of the Apocalipse: I verily
think that almost in every sentence there lies some mystical and merueilous
sense. Likewise S. Hierome: Epist. ad Paulin.
The Apocalipse has as many mysteries as words. And S. Augustine: In the book
of the Apocalipse many obscure things are told, and there are few things
therein, lib 20. de Ciuit. c. 17.
by light whereof the rest may be sought ought with labor And with Protestants
D. Andrews in his answer to Bellarmines Apology cap. 9: Is he ignorant, that
concerning the Apocalipse nothing certain or of faith is yet prescribed by the
Church, that it may be lawful to use one only kind of interpretation and no
other; as if it were so clear and evident that it were a heinous offense to
leave it, or to dissent any way from it. Yea as any may with greatest
probability show the prophesies there to be fulfilled, so is it free for any to
use his judgment and to follow his own opinion in explicating them. And D.
Whitaker Cont. 4. quest. 5. cap. 3 page 677: It is well enough known that John
in the Apocalipse speaks not of clear and open matters, but of obscurt and
hidden. M. Brightman in his Preface of the Apocalipse: In so great abundance of
ancient and new expositions, the Apocalipse yet, as all agree, needs an
Apocalipse. And M. Sheldon in his book of the miracles of Antichrist cap. 4.
page 54 calls it a darck and Mystical prophecy, in which (says he) quot
verba, tot latent Mysteria. And page 226: The Apocalipse is a book wholly
mystical, which does (excepting some few doctrinall rules and exhortations to
virtue) in types, figures, forms, and resemblances, describe and foretell the
future events of the church. How then can Protestants gather certainly out of
the Apocalipse, that their Church heretofore was in Popery? But, as Luther in
cap. 9. Genes. tom. 6. fol. 114. speaks of the Anabaptists and others: Why
Protestants account to much of the Apoc.
The Anabaptists make so much of obscure books as the Apocalipse, because
there they may seigne any thing. And in cap. 11. fol. 136: Ambitious heads
think it a great matter, if they give their judgment freely of obscure places,
and after stubbornly maintain their opinion. And Praefat. in Cantica tom. 4.
fol. 47: Some do put all their labor in hard places, thinking it a
commendation of their wit to meddle with those matters, which others by reason
of their obscurity do fly, and because in obscure places every one may divine
and follow his own head.

2. Thirdly I answer, that the foresaid place is allegorical, mystical, and
obscure, and therefore not fit to ground faith upon. That it is mystical and
allegorical, is manifest, because Babylon does not literally, but at most
mystically signify Popery. That also the sense which Protestants frame thereof
is obscure, is evident, because they cannot either by any part or by any
circumstance thereof, clearly show, that by Babylon is meant Popery. Besides,
neither any of the Fathers, nor of those imaginary Protestants before Luther,
did perceive this sense; otherwise some of them would have obeyed Gods
commandment, and gone out of Popery. But it were plain madness to urge an
incredible thing, (as is that Protestants were heretofore in Popery) to be
believed certainly, for one mystical and obscure place. Who (says S.
Augustine) without great impudency will go about to expound for himself,
Epist. 48.
any thing spoken in Allegory, unless he have manifest places, by which the
obscure may be lightened. Let them bring therefore some evident place, Morton
part. 2. l. 2. c. 5.
wherein Babylon signifies Popery. Luther also says: If in the new testament
the signification of a figure be not clear, we must not rely upon it, because
the devil, an excellent craftsman, plays with figures, and if he catch a
soul which without certain ground wresteth the Scripture to Allegories he
uses to cast him here and therelike a dye. Bnd in cap. 3. Genes. tom. 6. fol.
52: An Allegory serves nothing for proof. Kemnice also 1. part. exam. tit. de
epist. Apost. page 79: We say, that a sentence is not to be builded upon any
obscure places of Scripture, which cannot de proved out of other clear places.
Peter Martyr in locis tom. 2. tract. de Missa: An opinion is not to be founded
in doubtful words, Sadeel ad Sophism. Turrian. loc. 11. page 597: The most
learned interpreters do teach that Anagogicall arguments must rely upon clear
and express testimonies, if they will breed says. And Pareus lib. 4. de
Iustificat. cap. 15. page 1120: Testimony for a false opinion is in vain
sought out of an Allegorical and most obscure place. But as the Fathers have
noted, it was ever the humor of heretics, to seek some pretext of
allegorical and obscure places. Of the Gnostiques, thus, writes S. Irenaeus
lib. 1. cap. 1: Heretics seek out obscure places.
Whereas many parables and Allegories are recited, which may be drawn into
diverse senses, they craftily accommodating that which is ambigious unto their
devise, do lead into captivity from the truth, those which have a weak faith
in Christ. And S. Augustine lib. de Vnitat. ca. 24. says to the Donatists: Ye
willingly abide in obscure matters, that you may not be compelled to confess
clear matters. And of heretics in general thus speaks Tertullian: Praes. c.
17.
Diverse presumptions of necessity will not acknowledge those things, by which
they may be overcome; and rely upon those, which they have falsely forged, and
have taken out of vncertainetyes. Again: De pud. c. 16.
This is the custom of froward men, idiots, and heretics, by occasion of some
doubtful passage to arm themselves against an army of the whole testament.
And Clement 7. Stromatum: They seek out doubtful speeches, and turn them to
uphold their opinions. The like writes Luther of Anabaptists. And others, as
has been now rehearsed. Wherefore Protestants do follow the custom of
Gnostikes, Donatists, Anabaptists, froward idiots, and heretics, whiles they
fit the Allegory of Babylon to their turn, whiles they willingly abide in
obscure matters, and make such account of the Apocalipse because there they
have leave to feign any thing, whiles they rely upon those things which they
take out of uncertainties, and by occasion of one ambiguous and doubtful
place, are armed against an army of sentences of the Scripture, which teach
that neither Popery is Babylon, nor Protestants the people of God. Moreover
Donatists for the very like place Isaiae 52: Go back again out of the midst
of her, lib. de vnic. bapt. c. 14. L 2. cont. Parmen. c. 28. l. 2. co^t. Gaud.
c. 9.
would prove that they ought to go out of the Catholic Church of their time, as
witnesses S. Augustine, and Danaeus confesses lib. 3. de Eccl. c. 9. who also
in lib. 1. August. cont. Parmen. has these words: The argument of the
Donatists out of Isay the 52. was, That we ought to go back and go out of
the midst of Babylon. And the Anabaptists in Zuinglius tom. 2. in Elencho fol.
21. Out of this self same place of the Apocalipse, did gather that they ought
to go from Protestants. Why then may we not say with D. Whitaker: Cont. 2. q.
^. c. 23.
Our adversaries serve themselves of the same weapons, whereof most wicked
heretics did; and herein show themselves to be nothing less then Catholics.
Moreover I say, that if I list to expound Scriptures at my pleasure, I might
say, and more probably too then Protestants, that by the foresaid words God
commands Protestants to go out of Protestancy. For Protestancy may well be
called Babylon, because it is a Mass and confusion of opposite heresies, where
almost every one has a faith of his own, and speaks a peculiar language,
nor understands the tongue or doctrine of another. And Protestants may be
called the people of God in that they are baptized, and therein dedicated to
his service; and pretend the faith of Christ as did Israel even after it had
foresaken the Synagogue: De prouid. art. 22.
And as Calvin says that God calls even the disobedient, his servants, as
Nabuchodonozor in Hieremy, and as God has both good and faithful servants,
and naughty and unfaithful; so has he good and naughty people.

3. Secondly I answer, that the argument which can be framed out of this
place, to prove that which the Protestants write of their churches being in
Popery before Luther arose, to wit: Go you my people out of Babylon. Therefore
before Luthers time the church was in Popery, and so secret as for many ages
she was not seen either of her own or of others; is a mere Sophisme. First
because one unknown thing is here proved by another more unknown, a false thing
by another not only false, but also impossible. For more unknown it is, more
incredible, more impossible that the Protestant church should be the people of
God, or that Babylon, out of which Gods people is bidden to go, Popery: then
that Protestants have been heretofore amongst Papists. For this, although it be
both false and incredible, yet it is not impossible, as the other is. How then
can they prove unto us, that they were heretofore in Popery, by affirming that
they are that people of God, and Popery that Babylon, since this is to us far
more incredible, then the other. Let Babylyn sometime in Scripture mystically
signify the city of Rome; let it also signify the number of the wicked both
faithful and Infidels; but in Scripture it never signifies a certain
religion, and least of all Popery. Besides his Majesty in his Epistle to
Cardinal Peron, has those words: What that Babylon is, out of which Gods
people is commanded to go, the King enquireth not in this place, nor
pronounces any thing of that matter. And if his Majesty will not pronounce
what that Babylon is, why should Ministers do it? Secondly, it is a Sophisme,
because there are many things in the consequent, which are not at all in the
antecedent, although it be understood as Protestants would. And therefore
herein they not only prove an unknown thing by another more unknown; but some
things they prove only by themselves, that is, they affirm them, and prove
them not at all. For let the Protetestants be the people of God; and let Popery
be that Babylon (which they can never prove) nevertheless that the Protestant
Church had been in Popery so long time, to wit, so many ages, and in such
manner, to wit so secret as she was altogether invisible either to her own or
to others, can no way be gathered out of the foresaid words, though they were
expounded according to the Protestants mind.

4. Their second argument they ground upon that, 2. Thessal. 2. that Antichrist
shall sit in the temple of God, which they expound, as that the Pope should sit
in the true, that is, according to them, the Protestant Church, and
consequently that heretofor the Pope ruled over Protestants. To which I answer,
that this argument is a Sophisme like to the former. First, because it proves
an unknown thing by another more unknown; and one untruth, by another both
untrue and impossible. For it is more incredible to us, that Protestants are
the temple of God, or the Pope Antichrist, then that they were heretofore
amongst Papists. Secondly if hence they Infer, that their Church was so long
in Popery, and in such manner as we have recited out of their words, they will
infer that in the consequent, whereof there is no sign in the Antecedent,
although it were expounded to their desire. Thirdly I say, that there can be no
certainty gathered out of this place, because it is obscure, as appears both
by it self, and by the different expositions thereof, Lib. 20. de Ciuit. c. 29.
and by the judgment of S. Augustine, who writes thus: In what temple of God
Antichrist is to sit as God, it is uncertain, whether in that ruin of the
temple which Solomon built, or in the Church. Again: I truly profess my self
not to know, what he said; yet I will relate the suspicions of men, which I
have heard or read of this matter. And again: One in this sort, another in
that, ghesseth at the obscure words of the Apostle. Yea D. Andrews intimates,
Respon. ad Apol. Bellar. c. 5.
that it cannot be certainly gathered hence, that the Pope is Antichrist, when
he says: It is probably gathered out of the 2. chap. 2. Thessal. That the
Bishop of Rome is Antichrist. But we regard not, whence they probably gather
what they please, but only whence they can certainly and undoubtedly prove what
they say. Fourthly I say, that whatsoever is the temple of God wherein
Antichrist shall sit, this place it self shows, that the Pope is not
Antichrist, because he sits not in the Church of God as God, but as Bishop,
and as Gods vicar. Fithly I add, that the Protestants themselves do not firmly
believe, Protestants not certain that the Pope is Antichrist.
much less as a point of their faith, that the Pope is Antichrist, howsoever
they use the name of Antichrist as a bugg to fear children. For Melancthon, as
Schuffelburg reports, seemed to doubt whether the Pope were Antichrist, or
no. D. Whitaker lib. 1. cont. Dureum sect. 33: says: In the mean time, l. 4.
Theo^ Call. p. 166
we must needs probably and justly suspect the Pope to be Antichrist And Cont.
4. quest. 5. cap. 3: Many who care not much for the Pope, do not think, that it
can be proved that he is Antichrist. And his Majesty in his Monitory epistle
page 70. Surely for so much as pertayneth to define Antichrist, I would not
urge a thing so obscure and hidden as a matter necessary to be believed of all
Christians. And the same says Moulins in his defense of that Epistle. To which
his Majesty adds page 142. these words: If any list to refute this my guess
concerning Antichrist, etc. Behold how the Protestants themselves doubt,
account it but a suspicion, a guess, an obscure matter, and not needful to be
believed, that the Pope is Antichrist. How then can they certainly gather out
of the foresaid place, that the Pope sat among Protestants? Yea some of the^
deny the Pope to be the true Antichrist. For thus Luther in cap. 9. Genes. tom.
6. fol. 122: We hold the Turck for the true Antichrist. Zanchius lib. 1.
Epist. ad Stuckium: I am persuaded that the name of Antichrist agrees rather
to the Turck then to Pope. And in his answer to an Arian, Antithes. 21. col.
879: The Bishop of Rome is not that Antichrist whereof is meant 2. Thessal. 2.
And in his Disceptation betwixt two Deuines page 637. and respons. ad calumnias
page 217. he plainly denies, that the Pope is that notable and singular
Antichrist, whereof the Fathers speak. And his opinion herein many Protestant
universities do judge probable, namely the university of Marspurg, Heidelberg,
Zurich, and Basle, among which, that of Zurich has these words: The 2. Thesis
of Antichrist, cannot be rejected as heretical, seeing it is very probable.
For almost all the Fathers are of that mind. Again: Since malice daily
increases, nothing lets but at the last some notable one may come who in
impiety surpasses all the enemies of the Gospel. Vorstius also in his
Antibellarm. page 79: Who discourse more advisedly of this matter, do grant
that it is very likely, that yet some one shall arise, to whom all the qualites
of Antichrist may agree in the highest degree. What certainty then can
Protestants have out of the foresaid place, for their purpose, since some of
their best learned do but doubt, and others deny, that the Pope is that
Antichrist, whereof S. Paul speaks?

5. The third argument they wring out of the 12. Apocal. where it is said, that
the dragon shall cause the woman, that is, the Church, to fly into the
wilderness. This also is a fallacy, not unlike to the former. First, because
it is more unknown that the Protestant church is the woman, or the true
church, or the Pope that Dragon, or the Popery the desert, he^ that Protestants
were heretofor amongst Papists. Again there is no speech at all, that the
Church should be so long time and so secret as Protestants say their church was
in Popery. Yea the time which this woman was to abide in the wilderness, is
set down, to be 1260 days, or (as it is said cap. 20.) a small time. And as
Luther upon Daniel tom. 4. fol 265. and Bullinger conc. 46. in Apocal. write:
Almost all Doctors attribute but 3. years and half to the persecution of
Antichrist. Wherefore these kind of testimonies, by which Protestants make show
to prove that their Church was heretofore in Popery, are but as S. Augustine
speaks of the like testimonies used by Donatists: De unit. c. 19.23.
Slender snares of delays, wherewith you underprop an evil cause, by
delaying. But we demand some manifest testimony. Therefore bring out some
manifest, produce some thing that needs no interpreter, or if you cannot
perform that which so justly we demand of you, believe truth, hold your
peace, sleep a nap, and after waken to salvation.

6. Their 4. Sophisme they draw out of reason in this sort: As soon as
Protestancy was publikly preached, many came out of Popery, and followed it.
Therefore there were who in Popery did believe it. This fallacy is nothing
better, then the former. For if it be reduced to a Syllogism, it will be found
to rely upon this principle: If any in a company do follow the preaching of a
new doctrine, there were some therein, that before tym believed it; which
principle is manifestly false. For never any heretics preached, whom some
unsettled Christians did not follow; and yet who will say that there was never
any heresy preached which before had not been believed of some Christians.
Epist. Monitor. page 107. Whitak. cont. 2. q. 5. c. 6. Pless. de Eccles. c. 11.
Sadeel. Refutat. Posnan. c. 10.
Besides Protestants account it for a wonderful miracle, that at the beginning
so many Papists came out of Popery unto them; but it had been no shadow of
miracle, if before they had been Protestants. Morouer the number of Papists
forsaking Popery argues not, that before times they had been Protestants, but
that they were unsettled Papists, who as the Scripture speaks, were carried
about with every wind of doctrine; Ephesians. 4.
and that protestancy is a voluptuous and licentius doctrine, because (as
Calvin says) deceitful doctrines do soon bewray themselves, whiles they are
admitted of all men with gentle cares, Praef. Inst.
and are heard of the world applauding thereto.

7. Of all which has been said in this and the former chapter I frame my fifth
demonstration in this manner: If the Protestant Church and Religion were no
where before Luther arose, it was not all. But before him it was no where.
Therefore not at all. And by him it got to be some where. Therefore by him it
got to be. The minor is manifest by all that has been said in the former
chapter. The case of the protestant Church before Luther.
And the mayor is evident by it self. For no company of men, much less a
Catholic or universal Church, can be, and be no where. And these 5.
demonstrations which hitherto we have made, have been taken out of the state
wherein the Protestants confess their Church to have been before Luther arose.
For by them has been showed, that before him according to the most free, most
frequent, and most evident confessions of the famousest Protestants, it had no
Cap. 8.
Pastors to govern, no Cap. 3.
sheep to be governed, no Cap. 5.
appearance to be seen, no Cap. 9.
place to abide, no Cap. 1.
being to be. What then could it be but a fiction of lying men, or an
imagination of phrantike men, vainly devised, untruly avouched, and foundly
believed.

That all the Protestants first heard of, had been in former times Papists.
CHAP. XI.
THE 6. demo^stratio^ for to prove Luther to have bin the Author of
Protesta^cie shall be grounded upon that all Protestants who were first heard
of had bin al Papists before Luther began to teach. Luther before a Papist.
Of himself, thus writes Luther Prefat. in tom. 1. Before all things I
request the godly reader, that he read all with judgment, and consider that I
was once a monck, and a most mad Papist, when I began this cause; so drunken
and drowned in Papistry, that I was most ready to kill all, if I had bin able,
etc. And in psalm. 45 tom. 3. fol. 441: I was baptized in the Popes house, I
was catechized, etc And in psalm. 51. fol 476: I wholly lived so in trust of my
justices, as if any had then ^aught that which I now teach, I thinck I should
have torn him with my teeth. And in cap. 1 Galat. tom. 5. fol. 291: If any at
anytime, surely I before the light of the gospel, did thinck piously, and was
zealous for Popish laws and traditions of Fathers, and did in great earnestnes
urge and defend them as holy, and the observation of them as necessary to
salvation. I purely adored the Pope, and what soever I did, I did of a simple
heart, a good zeal, and to the glory of God. The authority of the Pope was so
great with me, that I judged it a crime worthy of eternal damnation to dissent
from him; and would have subministred with fire and sword for the defense of
the Popes authority.

2. Melancthon, who, as Calvin writes, was a principal Minister of God in
doing great matters, and was indeed Luthers chiefest instrument, in his dispute
of Matrimony tom. 2. Luther. fol. vlt. gives God tha^ckes, Melancthon first a
Papist.
that he was delivered out of the kingdom of Antichrist and Poposh errors; and
says, as reports Scusselburg tom. 13. Catal. Haer. page 625. of himself: I
moved not these controversies, but fell into them after they were moved, which
being many and not explicated, I began to consider them with a desire of truth
And the Saxonicall Ministers in the Conference of Alburg. Scrip. 7. page 349.
write that Melancthon of his own accord acknowledged himself a scholar of
Luther. yea the whole University of Witterberg, The University of Witterberg
first Papist.
out of which almost al Luthers first champions came, was in former times
Popish; as appears by their epistle ad Milititium tom. 1. Lutheri fol. 205.
where thus they write: We are so affected both to all the Christian Religion
and the sea Apostolic and holy Church of Rome, that if we were certain, that
D. Martin Luther were fallen into so foul and impious errors, we first of all
would not only yield him up to the law, but also would punish him and cast him
out. And in their Epistle to Pope Leo 10. ibid. fol. 206. Most holy Faoher we
devout and obedient children of your Holiness, do most humbly and earnestly
beseech etc. And below: Neither would we ever seem such, as would
pertinaciously hold any opinion contrary to the Catholic doctrine, ready at
all times to obey yours and the holy Churches behests in Christ. And in another
letter to Frederick the Elector fol. 227. Above all things we exceedingly
like that your highness simply and purely honors the holy Church and the
Pope. Neither will we ever be of any other mind. We prefer nothing before
the judgment of the Roman Church. And not only the University, but the people
of Wittenberg were also Catholics, as Luther declares in these words, to
Frederick Elector fol. 330. It cannot be denied that the Reformation of
doctrine and religion in this Church (of Wittenberg) began by me.

3. Frederick also the Elector Frederike Elector first Catholke.
and Luthers chief Patron was a Papist. For thus himself writes to Cardinal
Raphael. tom. 1. Lutheri fol. 228. Your kindness God willing shall never see
that I have any other mind or will then to show my self obedient and officious
unto the Catholic Church. And his Counsailers tom. 2. fol. 116. profess that
he is an obedient son of the Holy Catholic Church. And likewise tom. 1. fol.
101. Frederick the Elector above all loves the Catholic and Apostolic
truth. Besides (as Luther writes tom. 7. sermon de simulacris) he put silver
statuaes in the Church, thinking thereby to merit at Gods hands. And tom. 2.
lib. de abroganda Missa fol. 268. He deceived by Papists, did greatly increase
and adorn the house of All Saints. He founded also a College of Canons, where
he kept Mass until the end of the year 1524. as Chytreus testifies lib. 11.
histor. Saxon. and Luther intimates in formula Missae tom. 2. fol 387. saying.
Be not you or any other afraid, that in our Wittenberg that sacrilegious
Tophee remains as yet, which is the wicked and lost money of the Princes of
Saxony, I mean the temple of All Saints.

4. Pomeranus.
Bugenlage the Pomeran and first Protestant of VVittembrge had been before a
Papist. For as Scultet. concione saecul. page 15. reports when he first read
Luthers book de captiu. he said: Since the beginning of the world the Sun
never beheld a greater heretic then Luther. Of Osiander Osiander.
thus writteth Danaeus respons. ad Leonicum page 1518. He was a most wicked
Fra^ciscan Erier: His proper name was Hosen, that is hose or hosier, but of
hosier he would be called Hosion, that is a holy man.

5. The same also we manifest of the Captains of the Sacramentaryes, among whom
Zuinglius Zuinglius.
writes thus of himself epist. ad Fratres tom. 1. fol. 341. I will not deny,
that in times past I received guists of the Pope. For then I thought it lawful
to use the Popes liberality, when I thought it a pious and godly matter to
defend to my strength his Religion and faith. And Luther lib. de Coena writes
that Zuinglius was become seven times worse, then when he maintained Popish
religion. Likewise Oecolampadius Oecolampadius.
Zuinglius his chiefest partener thus witnesses of himself respons. poster.
ad Porkey merum page 108. I entered into a Monastery being of a good age and a
man and Doctor, and with mature advise. To which Hospin adds part. 2. hist.
fol. 35. He entered two yeures before into the Monastery of our Savior near to
Auspurge, and there became a Monk, fearing some danger of the common wealth by
Luthers writings. Pelicanus.
And ibidem fol. 42. he says that Pelican was a Franciscan. And fol. 213.
that Bucer Bucer.
became a Dominican in his childhood, of whom also and Peter Martyr D.
Andrews Respons. ad Apol Bellar. says: They left their monkish life.

6. Of Calvin Calvin.
thus testifyeth himself lib de scandalis page 100. Under the Popes tyranny I
was free to marry, since God delivered me from thence etc. And respons. ad
Sadolet. page 122. If I would have provided for my matters, I should never have
left your faction. In his Testament: God delivered we from the deep darkness of
Idolatry, wherein I was drowned. And Pareus lib. 2. de amiss. great. cap. 1.
Whence were Luther and Calvin but of Papists? The same appears out of his
life written by Beza, where he says that he had a benefice in the Cathedral
Church of Noyon, and the cure of a Parish thereby, and that he was first put in
mind of Protestancy by Robert Oliuetan. That Peter Martyr Peter Martyr.
was long time both Catholic and Canon regular, Simler testifyeth in his life,
which also he affirms of Zanchius Zanchius.
saying, that he was one of the 18. companio^s that forsaking Popery followed
Peter Martyr, who also in his preface de Natura Dei says that he was 35.
years of age when he left Babylon.

7. Concerning the Lutherans in general Luthera^s in general
thus writes Luther epist. ad Erford. fol. 500. In which (error of
Antichrist) we being all stifled enthralled wlth a grievous and miserable
slavery, did serve the God and Prince of this world, serving the same in sins
and all kind of impiety. And tom. 4. in cap. 43. Isaiae fol. 179. We are
accounted heretics of the Pope, as who have divided our selves from that
Church wherein we were baptized and instructed. In cap. 4. Galat. tom. 5. fol.
377. We old men were brought up in that (Popish faith) and have so swallowed
it, that it has entered the most inward sinews of our hearts. And therefore we
forget it with no less pains, then we learn the true says. Ye hear how
hardly the very first Protestants could become Protestants, and leave to be
Papists. And in cap. 11. Genes. tom. 6. fol. 129. he thus boasts: We are
holy Apostataes, for we have fallen from Antichrist and the Church of Satan.
Melancthon likewise in cap. 7. Math. tom. 1. fol. 406. We were heretofore
subject to the Popes kingdom. Tom. 2. cont. Suenefeld page 200. We departed
from the Popes Churches. Tom. 3. ad Art. Bauar. fol. 364. There was necessary
cause, that we should forsake the Papists. And tom. 4. in Act. VVormat. page
403. We have just cause of departure from the Popish congregation, and with
good conscience we forsook the consent of so many Nations. James Andrews
cont. Hosium page 332. The more aged do gratefully acknowledge, that they came
from you, that is, lest you, and your doctrine. And Schuffelburg in Epist.
dedicat. tom. 8. Catal. haeret. has these words: It is behoofull to have
before our eyes the causes whereon our consciences may in the storms of
tentations rely, why in this our age Ancestors would and ought to divide
themselves from the Roman Church. Behold how their consciences were tossed as
with a storm, for that they had forsaken the Roman Church Lobechius also
disput. 10. page 224. says: Our Ancestors did well, that they went out of the
Roman Babylon.

Sacrame^taryes in general.
8. Of Sacramentaryes also in general thus writes Zuinglius in Praefat. lib. de
ver. and tals. relig. fol. 159. We were alas long time so besieged with the
iuglings of men. And Calvin in confess. Fidel page 111. We dissemble not that
we also were of the number of them (who honor Masses) until the abuses of
Mass were discovered. And 4. Instit. cap. 6.. 6. We departed from the Roman
church. cap. 15.. 16. We were christened in the Popes kingdom. Respons. ad
Versipel. page 360. Of our own accord we went from the rabble of Popery. Resp.
ad Sadoler. page 122: That I may not make any long role, this I say, there was
none of those who were beginners of this cause, but might have been in better
estate and condition among you then that he needed therefore to think of any
new k^nd of life. Peter Martyr in locis col 1459. proposes this question:
Whether the Ghospellers be Schismatikes, because they separated themselves
from the Papists. And col. 1465. concludes thus: Seeing there were so many and
so just causes of our departure from Popery, our separation seems to be very
laudable and not to be disliked. Zanchius tract de Eccles. cap. 18. It is
manifest that we departed from the Church or rather from the sect of the Pope.
And this we willingly confess. Bullenger tom. 1. decad. 5. sermon. 2. fol. 282.
We willingly confess that we went from the Roman Church. Musculus in locis
tit. de Schismate p. 620. We are termed Apostataes of the Romanists, as many
have forsaken the Communion of the Roman Church. This we are so far from
denying as we think that we should rather glory theereof. Plessie de Eccles.
cap 11. page 361. writes that Luther, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Bucer, Capito,
Martyr and others out of whose school says he the Ministers who gathered the
Church from Antichrist did come were Priests, Curats, Doctors of divinity etc,
To whom Beza lib. de Notis page 8. adioyneth Pelican and Haller and others
more. D. Whitaker lib. 9. cont. Duraeum says: Luther was a Priest according to
your order, and such were Zuinglius, Bucer, Oecolampadious and others without
number. M. Perkins in cap. 4. Galat. v. 26: All the first renewers of the
Gospel were either Priests or teachers of Schools. Paraeus lib. cit: Are we
worthy of blame or heretics because we left the Popes Church? And in the end
of his book de Iusticatione: Our Ancestors 97. years ago had necessary cause
for to forsake Popery. And Scultet. in concione saeculari page 4. This is the
hundredth year since God plucked our Ancestors out of Popish darkness. Finally
Polanus in praefat. These. de Eccles: We have separated our selves from the
false Catholic Synagogue.

9. The same also is manifest of the English Protestants by their own words.
For thus they speak in their Apology part. 5. cap. 12. diuis. 1. English
Protestants
It is true we have departed from them. Item: True it is we were brought up
with these men in darkness and in the lack of the knowledge of God. And part.
6. cap. 20. diuis. 2. As for us truly we have fallen from the Bishop of Rome.
Causabon also Epist. ad Card. Peron cap. 16. The king confesses, that his
church has forsaken no few points of that faith and discipline, which at this
day the Roman Church does profess. And page 17. The English have gone from
that Church. M. Hooker lib. 4. de Polit. Eccles. page 181. We were a part of
them. M. Powel. lib. 1. de Antichristo cap 21. We confess we have separated
our selves from the Bishop of Rome, and his Synagogue. M. Perkins in cap. 5.
Galat. verse. 21. We have separated our selves from the Roman Church. D.
Whitaker cont. 2. quest 6. cap. 3. says: The Roman Church was justly lest of
us. And D. Morton part. 2. Apol. lib. 2. cap. 10. The former book told a just
cause of our separation from you. In like manner those of Zurich in Sleidan
lib. 4. histor. say: After the rising of the Gospel we have cast of that
burden which the Pope had put upon us idiots. And add withal that before they
had heard nothing of Protestancy. Suitzers.
And the Suitzers in their confess. cap. 17. confess that their Churches had
parted themselves from the Roman Church. And the Scots in their confess. write
that the truth was lately borne amongst them. Polonians.
And the Polonians in their consent, that God has delivered their Churches out
of the gross darcknes of Popery.

10. Furthermore of the whole Protestants church or of Protestants in general,
The whole Protest. Church.
thus they write. Lobechius disp. 12. page 254. Our confession (of Ausburg) was
the belief of the whole orthodoxall Church gone out of Roman Babylon. And in
like sort speaks Daneus de Antichristo cap. 17. Pareus Proaem. l. de
Iustificat. The Evangelical Church was compelled above 96. years ago to make
a divisions from the Popish Church. The like he has lib. 2. cap. 1. and lib.
3. cap. 8. Schusselburg tom. 8. catal. page 727. Our Church departed from the
Church of the malignant. Polanus part. 2. Epist. ad Bezam. The reformed
Churches did well that they did separate themselves from the Popish Church.
Aretius in loc. part. 2. fol. 10. Our reformed Churches departed from Popery.
D. Andrews respons. ad Apoll. Bellarm. cap. 14. boasts that almost half of
the Christian world is gone out of the Roman Babylon. And D. Whitaker cont. 2.
quest. 3. cap. 3. says: England, Germany, Scotland long ago have fallen from
the Pope. And the English Apology glories in this sort, part. 1. cap. 1.
diuis. 3. For they be not all made at this day so many free cities so many
Kings, so many Princes which have fallen away from the seat of Rome. Daneus
cont. 4. lib. 4. cap. 12. All Scotland, England, Saxony, Denmark, a great part
of Germany, all Suitzerland, the greater part of the Grisons have fallen from
the Church of Rome. D. Sutliue lib. 2. de Eccles. cap. 2. p. 251. Our Church
having shaken off the filth of the Roman church is returned to the Catholic
faith. And page 254. England, Scotland, Ireland, Denmark, Norwey, Saxony,
Pomerania and the chiefest parts of Germany, France, Flandres, Poland have
fallen from the Pope. Moalins lib. de. fug. Arnoldi cap. 2. Our Churches be
called reformed, because they be Christian Churches purged from Popery. D.
Rainolds amongst his conclusions puts this for the sixth: That the reformed
Churches in England, Scotland, France, Germany, and other kingdoms and Common
wealths have justly separated themselves from the Roman. And adds with all
that, All reformed Churches have departed from the Roman Church. Brentius in
his Apology for the confess. of Wittemberg page 873. speaking of Protestants
says: We also once were all fools seduced and seducing and serving idolatry
and Antichrist. Serauia defens. lib. de Grad. Minist. cap. 2. page 33. I mark
that the Authors of all Reformations which were made in our age were Priests
of the Roman Church. To al which I adioyne that Luther in cap. 2. Oseae. tom.
4. fol. 279. says that these be the speeches of Papists. Were ye not
Christened in the Popes Church? Why therefore go ye from her? And he
acknowledges that the Roman Church is their Mother, but says that they have
left her, because she is a harlot and an adulteress. And Scrauia de diverse.
Minist. grad. cap. 6. page 30. has these words: Popish Church Mother of
Protetestants.
The Roman Church is our Mother in which and by which God regenerated us; but
because she is a harlot and an Adulteress, we justly contest against her. The
like has Iunius lib. singulari de Eccles. cap. 17. and others commonly. So
that they acknowledge themselves to be the children of an harlot, and
consequently bastardes, and not begotten of God, because God begets not
children of harlots, but only of his chaste spouse the Church. Let them therefore
hear the Roman Church speaking to them in these words of S. Hierome: Dial.
cont. Lucif.
If an Angel or Apostle have rebaptised thee I break not that which thou
followest. But if thou borne in my lap, nourished with the milk of my
breasts, do draw thy sword against me, restore what I gave thee, and be if
thou can, a Christian by other means: I am a harlot but yet thy mother: I
keep not chastity to one husband, such I was when thou were begotten. Or else
let them harken to S. Athanasius: It remains that they find fault with the
baseness of their stock, De Synod. Arim. and Seleuc.
and say that they came not of pious, but of heretics, neither fear they that
which is written in the Proverbs, An ill brood curses their father. Or else
let them give care to S. Augustine thus speaking to the Manichees: do so slaves
of Cham. L. 11. cont. Faust. c. 24 lib. 6. c. 5.
Get you gone who despise the naked flesh whereof you sprung. Again: Yea thou
often married to elements or rather harlot prostitute to devils and great with
sacrilegious vanities dare thou revile Catholic marriage of thy Lord with the
crime of unchastity. But omitting this, because Protestants regard not, how
far they disgrace themselves, so that they revile the Church of Rome; out of
that which we have rehearsed in this Chapter, it appears how impudently D.
Morton 1. part Apol. lib. 1. cap. 10: wrote that Melancthon, Pelican, and
others were Protestants before Luther arose, and much more impudently D. Field
said lib. 3. de Eccles. cap. 8: that before Luthers time those who defended the
Popish errors, were but some faction like to those in the Church of Corinth,
who in S. Paul's time denied the Resurrection: which untruth is so apparent, as
to have related it only, is to have confuted it. But here by the Reader sees
how needful it is for me to heap up many testimo^ies of Protestants, for to
prove even those things which are most manifest.

11. My sixth demonstration therefore I frame in this manner: If all Protestants
who were first known, whether people or particular persons, were Papists
before Luther began to preach, then were there no Protestants before him, and
he author of their Church: But all the first known Protestants were such.
Ergo. The Mayor is manifest by it self, and the Mimor by that which has bin
recited in this chapter.

That no Protestant ancienter then Luther did come forth and adioyne himself
to his company when Luther safely preached. CHAP. XII.
THE seventh demonstration for to prove Luther to be the first Beginner of
Protestancy, shall be taken from thence, that after that Luther securely
preached Protestancy, no Protestant ancienter thou he peeped out, and adjoined
himself unto him. This I prove: first out of the real Confession of all
Protestants, who neither then, nor hitherto could name one such Protestant.
Whereupon it follows necessarily, that Luthers company was altogether new,
and no one member thereof before him; neither did he adioyne those whom de
drew out of Popery unto any company before extant; neither did any company
which had bin before, adioyne it self unto him. Secondly this may be proved by
the silence of D. Whitaker Cont. 2. quest. 5. cap. 3. where being urged with
this argument, he answeareth it with silence only, and stands mute, as
confessing the accusation to be true. Thirdly I prove it by the silliness of
the Answeares of other. Iunius lib. 4. de Eccles. cap. 5. says only, that some
ancienter Protestants came forth, and adjoined themselves to Luther, but names
none, nor proves any thing; and therefore gives words and naught else. He
should, as Tertullian said to old heretics, have feignes the names of some.
Praescrip. c. 32.
For after blasphemy what may not they do? But I know not how it comes to
pass, that whereas Protestants feign many things and persons, yet they dare
not feign names. As D. Sutliue, when in the Preface of his book of the Church
he had said only, that Bolsec (who wrote Caluins life) does insinuate that he
wrote for hire; after growing more bold in his answer to exceptions cap. 4.
page 120 deuiseth a synod, D. Sutcliue feigneth a Synod.
in which (as he says) Bolsec publicly recanted the book which he had written
of Caluins life. Of which Synod none before him ever heard, but since D.
Morton and M. Beard write that they have heard of it, 1. part. Apol. lib. 2.
cap. 33. Beard Motive. 12.
perhaps by D. Sutliue, but yet durst not feign the names either of the men
who held this synod, or of the place where it was held, nor yet specify the
year of our Lord when it was held. This he left to others to feign, or to
himself at more leisure

2. Fourthly it may be proved by the ridiculous nomination and proving made by
some. D. Morton part. Apol. lib. 1. cap. 16. writes that Melancthon, Pelican,
Lambert, Capito, Osiander, Sturmius, Bucer came forth, which he proves because
Alphonse a Castro in the epistle dedicatory of his book against heresies has
these words; Neither did Luther in this age come forth alone, but accompanied
with a great troop as with a guard, and names those before cited. But first
it is ridiculous to say, that the foresaid persons were Protestants before
Luther, since partly themselves, partly Protestants deny it, as we showed in the
former chapter. Again, it is ridiculous to prove this by Castroes testimony,
who being a Spaniard, and those all Germans except Lambert who was a French
man, it is most likely that he never knew the^ nor heard of their names before
Luther had revolted. Moreover ridiculous it is, to imagine that in the forecited
words Castro should say, that the fornamed persons did come forth in such sort
as we mean, that is, came out of the Protestant lurking holes, or to have bin
secret Protestants before Luther appeared; seeing he only says, that they came
forth in such sort as he says Luther came forth, to wit forth of the Catholic
church and of Catholics became heretics.

3. Fifthly I prove it out of the common doctrine of Protestants, wherein they
teach that every one ought to adioyne himself to the visible Church if so he
can conveniently. For so teaches the Confession of the low countries art. 28.
the French art. 26. Melancthon in cap. 8. Matthew. Calvin 4. Institut. cap. 1. D
whitaker Cont. 2. quest. 3 cap. 2 and others commonly. But these former
Protestants (if any such had bin) might conuenie^tly have joined themselves to
Luthers company after that they saw him to preach securely and out of danger.
Seeing therefore, no such came to him, it is manifest that there were no such at
all. Finally this is manifest otherwise. For suppose, that before Luther they
lay so close, as that they worshipped God only in heart and soul, yet when they
saw Protestancy to be preached publicly and securely, and that they might
live openly and amongst men, who will imagine, that they would prefer
darcknes before light, and lurking holes before towns and cities, and always
keep in deserts? Certaidly such kind of fellows should be rather batts or
owls, then men. Besides being just men, forsooth, why did they not afford God
external worship when they might securely do it? Why did they not according
to Christ's commandment celebrate the memory of his Passion by receiving of the
Sacraments?

4. Out of these I compose the seventh demonstration: If after that Luther
securely preached Protestancy, never any ancienter Protestant came forth and
adjoined himself to his company, there were no Protestants before. But no such
ever came forth. Ergo. But if there were no Protestant before Luther,
undoubtedly he was the beginner of that company.

That the Protestant Church, and Religion is new. CHAP. XIII.
THE eighth demonstration with which we will prove, that Luther was the
beginner of the Protestant Church and religion, we will frame out of
Protestants Confessions of the nouelty thereof: First therefore they say, that in
the judgment almost of all men it is new, and that it is almost impossible, Now
in almost all men's judgment.
to wipe away from it the spot of novelty. Thus Illyricus in the Preface of
his Catalogue: When Doctors raised of God preach the (Protestant) gospel and
do inueigh against contrary errors, they seem in the judgment almost of all
men to bring a new doctrine unheard of before and to impugn the old. Again:
It is very hard and almost impossible to remove the hateful marck of nouelty
from the (Protestant) doctrine. Almost impossible.
To which D. Fulke lib. de Success. page 454. adds, that the Protestant
religion, Was altogether new to most nations.

2. Secondly in equivalent words they oftentimes call their Religion new or
begun of new. For as we shall straight rehearse they term it in the blade,
renascent, reviving, borne a new, renewed, repaired, restored, raised again,
resuscitated. And what can be meant by these terms, but a religion either new
or newly erecteth, such as Christ's religion is not? For neither is it new in it
self, neither can it be begun or raised anew, because it can never fall.
Luther in cap. 22. Genes. tom. fol. 208. writes thus: Borne anew.
In the beginning of the gospel borne a new, Monetarius etc.. In cap. 31. fol.
434: Nine assemblies have been held since the Gospel began to be borne a
new. In cap. 32. fol. 458 After the light of the Gospel was borne again. In
cap. 48. fol. 643. Borne again.
At the beginning of the Gospel rising again. In cap. 49. fol. 662. They
desire to extinguish the light of the Gospel rising again. In cap. fol. 342.
I remember that before these times of the Gospel borne a new. And in the
Praefat. Deuter. tom. 3. Ienen. fol. 75. The rising again or rather springing
Gospel. Rising again.
Thus speaks Luther. Melancthon Apol. pro Luthero tom. 2. Lutheri fol. 194.
You oppose against the rising light of the Gospel. And respons. ad Clerum
Colon. tom. 2. page 97. The beginning of the pure doctrine rising again. And
in cap. 7 Matthew. tom. 1. Renewed.
fol 398: He terms it renewed doctrine. Carrion in Chron. page 706. calls
their Church the renascent Church. Iustus Jonas Epist. dedicat. lib. Lutheri de
Iudaeis tom. 7. fol. 166. God would that in our time the Gospel should be borne
again under the house of Saxony. Reviving.
Besoldus in his Preface of the 4. part of Luthers Co^me^tarie upon Genes. has
these words: In the beginning of the Church borne anew. O siander in his Manual
englished page 62: Our doctrine is renewed. And his son Lucas Epist. Euchar:
The doctrine of the gospel borne again. The author of the Sponge in Daneus
page 13. Christianity green.
calls it the light of the Gospel borne again, the Evangelical doctrine
reviving or quickening again. Kemnice in locis part. 2. p. 106. In the
beginning of the Gospel borne again. Amongst the Sacramentaryes Zuinglius
speaks thus in supplicat. ad Suithenses fol 121: Christianity being green,
christianity rising again. And in Eccles. fol. 41. New born truth. Which
phrase he repeateth disput. tom. 2. fol. 607. Gesnerus in Bibliotheca says of
Luther: The newborn Church does owe much unto him. Recalled Gospel.
Muscle Epist. dedicat. locorum. I was in the beginning of the new rising
Evangelical truth. Bucer in Retract. page 642. uses. these words: Beginning
of the new born Gospel.
Among the Ministers of the recalled Gospel. Beza in cap 3. Romans v. 20. They
by whose Ministry God in our age has recalled to light Christ's Gospel
almost buried. Gualter. Praefat. in Romans How much harm the Anabaptists did at
the beginning of the newborn Gospel. Quickening again.
Martyr in locis tom. 2. page 228. In the beginning of the Gospel born
again. And in Epist. dedicat. comment. ad Romans The Gospel quickening again.
Hospin. Epist. dedicat. 1. part. histor. The Evangelical truth borne again.
Sohinus in Methodo Theol. page 215. Among the Doctors of the Church borne
again. And Calvin 4. Institut. cap. 7.. 24. The doctrsne of the Gospel borne
again. lib. de scand. page 76. and 94. The gospel borne again. Admonit. 2.
ad Westphalum page 784. The Gospel is borne again. And cont. Scruetum page
592: Of the Gospel borne again. And in like manner he speaks ordinarily.
Sadel respo. ad Arthurum cap. 7. The Church borne again. Paraeus in Miscellan.
Vrsini page 26. The light of the Gospel borne again. Danaeus respons. ad
Solnec. page 1565: In the very beginning of the Gospel borne again. Plessic
de Eccles. cap. 11: Christ borne again. Cambden in apparatu Annalium: The
rising religion of Protestants. Christ borne again.
Usher de Success. cap. 8. In the beginning of the Gospel born again. Scult.
in Praesat. 4. partis Medullae: Thou were in the flower of the Church borne
again. In the flower of the Church.
Moreover Luther tom. 1. in dis. fol. 410. calls his doctrine, A doctrine
repaired in this age. And Praefat. ad Galat. tom. 5. fol. 270. says: In these
later times the wholesome knowledge of Christ was again resuscitated James
Andrews lib. cont. Hosium page 1 The Lord by the Ministry of Luther has
resuscitated the doctrine of the Gospel. And page 349: Repaired.
Among our men after the doctrine of the Gospel was resuscitated. Kenice
Praefat. in lib. de union hypostat: Resuscitated.
It is now three score years since the ancient serpent raised again the
heresy of Berengarius for to oppress as they say in the hlade the doctrine of
the Gospel then first restored by Luthers Ministry. Gospel in the blade.
Calvin l. de Coena cap. 10: This controversy began between them, who were
the chiefest captains in restoring the doctrine of the gospel, and bringing
it back as it were when it was lost. Restored.
Lib. de libero arbit. page 147. The purity of the Gospel was restored by
Luthers labor especially. Et epist. ad Ducem Somerseti: God would have me to
be one of those by whose labor he restored this time the sincere doctrine of
the Gospel. Danaeus in method. scripturae page 400: There are 54. years past
since that time that the pure light and doctrine of the Gospel was first
restored to the world. Apol. Eccles. Angl. part. page 64. It is no new thing
though at this day the religion of Christ be entertained with despits and cheks
being but lately restored and as it were coming up again a new. Ibid. cap.
17. Our desire was to have the temple of the Lord restored a new. Iezier de
bello Euchar. fol. 72: Even from the beginning of the restored Evangelical
light. M. Bancroft in his Survey cap. 8. In this later age of the world it has
pleased God to restore us the light of the Gospel. And M. Alenson in praef.
contro. 4. Whitakeri: After the restoration of the Gospel. And many more (as
we see in the chapter following) call their gospel restored Religion. By
which it may appear that D. Andrews Respons. ad Apol. Bellarm. cap. 1. did
untruly deny, that their men call their faith a restored faith. But whiles he
denies that their men terms it so, he clearly shows, what those mean who
term it so, to wit, that they mean a religion borne or framed a new,
according to the very substance thereof. And in truth what else could they mean
by so many terms and so often repeated of a religion green in the blade,
borne again, rising again, resuscitated, renewing, reviving, recalled,
repaired, brought back again, restored, but a religion substantial produced,
instituted and founded a new.

3. Thirdly this is proved, because they write, that in the time of Luther, of
Melancthon, of Zuinglius, of the Anabaptists and such others, was the beginning
the very beginning, the first beginning, the original, the entrance, the
cradle, the dawning, the new rising of their Church and religion, as appears
in the aforesaid testimonies of Luther, Melancthon, Besoldus, Kemnicius,
Musculus, Gualter, Peter Martyr, Danaeus, Vsserius, Gezler. And besides, Luther
in cap. 3. Genes. tom. 6. fol. 33. has these words: In the beginning of the
Ghopell, Carolostadius etc. Georgius Fabritius lib. 8. Orig. Saxon. page 13.
God would that true and wholesome doctrine should have her beginning in the
university of Wittenberg. Calvin epist. ad Montis belgardenses col. 590.
Protesta^cy had its beginning in Witte^berg.
edit. 1617: In this our age the ghospel did slow out of the church of
Wittenberg. Brentius Praetat. lib. Andreae contra Hosium: Did not we all in
the beginning of the revealed ghos^ell with one mouth dispro^e your Popish
impietyes? And in Recognit. page 327: They cannot deny, that, even from the
beginning of the reborne gospel the Zuinglians etc. And I. de May. Christi
page 109: Even from the beginning of the revealed gospel, Melancthon etc.
Witte^^ergenses in Resur. Orthodox^ consensu: page 22. Luther reca^ted some
things which in the beginning of the reborne doctrine of the gospel he
granted to the Papists. Lobechius disput. 12. Straight after the beginning of
the shining truth, in the year 1520. etc. Pappus defens. 1 cont. Sturmium page
19. Thou saydst that there were no such Theses published since the beginning of
re^^gion. I show thee the contrary that Luther and Philip held the ^^me.
Sleidan prefat. histor: The beginning (of Protestan^y) was slender and almost
contemptible, and one only (Luther) ^^re the brunt of all the world. Zanchius
lib. de perseue^at. 192: Anabaptists in the beginning of Protesta^tisme.
In the beginning of the Gospel the sect of Anabaptists ^^ose. Calvin epist.
63 If in the first beginning of the church, ^ising again, this example of
tyranny does now peep, what will (...) shortly? And epist. ^78: In the
beginning of the gospel ^^rne again. Epist. 269. The beginnings of the
kingdom of Christ every where in our ages were almost base and contemp^^ble.
Respons. ad Sadoset p. 133: New rising.
After the new rising of be gospel. Pl^ssie de Eccles. cap. 11. What shall
we think ^at the new star anno (1572.) did signify but the new birth of
christ on earth by preaching of the word. And he adds, New birth.
^^at as Christ first borne put the Idols oracles to s^^nce, so borne again he
has made the Popish miracles to vanish. Scultete part. 1. Medullae in Irenaeo
cap. 9. The dawning.
In this age the dawning of the Evangelical truth has shined a new unto us.
Zuinglius lib. de Prouid. tom. 2. fol 352: The Lantgraue labors that the
infancy of Religion be piously nourished. The infa^cy.
And Gesner in Bibliotheca says: Luther did happily set forward the infancy of
Religion. The Alogy of the Church of England part. 2. c. 2. diuis. 1. writes,
that Anabaptists, and Libertynes have been stirring in the world ever since
the gospel did first spring. M. Powel de Antichristo c. 32. How many wars
have been since the light of the gospel arose, the Heluetian, the Protestant
war etc. Vsserius I. de Success. Eccl. c. 8. At the beginning of the ghospall
borne again, Thomas Bilney etc. M. Bale cont. 8. cap. 68. speaking of the
beginning of protestancy, calls it, The rising of the new Jerusalem. Horn
in his harbor, Second birth.
The second birth of Christ. And Brocard in cap. 2. Apocal: the second coming
of Christ. But surely if the year 1520. were straight after the beginning of
Protestancy: If Luther, Second coming
Melancthon, Zuinglius, the Anabaptists, and such like were from the beginning,
at the beginning, and straight after the Rising of Protestancy: If the
dissension amongst Protestants, were in the first beginning of their Church: If
finally Protestant doctrine had its beginning in the Church of VVittemberge and
slowed from thence, without doubt it is a new doctrine an^ Church, which either
had never been before, or wa^ newly founded and restored. Besides what other
thing can signify The new rising, the new birth, the secon^ coming of Christ,
but another substantial beginnin^ and repayring of Christ's religion and Church
afte^ it had been quit overthrown. The same also the^ insinuate, when they
say, that the light of the gospel was in their time new kindled, or lightened
again. Kindled again.
Luther tom. 2. fol. 305. alias 307. God in the last time has kindled again
the light of the gospel. And i^ cap. 17. Genes. tom. 6. fol. 210. He has
kindled again for us the light of the Gospel. Melancthon in cap. 11. Dan.
tom. 2. fol. 314. God has again kindled for us the light of the gospel,
which again he repeateth in his common places tit. de gratia. The same has
Vitus Theodorus Praefat. Comment. Luth. in Psalm. Kemnitius in locis tit. de
Iustificat. page 109. 247. The Elector in Edicto de lib. concord. and Zuinglius
Praefat. Elench. ^om. 2. fol. 5. says: Christ has lighted again in our time
the lantern of his word. Wherefore falsely does Boysseul in confutat. Spondaei
page 25. deny, that their men say they kindle a new the doctrine of salvation.
But (as before I said of D. Andrews) Boysseul by denying that their men say
they kindle again the doctrine shows us, that those who indeed say so, do
mean of a substantial production of light, as in truth the word kindling does
signify.

4. Fourthly I prove the nouelty of the Protestant Church and religion, because
they do sometimes in plain terms call it new, fresh, unused, unaccustomed
newly planted, altogether new, and newly erected. Luther Praefat. formulae
Missae tom. 2. fol. 384. I was always slow and fearful for the weaklings in
says, from whom could not suddenly be taken so old and injured, nor ingrafted
so fresh and unaccustomed manner of serving God. In Psalm. 45. tom. 3. fol.
439. he says: Neither was there ever any new word revealed without miracles.
Fresh and and unaccustomed.
Which after he had proved by the example of Abraham, Moses and Christ, he
adds: So we also have our Miracles. And in cap. 19. Genesis tom. 6. fol. 238. he
says, that Papists do sore urge them saying: Your doctrine is new and unknown
to our forefathers, which he answearing, denies not that his doctrine is new,
but rather grants it, saying: What belongs it to us what God has judged
of those who dyed heretofore. Now the word is preached unto us, we must not be
Inquirers who ask God why he has revealed his doctrine at this time and not
in former ages. And in cap. 12. fol. 148. he writes in these words: Here
surely Abraham does show no small trouble of conscience which even in his
banishment is wounded with this dart, to think in this sort: Look to it, Thou
art all alon a stranger, wheresoever thou go thou carryest with thee a new
and strange religion. Art thou alone holy? has God care of thee only, and has
he cast off so many people and nations? The like (says Luther) we also suffer
when our adversaries with open mouth demand of us, Are all who went before us,
and followed the Popes religion damned? Ye see how plainly he intimates his
trouble of conscience about the newness and strangenes of his religion. And in
Appendice confess. in Hospin. part. 2. fol. 188. he says: Because our doctrine
seemed at that time very new and wonderful scandalous to the whole world,
Seemed very new to the whole world.
it behooved me to deal moderatly. And in the Epitaphe of his tomb is engraven
this verse:

A new light of the Gospel he spread throughout the world.

Melancthon Praefat. in tom. 2. ^urther thus speaks of him: He did so
illustrate these writings, that after a long and darcke night there seemed to
the judgment of all pious and prudent men to arise a new light of doctrine. New
in the judgment of al wise men.
The university of Wittembrg in Sentent. de Missa in Luthero tom. 2. fol. 349.
writes that the abolishing of private Communion: Is in this time a thing
altogether new, As Luther ibidem fol 385. says that Communion under both
kinds, is a rite over new. Spalatine whom Protestants account a very grave man
in his relat^on of the Confession of Auspurg says: Never such a confession.
Such a confession was never made not only a thousand years ago, but not
since the beginning of the world, neither in any history nor in any ancient
Father or Doctor it such a Confession to be heard of. Huber in Antibellarminum
libro 4. capite. 3. Our Church has a new form not used at that time when the
Pope had all. Wittembergenles in Prefat: Refuta^. Orthodoxi Consensus call the
Protestant Church lately planted, Lately planted.
and as yet tender. George Fabritius libro 7. Orig. Saxon. page 858. speaking
of protestancy says: New doctrine.
Duke George was greatly against this new doctrine, who was deceived by the
ancienter use of his forefathers. And lib. 8 page 21. writes that even the
Prince Electour himself at the first did not much defend Luthers reformation
as being new. And Freschelius Archdeacon of Wittemberg Preface in Comment
Melancthonis in Math. calls the Protestants company according to the age
thereof a Childish camp. A childish camp.
In like sort do the Sacramentaries speak, for thus Zuinglius Parenesi ad
ciuitatem Suithensem tom. 1. fol. 110. First of all in humble manner we entreat
this, that our cause do not seem to you absurd by reason of the newness
thereof. And in Supplicat. ad Suithenses he does almost openly confess that he
goes about to give men new precepts and laws. And those of Zurich in Sleidan
lib. 4. write that their ministers do teach them now five years, and that at
the beginning this kind of doctrine seemed new, because they had never heard any
such thing before. Sadeel de vocat. page 543: Seemed new.
God has brought into light the reborne Church as a yongling, and page 555.
that he has laid a new foundation of the Church, and erected again the
Church. Calvin Respons. ad Sadolet page 131. A new foundation.
makes a man speak thus to God in defense of his becoming a Protestant: I
being offended at the nouelty, did hardly give ear unto it. Bastingius epist.
dedicat. Catechis: Erected a new.
It seemed good to God in our time to erect his Church a new. Beza in Confess
cap. 4 sect. 49: God would preserve the relics of his Church in Popery till
he had erected it again. Erected again.
The Apology of the English Church part. 4. cap. 4. Diuis. 21 Forty years
ago and upward it was an easy thing for them to devise against us these
accursed speeches and others too, when in the midst of the darcknesse of that
age it first began to spring and to give shine some one glimmering beam of
truth unknown at that time and unheard of, when as yet the thing was but new
and the success thereof uncertain, and when there could be imagined against us
no fact so detestable but that the people then would soon believe it for the
nouelty and strangeness of the matter. Ibid. diuis. 1: How often have they
set on fire Princes houses to the end they might quench the light of the
gospel in the very first appearing of it. M. Fox in his Acts set forth anno
1610. page 788. writing what passed anno 1523 speaks thus: But in the blade.
Then the doctrine of Luther first beginning to spring and being but in the
blade, was not yet known whereto it tended, nor to what it would grow. D.
Rainolds in his Conference cap. 5. sect. 2. says that Protestants have not had
long tract of time. And a late Chronicler, thought to be M. Good win writing
the life of K. Henry 8. 1521. says: In the mean time our king moved at the
nouelty of Luthers doctrine etc. To all which I add, that Erasmus (whom
Protestants as is before showed do challenge as one of theirs) writes thus to
the Brethren of the low countries: New Gospel.
do not they bring a new Gospel, who expound it otherwise then the Church
hitherto has don? But Why I pray you should the Protestants religion seem new
to all the world, and in the judgment of all pious and prudent men, if indeed
it were not new? How should so many, so famous Protestants, so often, and in so
many different kinds of writings, to wit in prose, in verse, in peaceable, in
contentious writings, in Historical, in dogmaticall, in speech to men and to
God himself have said so plainly and so many ways, that Protestant religion
was new, fresh, unwonted, unused, wholly new, newly planted, and erected anew if
they had not thought that it was indeed new. For as Luther says: It is
impossible but that the conscience will some time bewray it self.

5. Protestants first refuted.
If any answer that the fore said Protesta^nts do not mean, that their
religion was absolutely new. First I ask, why then do they absolutely say so,
and that so often and in so many kind of writings? Why do they so often and in
so weighty a matter write otherwise then they think? Besides, it cannot be
proved, that they did not mean that it was absolutely new when they spoke so,
otherwise then because perhaps at other times they said the contrary. Which
kind of proof in Heretics is frivolous, as partly has bin showed before,
partly shall be more hereafter. Moreover this is like the excuse of the
Marcionists, who when they had brought in a new God, yet would not have him to
be called absolutely new, but only newly known or discovered.

6. Fifthly I prove the nouelty of Protestant religion because even then when in
words they deny it to be new, in very deed they confess it to be new in such
sort as suffices for me to prove that Luther was the Author thereof, and that
it is not the religion of Christ, to wit, that it is of new erected, built and
set up according to the very substance and essence thereof in such sorr as a
house fallen down but newly raised in walls, roof and other such
substantial, parts may be called a new house; Because Christ's Church and
religion cannot be new in this sort, being such as can never fall. For they
confess, that the antiquity of their Church was abrogated, and that it is a
religion refined and reformed, and that they are refiners and reformers. D.
Morton 1. part. Apol. lib 1. cap vlt writes that Protestants Challenge the
first antiquity, but abrogated by men's fault. Iunius Cont. 4. lib. 4. cap. 7
says: The continuance of the old and Catholic doctrine is renewed. But surely
that thing whose antiquity has bin abrogated and broken of, is new. For the
kingdom in Caesar's time was new in Rome although it began with the city it
self, because it had bin abrogated for diverse ages. Whereupon Riuet
Epitom-Cont. tract. 3 cap. 21 says: Things are called new, when they are
renewed and used after interruption. Besides whether a thing once abrogated and
taken away and afterward restored be to be called new or no, it suffices to
me, that the Protestant religion is in such sort new, as a house fallen down
and newly raised may be called n^w: because the Church and religion of Christ
cannot be new in this manner, nor the antiquity thereof, abrogated, and cut of.
In like sort Muscle in locis tit. de noua doctrina page 417: Albeit he deny
that they make new doctrine yet he confesses that they renew doctrine, And
that he means of a substantial renouation wherein the very substance of a
thing is renewed, it appears by the precedent page where he says that old
matters abrogated and fallen down for some ages are renewed. A Church therefore
and religion fallen down they do renew, that is, erect a new. Whereupon the
French Confession, Beza, and Bastingius as is before recited say that their
Church is again, and a new erected, and others call her a Church Revived,
resuscitated, reborn and assign a new birth and beginning of her, which words
do manifestly signify a new substantial production or making of her: which
whether it be called a nouatio^ or renouatio^, makes not much to the purpose,
seeing it is either a substantial production or first making of that which never
had bin before, or a reproduction and second making of that, which though it
had bin before, yet was fallen, and the substance thereof corrupted and
perished. Of which nouation or renouation Luther was the Author, Besides they
call themselves Renewers or Refiners, Protestants call themselves reformers.
and their Church or religion Reformed or refined. D. Andrews Respons. ad
Apol. Bellarm. cap. 1: We are Renewers. We call our religion reformed. Calvin
Epist. 341: We carry the name of the reformed Church. Iunius lib. 4. de
Eccles. cap. 16: We hold the Reformed Christian says. And in the same sort
speaks the Scots Confession, the Consent of Poland, D Whitaker Prefat. cont.
and cont. 1. quest. 2. c. 16. and 17. and cont. 2. quest. 5. c. 2. and others
commonly. I ask therefore what kind of form of religion have they taken away
by their reformation, and what a one have they given? Surely they have changed
the very substantial form. For (to omit al other points) they have taken away
the former manner of obtaining remission of sins by the Catholic faith and
good works, and brought in a new of obtaining the same by special faith only,
and undoubtedly the way to obtain remission of sins, is substantial to a
Church and religion. But they who take away the substantial form and bring
anew, do make a new thing, and such a mutation ought rather to be termed a
formation, then reformation. But whether it be called a formation or
reformation, it skilleth little, it suffices (as I said) that it is a
substantial mutation of religion the Author whereof Luther was, and such a
mutation, as cannot happen to the religion and Church of Christ. Moreover, it
is the shift of old and new heretics to bring in new religions under the name
of Reformation. Of the Marcionists thus writes Tertullian: They say that
Marcion did not so much innouate the rule (of faith) as reform that which
heretofore was corrupted. L. 1. cont. Mar. c. 20.
And he himself after he was become a Montanist: This is showed of us, that
the discipline of Monogamie is neither new nor strange, yea both ancient and
proper to Christian, L. 1. de Monogam c. 4.
that you may thinck the Paraclete (Monta^us) to have bin rather the Restorer
then beginner thereof. And of Seruetus thus write those of Zurick in Calvin cont
S^ruet. page 626. He goes on to thrust upon the Church a most corrupt doctrine
under the show of restitution of Christianity.

7. Sixthly, because the Protestants design the place, the occasion, the year,
day, and hour, when Protestancie began: The place we have heard already out of
Calvin and Fabritius was Wittemberg, and the same does Luther insinuate in cap.
49. Isaiae tom. 4. The place where Protesta^^y began.
fol. 192 saying: Now Wittenberg is blasphemed as the fountain of all
heresies, but it will come to pass some years hence that it shall be praised
of Posterity, as Gods garden from whence the Gospel was propagated into
Germany and all parts of the world. And Matthew Index in Edicto aeterni de^:
That clamor against Antichrist came out of the durty towns of barbarous and
base Germany. ^rotestan^y began ^n a durty own of barba^ous cou^^y.
A sit place no doubt from whence so durty, filthy, and barbarous an heresy
should spring. For sooth Wittemberge is the Protestants Syon, from whence their
law should come. S. Austin thought it ridiculous madness, that the Donatists
should say that the Church was to be renewed out of Africa the third part of the
world, ^e unit. c. ^.
and shall we think it wisdom to imagine that it should be renewout of a durty
and barbarous corner of Duchland? The occasion of it was Tezelius his preaching
of Indulgences, ^he occa^on of the ^ginning ^f prote^ancy.
for thus writteth Crusius l. 10. Anal. Sueu. page 5.8. Tezelius boldness
stirred up Luthers mind to set up conclusions against those indulgences on the
gates of the temple of All Saints in Wittenberg the last day of October which
was saturday. The day of the week and month.
Hence now came the occasion and beginning (says he) of correcting the
christian religion. Schusselburg Praef. tom. 8. Catal. haeret: Old men remember
and it recorded in writing for remembrance for ever and publicly extant, that
this was the cause that the Gospel flourished again in our age, that John
Tetzele carried about pardons of sins to be sold in the Popes name. And
Kemnice 4. part. Exam. tit. de Indulgentijs page 78: It is known to all the
world, that the impudent, and impious sale of pardons above 50. years ago gave
entrance to the wholesome repurging of heavenly doctrine. And Manlius in
Calendario: On All Saints eve first of all conclusions against Indulgences were
fastened by Luther upon the gate of the Church of Wittenberg castle in the
year 1517. at twelve of the clock. The lame lay Melanccthon ^^^fat. in tom.
2. The year and hour.
Lutheri, S^e^dan, Carrion, and others. We have then the place where, to wit,
Wittemberg, the year 1517. the day of the month, the last of October, the day
of the week, Saturday, and finally the very hour, to wit, twelve of the
clock, when first Protestancy began to arise. And as Vincent. Lyrin. says:
Cap. 34.
What heresy ever was there which sprung not up under some certain name in a
certain place, and time.

8. Luthera^s say that the Sacra^^ doctrine is new.
Seauenthly I prove the nouelty of Protestancy by the mutual testimony of the
Lutherans against the Sacramentaries, and of the Sacrame^taries against the
Lutherans. For of the Sacramentaries doctrine thus testifies Luther in defens.
verboru^ Coenae tom. 7 fol. 381. Neither does any thing set forth this heresy
more then novelty. And tom. 2. Zu^nglij fol. 383. Carolstadius first raised
his error. Melancthon Epist. ad Miconium, calls it new doctrine, and adds
that Carolstadius first raised this tumult. Heshusius lib. de reali praesentia
fol. 2: Carolstadius the unhappy author of this discord. Kemnice in fundamentis
Coenae page 116: Carolstadius was the first author of this strife. And Hospin.
part. 2. Histor. fol. 68. writes that Melancthon impugned the Sacramentaries
doctrine as a thing altogether new, and fol. 46. that Pomeran disallowed
Zuinglius doctrine as a novelty. And in Narrat. dissipatae Eccles. Belg. page
179. The Lutherans say to the Caluinists, your doctrine is new: and page 213.
your doctrine is of late. And Confess. Mans^eld: The Sacramentary doctrine is
justly suspected of us. First for the nouelty thereof because it arose in our
time. Neither ought the Sacramentaries to accept against these testimo^ies, as
if they were the testimonies of the adversaries. For such adversaries they are
as themselves account them their brethren in Christ, and members of the same
Church. Besides, though themselves be adversaries both to Catholics and
Lutherans, nevertheless they will have their testimonies to be taken against
the^ in matters of fact. Moreover, because the Sacramentaries themselves do
sometime confess the same. For Zuinglius tom. 2. Respons. ad Struthionem fol.
303. calls Carolstadius: The first teather of the truth of the Eucharist. And
in Subsidio fol. 244. he calls his opinion, the exposition of the ancients
brought back is it were after it was lost. Lasco Epist. ad Reg. Poloniae.
Abolished by injury of times and restored as it were after it was lost.
Lauather de dissidio Euchar. fol. 2. writes that the Senate of Zurich Was
troubled which the newness of the matter. And fol. 5. that when Occolampade
had set forth his book, the Senate of Basle moved with the nouelty of the
matter, forbid his book to be sold, until it had bin examined by Censors. And
fol. 1. that Zuinglius opinion was not heard of by the common people. In like
sort the Sacramentaries write of the proper opinions of the Lutherans. For of
their impanation or mixture of Christ's body and bread in the Eacharist Calvin
Defens. 2. Sacrame^taryes say the Lutheran opinions are new.
cont Westphalum page 786. says: It is a new doctrine, and till now unheard
of, that bread is substantially the body of Christ. Oecolampadius responsione
poster. ad Perkeymer page 18. Those new Doctors grant to bread that it is
substantially the body of Christ. And of the Lutherans vbiquity, wherewith they
make Christ's body to be every where, Calvin pronounces Admonit. vlt. ad
Westphalum page 829. that it was not borne long since. And Alcsius apud Hospi^
part. 2. fol. 201. says: I know both the time when this opinion was first
broached to the Church, and who was Author thereof. Authors Admonit. de lib.
concord. cap. 3. page 95. No man taught this their opinion before Luther. Do
they not bring forth new devises and not heard of before in the Church? Beza
also lib. de Omnipraesentia carnis Christi page 509. calls it a doctrine
unheard of in the Church. Finally Clenuitius apud Heshus. lib. cit. calls the
very Confession of Auspurg, A new and fifth Gospel. Thus Protestants testify
the newness of each other doctrine.

9. Eighthly I prove the newness of Protestancy by the new and before unheard
of nams, The names of Protestats are new.
which Protestants give to themselves, and to their Church and religion. For
they call themselves Protestants, or Ghospellers: and their Church and Religion
Evangelical and reformed. D. Andrews respons ad Apol. Bellarm. c. 1.
Protestants is our name. D. Willet in the Preface of his Synopsis: We refuse
not the name of Protestants. This name agrees fitly to our profession.
Praefat. consensus Poloniae: We are termed Ghospellers. Iezler lib. de bello
Euchar. fol. 31. We will be called Gospellers, and woe be to them who call us
otherwise. His majesty in his declaration against Vorstius page 49: The men of
our Religion do estsoones take to them the name of Gospellers. D. Morton part.
1. Apol. lib. 1. cap. 7: If ye ask where is the Evangelical and reformed
Church, all will straight point their finger to the Protestants assembly. But
surely all these names are new and never heard of before Luther, neither can
there be any name designed, which before Luthers time was proper to the
Protestant company. But it is incredible that there should have bin such a
company, and yet that it never had any proper or peculiar name given either by
those of that company or of any others.

10. Lastly I prove the nouelty of the Protestant Church by that, that
Protestants knowing well the newness thereof, deny that the greatest antiquity
among Christian Churches is a marck of the true Church of Christ, as does
Iunius lib. de Eccles. cap. 16. yea some of them are so offended at this marck
of Antiquity, as they bid us Luth. tom. 2, fol. 367.
shut our eyes at it, and say that it is a Raino. Confer. c. 5. diuiss. 2.
bastardly mark, and rather a mark of the Ples. l. de Eccles. c. 3.
Synagogue of Antichrist, the^ of the church of Christ. Nevertheless seeing it
ought to be undoubted amongst Christians, that since Christ's Church was founded
by him, it never failed or perished, and that it is manifest, that he founded
his true Church before any false Christian in imitation of him began a false
Christian Church, it ought also to be certain that she which amongst all
Christian Churches is the most ancient, is the very true Church of Christ.
Neither would ever Protestants deny this, if they did not too well know, that
their Church is far younger then the Roman, as being (according to their saying)
her daughter.

11. Out of all which has been recited in this chapter, I make my eight
demonstration in this sort: If the Protestant Church and Religion were in
Luthers time new or builded or begun a new, he was the Author and beginner
thereof. But so it was, as has been made manifest by the aforesaid
confessions of Protestants. Therefore Luther was the Author thereof.

That Protestants do plainly confess, that Luther was the Author and Beginner
of their Church and Religion. CHAP. XIIII.
THE ninth demonstration, that Luther was the Author of the Protestant Church
and religion, shallbe taken out of Protestants open confessions thereof. First
therefore they say, that he was the first who openly preached Protestancy.
Luther Praefat. in tom. 1: The Duch men did look what would be the event of so
great a matter, which before none either Bishop or Divine durst touch. Ibi.
fol. 159. It is said, Luther first of all in our age did tax the Popes
abominations, and illustrate the ancient and pure doctrine of the Church. And
Praefat. disput. fol. 370. Luther the first that preached his Gospel.
I first allowed the marriage of Bishops. In cap. 3. Galat. tom. 5. fol. 333:
Many gave God thanks, that by the Gospel, which by Gods grace we then first
of all preached, etc. In cap. 4. fol. 387. God in this later time has again
revealed the truth of the Gospel by us unto the ungrateful world. Epist. ad
Argentinenses tom. 7. We dare boast, First published Christ.
that Christ was first published by us. Melancthon Praefat. in tom. 3: With
what joy did men receive the first sparckle of light discovered by Luther.
praef. in tom. 2. Lutheri: God by him restored the Gospel to us. Again: He
recalled the minds of men to the Son of God, First spark of Protestancy.
and as the Baptist showed the lamb that takes away the sins of the world.
And praefat. in tom. 3: When there was great darcknes in the Charch, and the
light of the Gospel was oppressed, Luther laid open the justice of faith. The
university of Wittenberg in Hospin. part. 2. histor. fol. 250: Out of this
Church and school did shine the first light of pure doctrine touching God and
Crist, The first light.
which our new adversaries are forced to grant, though they burst with envy.
Amsdorfe, Alber and others write, that Luther was the first under heaven, who
impugned external sacrifice and Priesthood in the new testament. Schusselburg
lib. 2. Theol. Calvin. fol. 130. says that Vtenhonius a Caluinist was
impudent, when he wrote that he heard Conrad Pelican say, that many learned
men in Germany held the doctrine of the ^hospell before Luther appeared, and
that Pelican himself had rejected Purgatory before Luthers name was heard of.
This lie (says Schusselburg) the later Caluinists have refuted. And fol. 228.
he affirms, that Luther began the refining of the doctrine of the Gospel.
This praise (says he) we truly and with good right give to Luther, though the
Caluinists take it in very ill part. Morgerstern tract. 145. says, It is
ridiculous to think that before Luther any held the pure doctrine, and that
Luther received it of them, and not rather they of him. Milius in explicat.
confess. August. art. 17. If Luther had had orthodoxall forerunners in his
office, Had no predecessors.
there had been no need of a Lutheran reformation. The Author of the book
entitled Prognostica or Finis mundi page 12. Luther (as is confessed) first
brought in the gospel at the end of the world. The first that brought in the
Gospel.
Brentius lib. de Coena in fine. God raised up Luther to carry before us the
torch of the knowledge of Christ. And Smedensted apud Hospin. part. 2. histor.
fol. 232: He first in our age brought into the world the light of the Gospel,
after it had been extinguished. Thus the Lutherans: And in like manner the
Sacramentaryes. Zuinglius respons. ad Luther tom. 2. fol. 380. thus speaks
Luther: Thou first came into the field. Ibidem in Exeges. fol. 335. We
willingly acknowledge thee to be the chiefest defender of the Gospel, the
Diomedes who durst set upon the Roman Venus, the Ionathas who durst alone
assail the camp of the Palestins. Bucer de Coena page 675. calls Luther our
first Apostle of the pure Gospel, and 673. says, Luther first in our age did
impugn superstition. Calvin writes that he began to take the cause in hand,
and first showed the way. First showed the way.
Danaeus lib. de Baptismo cap. 15: Luther first gave others occasion to think
rightly of man's justification before God. Lauather de distid. Euchar. anno
1546. Luther first in our age did by diverse writings openly inueigh against
Popish errors. Author Orthodoxi consensus in Praefat. Apol: Luther and
Zuinglius were the first, who began to reprehend inueterate errors. Again:
The first teachers of Germany, Luther Melancthon, etc. Amongst English
Protestants M. Jewel in defens. Apol. part. 1. cap. 7. diuis. 3: Thus I say,
in this later age after your so long darcknesse, Luther was the first that
preached the Gospel of Christ. M. Fox in his Acts page 402: Luther opened the
vein long before hidden. M. Wotton in his examination of the title of the
Roman Clergy: It might be truly said, that Luther was the first who in that
time did publish Christ, especially in the chief points of the Gospel, which
is justification by faith in Christ. And in this respect it is an honor for
Luther to have been a son without a father, a scholar without a master.
Scholar without a master.
Ye see how plainly they say, that Luther first preached the Gospel, first
brought in the Gospel, first showed the way, first published Christ,
discovered the first sparcle, first laid open the justice of faith, had no
orthodoxall Predecessors, was a son without a Father, and a scholar without
a master, and that in the article of justification by only faith, which the
soul, hinges, and sum of Protestancy.

2. Secondly without Luthers help no man had known a jot of Protestancy.
Luther cont. Regem Angliae tom. 2. fol. 497: Unless we had opened the way, they
were like to have understood nothing at all, either of Christ or of the
Gospel. Nothing at all.
In cap. 15. 1. loc. tom. 5. fol. 134: The gospel is by our labor and
diligence brought into light, and they first learnt it of us, without our
pains they could never have learnt one word of the Gospel. And fol. 141: God
has called us by his holy spirit, Not one word.
that by us Christ might be manifested and known to the world. This praise they
cannot take from us, that we were the first and carried away the prize of
bringing the Gospel into light of which they would not have known one jot,
unless by our pains and study it had been brought forth. And ibidem in cap.
17. Matthew. he says that without him the Sacramentaries and others would not
have known never so little of the Evangelical truth. Not one jot.
Zuinglius in Exegesi tom. 2. fol. 358. writes these words of Luther: If they
had not had it of us, Never so little.
doubtless they would have known nothing of. And those of Zurich in their
confession write thus: Luther boasts, that himself is the Prophet and
Apostle of the Germans who has learnt nothing of any, and all have learnt of
him. None knew any thing but what they have known by him.

3. Thirdly they write, that Luther did kindle the Protestant light.
Schusselburg tom. 13. Catal. haeret. page 897: Luther kindled the Protestant
light.
By Luthers ministry the clear light of the Gospel is kindled again for
us: Lobechius disput. 1. page 6. By this man's Ministry the Lord has kindled
in Germany the light of the heavenly truth. M. Jewel defens. Apol. part. 1.
cap. 7. diuis. 3. page 56. Luther and Zuinglius were appointed of God to kindle
again the light which you had quenched. Verheiden in his Images, at the Image
of Luthers Thou first did preach the Gospel with so great constancy. Tho^
did lighten the torch of the Gospel to the world. And at the image of
Zuinglius he says of him and Luther: Laid the foundation.
These two Architects laying the foundation of the Evangelical kingdom. D.
Whitaker cont. 4. quest. 5. cap. 3. page 693. Luther lighted a torch which no
floods can put out. And in Praefat. tom. 2. Danaei, it is said: God raised up
Luther for to kindle and restore to the world the light of his Gospel. And
what is it to be a kindler of light, but to be Author thereof.

4. Fourthly they say, that Luther was the renewer, the Founder, the Restorer,
the setler and promulgator of their Church and Religion. Zuinglius in Exegesi
tom. 2. fol. 358. writes, that Luther challenges to himself all the
instauration of says. Illyricus in Schusselburg. tom. 13. Catal. haeret. fol.
850: This same religion was renewed and settled by Luther. Hamburgenses ibidem
fol. 658. Renewed religion and settled it
Luther truly the renewer of divine worship. Heshusius lib. de praesentia
Christi says of Luther: He was that notable instrumens by which true religion
was renewed. Saxonici in the conference at Aldburg Scripto 7. page 319. speak
thus: Since the time of the Ghospel renewed by Luther. Hemingius in
Schusselburg. lib. 2. Theol. Calvin Pap. 133. Luther restored the ancient
worship which our first parents received of God, and which Christ commended to
his Church. Calvin admonit. 2. page 147: By his endeavor principally the
purity of the Gospel was restored: And page 768. God raised Luther and
others, Restored purity of the Ghospel.
by whose Ministry our Churches were founded and instituted. The Protestant
Princes in Germany in Schusselburg tom. 13. catal. page 877. write that the
King of Navarre willingly affirms the French Churches to acknowledge Luther
to be their Father in Christ. Or as Thuanus lib. 79. histor. reports their
words: That Luther is esteemed and honored of the French Churches as their
Father in Christ, and that by his ministry truth was first pulled out. Beza de
Haeret. puniend. page: 148: Luther the Renewer of Christian Religion. Renewed
Religion.
And in his Images: The principal instrument of Christianity renewed in
Germany Danaeus cont. 5. page 1135. reckons Luther among those, of whom
(says he) all other men have received what light of the Gospel they have.
And lib. 1. de Euchar. cap. 1. First Renewer of the Church and truth.
terms him the Renewer of the Gospel of Christ. And Apol. pro Eccles.
Heluet: The first renewer of the Church. Hospin. part. 2. hist. fol. 134: The
first renewer of Evangelical truth and doctrine. Bucer Resp. ad Episc.
Abrincen. page 613. writes that God by Luther has merueilously and happily
restored the sum of the Gospel in our age. Restored the sum of the
Gospel Restored Religion.
D. Whitaker cont. 2. quest. 5. cap. 12. page 528: Luther only took upon him
to restore religion corrupted, and to renew the ancient and true doctrine. And
ad Rat. 10. Campiani calls him the Renewer of the old says, or as the
English Apology terms him the promulgator of this doctrine. D. Humphrey in
Prolegomenis page 82. says: We reverence Luther as a great renewer of
Religion. And what is it to be a renewer, Restorer, Setler of a thing
corrupted, especially if he restore the sum thereof, as Bucer said that
Luther restored the sum of Religion, but to be an Author or maker of it
according to the very substance thereof.

5. Finally, they plainly grant, that Luther was the first to whom Protestancy
was revealed, that he laid the first foundation of Protestant Religion, and
that he was the captain, Luther first to whom Protestats was revealed:
Author. and Begetter thereof. Luther himself in sermon, Quid sit homini
Christiano praestandum tom. 7. fol. 274. speaks thus to Protestants: I was
the first whom God set in these lists. I was also the first, to whom God
vouchsafed to reveal these things which are now preached unto you. Behold
Christian Reader a new Theod. l. 2. c. 18.
Aetius surnamed Atheist, who said, that those things were now revealed to him
by God, which hitherto he would have to be hidden unto all. A new Basil. l.
cont. Eun.
Eunomius, who said, that he had seund a new way to God and unheard of which
none before had perceived. A new Vinc. c. 42.
Nestorius, who gloried that he first understood the Scripture. A new
Cataphryge, Athan. de Synod.
who said: We have the first revelation and of us begins the Christian
says. For of thee (Luther) began the Protestant faith, and thou were the
first, to whom the God of this world (as the Apostle speaks) vouchsafed to
reueueale those things which have been preached to Protestants: Praescrip.
cap. 34.
To thee alone (that I may use Tertullians words) has truth been revealed.
Forsooth thou have found greater favor and more plentiful grace at the
Devils hands. Again in exposit. Papaselli tom. 2. Laid the first foundation
of Protesta^cy.
fol. 398. Luther has these words: When I laid the first foundation of this
cause, as Bullinger Praefat. Comment. in Joan. writes of Zuinglius saying:
When Zuinglius laid the first foundation of Evangelical doctrine. Moreover
Luther tom. 1. fol. 206. writes thus to his most inward fellow Melancthon: The
city is full of the noise of my name, An Herostratus.
and all men desire to see the man the Herostratus of so great a fire. Ye see,
how in a letter to his most assured friend, he confesses himself to be the
Herostratus, that is, the Author of that fire wherewith not the temple of
Diana, but the temple of God burns. Melancthon also acknowledged the like, as
it appears by these words of Luther in a letter to him tom. 9. Wittemberg.
Germ. fol. 416. Thou writest, Author and leader.
that for my authorityes sake thou did follow me as the author, and leader or
captain in this matter. Behold how Melancthon accounted Luther the Author.
And what suspicion is there, that Melancthon should in this matter write
otherwise to him then he thought. Schusselburg tom. 8. Catal. page 363.
defines true Lutherans or Protestants to be those, who embrace the doctrine of
the Gospel amending Popish abuses, of which amendment (says he) Luther was
the Author. And the same mean they, who call Luther the Author of the
Protestant reformation. For they protest amendment or reformation is indeed (as
has been showed before) a substantial mutation or change of religion, and
therefore the Author of such an amendment or reformation is indeed the Author
of a new Church and religion. D. Sutcliue lib. 2. de Eccles. cap. 3. page 237.
writes in this manner: Who were the first Authors of raising the Church
fallen down, Author.
as Cranmer, and other our Bishops, also Luther, Zuinglius etc. And cap. 7.
page 328. The Princes who first followed the Authors of restoring religion.
Osiander in Sleidan fol. 22. said that Luther and Melancthon had made a
certain divinity which sauoured more the flesh then the spirit. Maker.
Lobechius disput. 1. page 26. calls Luther the first deviser of the
Confession of Auspurg. Deviser.
And Melchior Neofanius Pastor of the Church of Brunswich in loc. Kemnitij
part. 2. says: How much does all Duch-land owe to worthy Luther for his great
deserts, who was the Author of pure Religion. Author.
D. Couel also in his defens. of Hooker art. 19. page 130. plainly confesses,
that some Protestants make Luther and Calvin Authors of the religion which
they hold. And M. Horn in his harbor makes England speak in this manner:
Begetter.
I am thy Country England, which brought forth blessed man John VViclise, who
begot Hus, who begot Luther, who begot truth. And hereupon it arises, that
(as Rescius in his Ministromachia p. 15. reports) the Lutherans call Islebium
(where Luther was borne) their new Bethleem. A new Bethleem.
Forsooth because there was borne their new Messiah, the begetter Author, and
founder of their religion. Mark now Reader how Luther, by his own and other
Protestants confession was, the first to whom Protestant doctrine was
revealed, laid the first foundation of the Protestant cause, was the Author of
the Protestant amendment or reformation, was the deviser of the first
Protestant Confession, was the Herostratus of the Protestant fire, finally was
the leader, maker, begetter, and Author of the Protestant Church, and
Religion. Which is in plain terms the very same which in all this book I
endeavor to prove. Justly therefore may Protestants sing to Luther as
Lucretius did to his Epicure the Author and beginner of Epicurisme. Lib. 3.
Those also of Basse were not ashamed in the Epitaph of his tomb to call
Oecolampadius, the first author of Evangelical doctrine in that city, as
report Hospin. and Lauather in their Hostories an. 1531. and Iunius lib. 4. de
Eccles. cap. 8. Neither was it peculiar to Luther to spread devises under the
name of religion For thus writes Iezler. de bello Euchar. fol. 26. of
Ministers: Matters devised of some few, we thrust upon the whole world. And
King Henry 8. when he began to incline to Protestancie, set forth articles with
this title, Articles devised of his Majesty.

6. And from this evidence and acknowledgement that Luther was the Author of
Protestant religion, it proceeds. First, that Luther oftentimes calls it
his doctrine, his gospel, his word, his cause, his part. For so he speaks
tom. 1. fol. 138. tom. 2. fol. 23. Protestancy is Luthers doctrine.
29. 93. 238. 488. 493. 493. tom. 3. fol. 555 tom. 5. fol. 290. tom. 6. fol.
79. and other where often. Secondly it arises that true Protestancie is called
Lutherans doctrine, the Lutheran cause, the Lutheran religion, Protestants
term themselue Luthera^s,
the Lutheran business, and Lutheranisme. Of Luther himself tom. 2. fol. 37.
and 497. Of Frederick the Electour tom. 1 Lutheri fol. 237. Of his Counsailers
tom. 2. fol. 116. Of the deuines of Mansfeld in Schusselburg tom. 8. page 270.
Of Schusselburg himself Epist. dedicat. tom. 4. Of Melancthon tom. 2. Lutheri
fol. 193. 197. Of Kemmice Epist. dedicat. lib. de duabus naturis. Of Hutter in
Analysi Confess. August. page 595. Of Brunsfelse Respons. ad Spongiam Erasmi.
Or Lobeen^us in Epist. dedicat. Disput. O^ George Fabritius l b. 1 and 8. Orig.
Saxon. and of other Lutherans. And in like manner of Sacramenttaries also, as
of Bucer in Matthew. 26. and lib. de Cura animorum page 261. Of Hospin. Prefat.
part. 2 Histor. Of Scultere Con. saecular. Of D. Morton 1. part. Apol. lib. 1.
cap. 45. and others Thirdly thereof proceeds, that the true and proper
Protestants are called Lutherans, both of themselves and of others. For thus
speaks Luther in psalm. 118. tom. 7. fol. 551: I grant my self to be a
Lutheran. And in like manner speaks he ibidem fol. 79. 242. 233. 361. and
400. And tom. 2. fol. 473. and in Hospin. part. 2. fol. 134. So also speaks
Melancthon in dominicam 8. Trinit. tom. 1. and in Hospin. lib. cit. fol. 72.
and Brentius also ibid. fol. 107. So speaks the Confession of Saxony in the
Preface, and the Saxon Ministers in the Conference of Aldburg page 60. Urban.
Regius in Iudicio de Conuentu Norimberg page 9. Amsdorse in Bucer in Scriptis
Anglicis p. 635. Matheus Index in Edicto aeterni Dei. James Andrews in Colloq.
Montisbel. page 179. Yea Grauer in the Preface of his Caluinisticall
absurdities dedicateth his book Unto the proper Lutherans: and page 61.
affirms, that their men are called Lutherans, that they may be distinguished
from Papists and Caluinists. Scusselburg tom. 17. Catal. page 866. says, The
Deuines of our part call themselves, and the Defenders of their opinion,
Lutherans. Which also affirms Reineccius tom. 1. Armat. cap. vlt. Hutten in
Expostulat cum Erasm. says: I acknowledge the name of Lutheran. And
Hailbruner: We are not ashamed of the name. And Andrew Schafman in Prodromo
brings many reasons to prove, that they did well in calling themselves
Lutherans. And those of Berga (as Hospin reports in Concord. Discord. c. 20.)
say that, All the sincere doctors of the Church call themselves Lutherans of
Luther. The same also testify the Sacramentaries. For those of New stade
against the book of Concord. cap 6. page 213. say they account none a sincere
disciple of Christ, unless he will be called as well a Lutheran as a Christian.
The author of the orthodoxe Consent in Prefat. Apologet. They take to
themselves factions names upon a preposterous and too great esteem of their
masters. Parcus in cap 2. Galat. sect. 24: They do not only call themselves
Lutherans of Luther, but also will be so called of all. Beza in Conspicil. page
8: Ye all will be named and called Luthera^s. And page 56: Not content with the
name of Christians, they call themselves Lutherans, and rejoice to be so
called. Danaeus Apol. cont. Iac. Andr^ae says that, He glories in Luther as
in another Christ, of whom every where be thundereth, and calls himself a
Lutheran a Lutheran etc. And Resp. ad Selnecer he says, that Selnecer Freely
confesses, that the Ducth Churches term themselves Lutherans. Vrsin in
Catechism. page 494. says: This is the opinion of them who call themselves
Lutherans. Zauchius Epist. dedicat. Miscellan: Many are not ashamed even in
printed books to all themselves Lutherans. And Iezler de bello Euchar. fol.
115: Some have no shame even in pulpit to say: We will be Lutherans constantly.
And at some times even the sacrame^taries seem to be desirous of the surname
of Lutherans. For those of Newstade in Admonit. de lib Concordiae page 106.
compliane, that some would seem to be the only disciples of Luther. Musculus
in locis tit. de haeresi page 604. says: No man condemns true Lutherans,
unless he be ignorant of the truth or very naughty. And the Protestant Princes
of Germany in Thuan. lib. 79. Histor. page 595. relate, that the King of
Navarre wrote to them, that if the French Protestants, were to be termed of any
man, they ou^ht most of all to be called Lutherans. Because when this name was
odious in France for almost therscore years, many by fire, by rack, be death
sealed with their blood the testimony of that doctrine which they received
first of Luther. Scultete also in Concion^ saeculari co^pareth Luther with the
Apostolical men. Besides the Sacramentaries call Luthers true follwers
Luthera^s, as Zuinglius tom. 1. fol. 420. 436. 470. Oecolampadius ibidem fol.
479. and in Hospin part. 2. fol. 84. 112. 126. Tigurini ibidem fol 88. Bucer in
cap Romans and in Scriptis Angl. page 669. Martyr tom. 2. loc. Epist. ad Calvin.
Hospin. lib. cit. fol. 91. Calvin in Zancius lib. 2. Epist. page 78. Daneus
ibidem page 401. Zanchius himself page 394. Pareus lib. 5. de Amiss. great.
cap. 1. and 2. lib 4. cap. 17 lib. 6 cap. 1. Vorstius in Antibellarm. page 561.
D. Whitaker cont. 1. quest. 2. cap. 3. and quest. 5. c. 8. and quest. 6. cap.
9. cont. 4. quest. 5. cap. 3. and lib. 3. de Concupisc. cap. 9. and lib. 3. de
Scrip. cap. 2 sect. 3. D. Fulke de Success. page 321. M. Perkins in Explicat.
Symboly col. 781. and 790. Yea Iezler loc. cit. fol. 39. and Vorstius in
Collat. cum Piscatore write, that properly and vulgarly they are called
Luthera^s. Whereupon D. Humfrey ad Rat. 2. Campian. page 128. says, Lutherans
vulgarly called.

7. Hereby we see, first that the Lutherans glory of the name of Luther, as the
Donatists (which S. Augustine reports) did of the name of Donatus. Secondly,
that they glory of a schismatic name: for such is the name of Lutherans, as
Luther himself confesses in D. Morton part. 1. Apol. lib. 1. cap. 8. And
Hospin Praefat. part. 2. Histor. Vorstius in Antibellarm. page 149 Yea D.
Whitaker cont. 2. quest. 5. cap. 2. says, that to take the name of any man at
all, is Heretical and schismatic, and that heretics carry the names of
their masters, and willingly acknowledge such names. Thirdly it appears, that
the English Apology untruly said, that Luthers disciples are called Lutherans
in disgtace or derision. For Grauer lib. cit. says, they are termed so for
distinction sake. Lauatherus and Hospin. Praefat. Histor. say, they call them
so for doctrine sake; that it may be known whom they mea^e. And Scul eye so
terms them for honors sake. And surely since both Sacramentaries, the common
people, and themselves also term them Lutherans, and glory also in that name,
it cannot be said, that they are called so in disgrace or contemp. Fourthly it
appears to be false, that D. Morton lib. cit. and D. Sutliue lib. de Eccles.
cap. 2. say: It is rather to be attributed to a lie then to Luthers desert,
that Protestants call themselves Lutherans. For (as we see) Luther himself
called them so, and therein they follow his example. Neither skilleth it, that
Luther did once dislike this name, because he did oftentimes use it, and it was
usual to Luther to allow and disallow the same thing. Fifthly we see it to be
false, which D. Whitaker writes cont. 2 quest. 5. cap. 2 page 494: None of us
ever called himself a Lutheran: we acknowledge not these names, nor are we
delighted with them. This name our adversaries have fastened upon us, only upon
malice and envy: Neither are we called Lutherans but of the Papists. False
also is that, which D. Fulke says de Success. page 188. that they acknowledge
no other name proper to their religion, but the name of Christians and
Catholics. These I say are false; for Luther (whom D. Whitaker accounts
his father) and the Lutherans (whom he terms his brethren in Christ) do
call themselves so, and are well pleased with that name. Besides, they are so
termed of the Sacramentaries and common people, and therefore not of Papists
only, nor upon malice and envy, but (as Grauer said) truly for distinction
sake, and that most justly. For as S. Athanase says, Who derive the origin of
their says from other then Christ, justly carry the surnames of their Authors.
But Protestants (as we have showed) confess that they derive the origin of
their faith from Luther. Therefore justly they bear his name.

8. Out of all which has bin rehearsed in this chapter, I thus frame my ninth
demonstration of this Matter: If Luther and many other famous Protestants
sometimes indeed, some times in plain words do confess, that Luther was the
Author of their Church and religion, he ought to be so taken and esteemed. But
they do so confess. Ergo. The Minor is evident by all that is said in this
Chapter: And the Mayor, by what we said in the Preface. For so many and such
principal Protestants knew well the origin of their religion, and willingly
would not lie to the disgrace and overthrow thereof.

That Protestants cannot prove their Church to have bin before Luthers time, by
any probable argument or sufficent testimony. CHAP. XV.
THE tenth and last demonstration for to prove that Luther was the first Author
of the Protestants Church and religion I will take from hence, that albeit
Protestants do sometimes boldly affirm their Church and religion to have bin
before Luthers time, Yet they can never prove it by any reasonable argument or
sufficent testimony. Which thing alone would suffice to show, that (as I said
before) it is a fable vainly feigned, falsely affirmed, and fondly believed.
It has bin always the fashion of heretics boldly to avouch any thing, but
few things to prove even in show. This S. Augustine does often observe in the
Manichees and Donatists, and some of his sayings we have alleged before. Of
Eunomius S. Lib. 2. cont. Eunom.
Basil notes the same, and S. Sermon. 6. in psalm. 118.
Ambrose of all heretics saying, Heretics are wolves, they can howl, but
prove nothing. And this do Protestants confess. For thus D. Whitaker cont. 2
quest. 5. cap 18: Heretics are wont to boast and promise truth, In Diatrib.
but not to prove it. Of Luther thus writes Zuinglius tom. 2. fol. 473. and
509: One argument he has in all these matters, He said it. And fol. 447:
Luther relyeth only upon his ^oyes and devises. Fol. 395: Thou put forth
whatsoever the motion of thy affections do appoint, and when a reason of thy
saying is exacted of thee, thou stand naked, unarmed. And of the Lutherans
thus writes Erasmus: They say it, and for that alone they will be believed. Of
the Sacramentaryes in like manner Luther writes in defens. verb. Coenae tom.
7. fol. 384. One word not easily ouerturneth all these things: for if you deny
them, then as butter melts in the sun so they quail. And the same is evident
to all that read the books either of Lutherans or Sacramentaryes. In the mean
time they cry to us, that that Pythagoricall word: He said it, has no other
place but in Whit lib. 2. de script. cap. 10. sect. 5. Bullenger in comp. l.
1. c. 3.
Christ and the Scripture: that in other it is the proper argument of Vorstius
Antibel. p. 468.
fools: that to affirm any thing beside scripture, is to Powel. l. 1. de
Antic. c. 19.
trifle: that til we prove our affirmative, they will stand in their Luth. tom.
2. fol. 437.
negative, and exact Vorstius l. cit. Fulke de success. p. 74.
demonstrations, that is, either express testimonies of scripture, or forcible
reason deduced from thence. Now we say the same to them. They affirm their
Church to have bin before Luthers time. We deny it until they prove it. Neither
let them affirm it only, which is the proof of fools and wilful men, but if
they cannot bring demonstrations thereof, at least let them produce some
credible testimony, or some effectual reason and argument. Otherwise their
belief in this matter, Scorp. c. 11.
is (as says Tertullian) a perverse belief which will not believe things
proved, and belieueth things which cannot be proved.

2. That in this matter they be destitute of all credible testimony, appears
sufficently by what has heretofore bin rehearsed of their own confessions,
and now we will show, that they want also all probable reason or argument. For
all their arguments herein be reduced to this one: Our doctrine is the doctrine
of Christ: Therefore our Church was always since Christ. For thus agrees D.
Whitaker cont. 2. q. 5. c. 3. p. 498: I use this argument: What Church soever
keeps the doctrine and preaching of the Apostls, she is the Apostolical
Church. But our Church does so, Therefore etc. Of the Mayor (says he) no
controversy can be made. And cap. 5. p. 505: It was our Church which was in the
time of the Apostles and afterward unto the Apostasy. But how do we prove
this? By this reason, that our Church keeps the same faith and doctrine which
the Church in the Apostles time and afterward kept. And cont. Dureum sect. 1:
If thou hold Christ's doctrine thou art a Catholic. And sect. 2: It must
needs be the true Church of Christ which keeps and conserueth Christ's
doctrine delivered in his word. Dancus cont. 3. page 388. With us is the true
Church of God, because we restore the true doctrine of Christ. Lubbertus lib. 5
de Eccles cap. 1: If the doctrine which our Church professes, be the same
which Christ delivered, then our Church is that which Christ instituted. D.
Fulke lib. de Success. page 27: Seeing we are ready to prove out of the
scripture, that we profess the same doctrine of faith, and manners, which
Christ would have to be perpetual by evident reason, our succession is
manifest, although all Historyes were silent of the names of the Persons and
continuation of succession. And the like he has page 154. and 331. D. White in
his way page 403. says he knows his Church was always, because it holds
the faith of the Scripture, which cannot be extinguished. The like he says
page 320. and 326. Likewise Luther de notis Eccles. tom. 7. fol. 149. Calvin in
Matthew. cap. 24. verse. 28. and generally al of them whiles they make the truth
of doctrine the infallible mark of the Church. Lib. 2. contra Arian.
O proof (that I may cry out in S. Augustins words) O error, o dotage. And
with S. Athanase: A worthy heresy which wants probable reasons to under
proppe it. For this argument on which all their belief, that their Church was
before Luther does rely, is a most fond sophisme, and most counterfeit
syllogism, as manifestly appears, whether it be framed in that form wherein
D. Whitaker has proposed it, or whether it be reduced to this form: That
Church which holds the true doctrine of Christ has always been, and
consequently before Luther. The Protestant Church holds the true doctrine,
holds the true doctrine of Christ as (say they) we will prove by scripture.
Therefore it has bin always.

3. I answer that this argument is a manifest sophime for many causes. For if
the Mayor be particular, so that the sense thereof be, Some Church which
holds the true doctrine of Christ has always been, it is true because the
catholic church, which holds Christ's true doctrine, has always been: but
then the Syllogism is sophism for want of due form, inferring a conclusion
out of particular propositio^s. But if the Mayor be universal, according as it
is made of D. Whitaker, then so far is it from being out of controversy (as
he affirms) that it is manifestly false, and no way true, but only apparent,
and therefore unfit to make a true syllogism, but only a counterfeit and a
sophisme. Protestants assume a manifest falsity.
That it is manifestly false, is evident, because that Church or company of
Christians which is strictly and properly termed schismatical, holds the true
doctrine of Christ as both the Fathers teach, and the Protestants themselves
do also most plainly affirm, and yet it is not the true church of Christ.
Wherefore since (as the Philosopher teaches) those things are probable, which
seem true to all, or to most, or to wise men, and those either al or most, or
most approved, and such as are not probable serve only to make sophismes; The
foresaid Mayor, not seeming true to all, or most, or the wisest Christians, yea
not even to the Protestants themselves, it is manifest, that it is no probable
proposition, but only apparent, and therefore not fit to make a true
syllogism, but only an apparent and counterfeit.

4. That the Fathers teach that a Schismatical Church holds the true doctrine
of Christ, is manifest by S. Augustine who lib. quest. Euang. page 28. tom. 4.
says: It uses to be enquired, wherein Schismatickes differ from heret^kes,
That Schismatikes hold true doctrine.
and this found, that no difference in faytht but breach of society in
communion makes Schismatikes. And lib. de fide and Symbolo cap. 10: Heretics
by believing wrong of God violate the faith: but Schismatickes by wicked
divisions leap from fraternall charity, albeit they believe aright those
things which we believe. And lib. cont. Gaud. cap. 9. refuteth him, because he
had said, that Schismatikes and Heretics are the same; against which he says:
Thou art a Schismatike by sacrilegious division, and an heretic by
sacrilegious opinion. And lib. 1. cont. Cresc. cap. 29. and de gest is cum
Emerito affirms that the same faith is had out of the Church. S. Hierome in
Tit. 3. We judge this difference to be between heresy and schism that heresy
holds a naughty opinion, schism separateth from the Church by dissension of
Bishops. S. Gregory lib. 18. Moral. cap. 14. Some do believe false things of
God, others by Gods help believe rightly of God, but keep not unity with their
brethren, these are divided by schism. S. Isidor. lib. 8. Origin cap 3.
Schism took its name of breach, for it believes the same religion and rites
that others do, only is pleased to keep company a part. The same teach S.
Ireneus lib. 4. cap. 62. S. Chrysostom. hom. 3. in 1. Cor. S. Optat. lib. 1. 4.
and 5. cont. Parmen. and others. And it is manifest by reason. For if
Schismatikes did err also in Faith, they should not differ from heretics. And
it is granted both of old and new Heretics. For thus says Faustus in S.
Augustine lib. 20. cont. Faustum cap. 3. Schism if I be not deceived, is to
believe the same and to worship God in the same manner that others do, only to
be delighted with division of assemblyes. Calvin 4. Institut. cap. 2.. 5.
Austin puts this difference betwixt heretics and schismatiks, that they
corrupt the sincerity of the faith with false doctrines, these sometimes even
having the like says break asunder the band of society. And in. 1. Cor. cap.
11. verse. 19. It is known in what sense the ancient used both these nams
(schism heresy,) they put heresy in difference of doctrine, but schism rather
in alienation of minds, to wit, when any either upon envy, or hatred of the
Pastors or of frowardness departed from the Church. Beza libro de puniendis
Haereticis page 89: Shism properly is the division of those who believe the
same things And page 150. Let them remember that we term them not heretics,
who are properly called Schismatiques. The same he has in 1. Cor. 1. v. 10.
and other where. Plessie lib. de Eccles. cap. 1. page 16: We call erroneous
Churches either heretics, or schismatikes according as they err either in
faith or in charity. And page 32. What pertains to schismatic Churches,
either they are simply schismatic or when heresy also is adjoined as it
uses after schism, as an ague after a wound. And cap. 10. page 340. True and
pure Schismatiks are those, who holding the same doctrine yet make meetinges a
part. Peter Martyr in locis tit. de Schism. page 618. I think it more plain
to define Schism to be a cutting a sunder of the Ecclesiastical peace and
unity. And page 619: There may be schism in the Church without heresy. Aretius
also in locis part. 2. fol. 10: Schism sometimes in the same doctrine breaks
society. Bucan in loc. quest. 33. de Eccl. affirms, that shismatiks differ
from heretics because heresy properly is dissension in doctrine. Pol^n. part.
2. These. de notis Eccl. Albeit schismatical Churches agree in the doctrine of
truth etc. Zanchius tract. de Eccles. cap.: There may be breach in the symboles
of Charity, that is in participation of Sacraments communication of public
prayer, and such like other Ecclesiastical exercises, to wit when one thought
he agree with the rest of the Church of Christ in the principal heads of
Christian faith, yet I know not for what light causes withdraws himself from
the rest of the Church and communicates not with her in the sacraments. Such
(says he) are properly called schismatikes, M. Perkins in cap. 5. Galat. verse.
21. Heresy is in doctrine, Schism in manners, order, and government. D. Fulke
de Success. page 165: There may be schism in the Church, where the same
doctrine is held on both parties, and the one wants lawful succession. D.
Field lib. 1. of the Church cap. 7: Some profess the whole saving faith but
not in unity, as schismatiks. Dancus in August. de haeres. cap. 3. He is a
schismatike, who retayning the same doctrine of faith and that entire, yet
without probable and better reason follows not the decent rites of the
Church. The same he has Apol. pro Heluet. Eccles. page 1485. Bullinger tom. 1.
Decad. 5. sermon. 2. Vorstius in Antibellarm. page 190. D. Whitaker cont. 2.
quest. 5. cap. 10. D. Rainolds Praelect. 1. col. 2. Heshusius in 1. Cor. 1. and
others.

5. Now that proper Schismatikes, to wit, such as wilfully separate themselves
from the Communion of the Church, be not members or parts of the Church, is
clear by the testimony of the Fathers, That Schismatikes are out of the Church.
the confessions of Protestants, and manifest reason. S. Augustine lib. de fide
and symbolo cap. 10. says: Neither does an heretic belong to the Catholic
Church, nor a schismatike. Tract. 3. in 1. Joan. All heretics, all
schismatikes are gone out of the Church. Lib. 3. de Baptism. cap. 19. All
heretics and schismatikes are false Christians. And lib 2. cont. Crescon. cap.
29: I think not that any so doteth to believe him to belong to the unity of
the Church, who has not charity. The like he has in many places S. Ambrose
lib. 7. in Luc. cap. 11. Understand that all heretics and schismatikes are
separated from the kingdom of God and from the Church. S. Optatus lib. 2. The
Church cannot be with any heretics or schismatikes. S. Fulgentius de fide ad
Petrum cap. 38: Believe most steadfastly and doubt nothing; that not only all
Pagans, but also all Jews, Heretics, and schismatiks, which end this life out
of the church, are to go into everlasting fire The same teach S. Hierome, and
S. Chrysostom loc. cit. S. Ignatius Epist. ad Smyrnens. S. Iren. lib. 4. cap.
62. S. Cyprian lib. de unit. and epist. 42.51.55. S. Prosper de vocat. Gentium
cap. 4. and the rest. The protestants confessions of this matter we related
heretofore, amongst whom say, Lib. 1. c. ^ number. ^.
that this is an undoubted truth. Reason also conuinceth the same: for as
Calvin confesses 4. Institut. loc. cit. The communion of the Church is held
with two bands, to wit consent of doctrine and fraternall charity: But
Schismatikes break the band of fraternall charity: therefore they are not
within the Church. Again Danaeus lib. 3. de Eccl. c. 5. says: This is the
mark that thou art of the visible Church, that outwardly thou profess the
faith and communicate with the rest of the Church in the same Sacraments: but
schismatikes do not communicate in Sacraments with the rest of the Church.
And D. Field lib. 2. of the Church cap. 2. says: Communion in Sacraments
under lawful Pastors is an essential note of the true Catholic Church: but
Shismatiks want this communion. And Casaubon epist. ad Card. Peron. page 9. The
true Churches of Christ are united in the unity of faith, and doctrine, and
conjunction of minds and in true charity and offices of charity, especially of
mutual prayer. But Schismatikes are not united in charity and offices of
mutual prayer. Finally only Catholics are members of the Catholic Church, as
is evident and Whi. conc. 2. q. 5. cap. 3.
Protestants confess: But Schismatikes are not Catholics, as the very name
does declare, the Fathers doc teach, and Gesner loc. 24. Field l. de Eccles c.
7.
Protestants acknowledge.

6. By this it appears that the foresaid Mayor which is the foundation of
Protestants in this matter, is not only false, but also so manifestly false, as
out of this question, it is commonly denied of Protestants themselves. Besides
it is not only false, but also so improbable, that neither it is proved of
Protestants, nor can be any other ways, then by proof of fools or wilful
men, that is, by their own saying. For D. Whitaker (as we have seen) proves
it no other ways, then by saying, it is out of controversy. D. Fulke, that it
is manifest. But Luther more boastingly says l. de Missa priu. tom. 7. f. 247.
This is our solid foundation and most steadfast rock: Wheresoever true doctrine
of Christ or the Gospel is preached, there is necessarily the true holy
Church of God. And who doubts of this (says he) may in like manner doubt,
whether the Ghospel be the word of God. A notable proof surely, and fit for
Pythagoras school, and a sound foundation, on which to feigned a Church should
rely, and a fit rock for them to build upon, who have left the rock upon which
Christ built his Church. Wherefore that I may imitate S. Augustine in the like
matter. Lib. 1. cont Gaudent. cap. 33.
I ask whether God or man has told them, that wheresoever true doctrine is,
there is the true Church? If God, let them read it out of the Scripture, where
indeed we read, that where the true Church is, there true doctrine is: but
contrariwise, that where true doctrine is, there the true Church is, there we
never read. If men have told you this: Behold a fiction of man, behold what you
believe, behold what ye serve, behold for what ye rebel, ye run mad, ye burn.
Again, what kind of men were they, surely no other then your selves. And what
is your authority, I say not with us, but even with your selves? Is (as one of
your part said) the judgment of Lutherans or Sacramentaryes, the square of
truth? Moreover, Pareus l 3. ce ^^stifie. cap. 13.
seeing that three things are essential or substantial to the true church, to
wit, true doctrine, lawful Pastors, and people following their Pastors, nor
any thing can be, unless all the essential parts be, it is sophistry and
madness to infer, that that company is the true Church wherein one only of
these parts is to be found. If they say, that by the true Church they mean not
her which is true in nature, or essence of the Church, but only her which is
true in doctrine, of whose essence is only truth of doctrine. First they deceive
the Reader. For we speak only of the Church true in essence, not of that which
is only true in doctrine as a schismatic Church may be. Besides, if they
mean such a true Church and understand their foresaid Mayor universally, it is
false; for not every true Church in that sense is Apostolical or has ever
been. For a schismatic Church is true in doctrine, and yet is neither
Apostolical, nor has ever been. And if they understand their Mayor
particulerly the conclusion follows not, because it is deduced out of pure
particular propositions. And thus much of the Mayor.

7. Secondly the foresaid argument is a sophism because of the Minor, by which
one unknown thing is proved by another, one false thing by another, not only
false, Protestants proof out of a thing more unknown.
but also impossible. For it is more vncercertaine, that the Protestant Church
holds the doctrine of Christ, then that she was before Luther. For albeit she
were not before, notwithstanding it was not impossible that she should have
been, but that she holds the doctrine of Christ, is both false and
impossible also. And as Luther says in defens. verb. Coenae tom. 7. fol. 385.
It is a mad man's part to prove uncertain things by others as uncertain. And
D. Whitaker cont. 2. quest. 3. cap. 3. All proof is by things that are more
known. Which also he has cont. 2. quest. 5. cap. 18. Sadcel praefat. lib.
cont. Traditiones. Daneus l. 4. de Eccles. cap. 2. D. Morton part. 2. Apol.
lib. 1. cap. 37. Pareus lib. 3. de Iustificat. cap. 1. Whereupon Luther tom. 2.
Praefat. assert. Antic. fol. 95. writes Aristotle and all sense of nature
shows, that unknown things must be proved by things more known, and
obscure things by manifest. If therefore, (as Pareus says lib. 1. de
Iustificat. c. 20.) when the Adversary is brought to that, that eitheir he
gainesayth himself, or beggs that which he is to prove, assuming that in his
proof which is in debate, or trifleth by repeating now and then the same
thing, he is vanquished; surely then Protestants are vanquished, whom in this
small work we have showed oftentimes to gain say themselves, now including
these within the Church, now excluding them, now affirming the Church to be
invisible, now denying it, now to have always Pastors, now denying it, and
the like: And in this argumment, with which alone they prove the existe^ce of
their Church before Luther, they assume in the Minor, that which most of all is
in debate: Calvin. 4. Insticut. c. 1. 12. Narrat. de Eccles. Belg. p. 196.
And the Mayor they can prove no otherwise, then by trifling by repeating it,
and saying that it is out of all doubt. I add also, that the sacramentaryes
say, that the Lutheran Church erreth even in the fundamental points, and the
like say the Lutherans of the Sacramentaries, and scarce there is any
Protestant, who does not think that the Church whereof he is does err in some
points. What reason then have they, out of the trueness of the doctrine of
their Churches to infer their perpetual existence?

8. Thirdly I add, that the manner wherewith Protestants do prove the Minor of
their foresaid syllogism, is sophistical and not such as they exact of us for
proof of our doctrine. For commonly they exact of us to show, that our
doctrine is contained in express words in Scripture, or (as Luther says lib.
de seru. arbit. tom. 2. fol. 440) inso manifest testimonies as are able so to
stop all men's mouths as they are not able to say any thing against it. But
manifest it is, that such be not the proofs where with Protestants prove their
doctrine. For to omit other points, where is in express words in scripture
that fundamental point of their doctrine that we are justified by only faith?
Say the contrary is so expressly in S. James epistle, Tom. 6. in c. 12. Genesis
as therefore Luther blasphemously says S. James doted. And the Lutherans for
that very cause deny his epistle to be canonical. Besides, Whitaker cont. 1. q.
4. cap. 3.
Protestants do now confess, that the scripture is not of it self sufficient
to end all questions of faith, and that Schismatikes cannot be convinced by
scripture. How then can they sufficiently prove all the points of their doctrine
by scripture? Whitaker. loc. cit. p. 490. Plessy l. de Eccles. c. 9.
Again, themselves acknowledge, that they need certain means to attain to
the right sense of the Scripture and that their means are humane and not
infallible, as knowledge of tongues, conference of places, and such like, and
with all, that such as the means be, such is the exposition of Scripture. If
therefore their means be not infallible, how can their understanding of the
scripture be infallible? Moreover, they scarce ever prove any thing by both
principles out of scripture, but almost evermore adioyne one human principles,
as easily will appear if their proofs be brought to a syllogisticall form, as
well observe the most learned Bishop of Lucon in his defense of the Principal
articles of faith cap. 3. and 5. And how can they be infallibly certain of the
conclusion, which they cannot know but by one human principle, whereof they can
have no such certainty? Furthermore, because many of their proofs do not only
consist of one humane principle, Protestats conclude against sense.
which is not at al in the scripture, but also they infer a conclusion
directly contradictory to that which the scripture in most express words
teaches of that matter. As for example, when they prove that the Eucharist is
of not the very body and blood of Christ, always one of their principles is
humane; and besides their conclusion is flat contrary to express words of
scripture, which affirms that it is Christ's very body and blood. And who is
he in his wits, that will persuade himself, either that the scripture
means, that the Eucharist is not the body and blood of Christ, which directly
it never says, rather, then that it is his body and blood, which it as
expressly says, as ever it says any thing, or that that proof is not
sophistical, which out of one humane principle at least, infers the
contrary of that, which the scripture most expressly teaches? Lastly, they
never proved any one point of their doctrine any otherwise, then ever Heretics
do, that is in their own judgment never before any judge or general Council,
which Luther himself confesses in c. 27. Genesis tom 6. fol. 368. in the words:
In the affair of the Gospel we have decided the matter against all the impiety
of the Pope without form of law. We accused not the Pope, neither could we,
for there was no judge. Yea their doctrine has bin condemned according to all
form of law in the General Council of Trent and of the Patriarch of
Constantinople, to who^ they appealed, and of al other kinds of Christians.

9. Fourthly I say, that the foresaid argument is a sophisme, in that in a
se^sible matter (as the Church is) it concludes against the sense of all men.
For nether did any see the Protestant Church before Luther, neither did any man
feel or perceive himself to have bin a member of such a Church before that
time. Wherefore, as he should manifestly play the Sophister who would go about
to prove by scripture that the sun appears at midnight: so likewise does
he, who out of scripture endeuoreth to prove, that there was a protestant
Church before Luther, because all men's sense convince the one as well as the
other. Besides Protestants write, that though faith command us to believe
things which we see not, yet it does not command us, not to believe that which
we see, for otherwise faith should be contrary to sense, and none should become
faithful, but he should first be senseless. But surely wonderful is the
blindness or wilfulness of Sacramentaries, who in the matter of the Eucharist,
against the most express words of Scripture, will endeavor to prove by sense,
that there is not the body of Christ, when as the body of Christ there is not
sensible. And here in the matter of existence of their Church before Luther,
out of some apparent show of scripture, against the most manifest sense of all
men, will prove, that it was before Luthers time. When as a Church is a
sensible thing, and can be felt either of others, or at least of them who are
of it. How much better and more reasonably should they proceed, if in the
Eucharist where Christ's body is not sensible, they would rather give ear to
the most express words of scripture then to the suspicions of their se^ses,
which can judge of nothing but of sensible accidents; and in the matter of the
Church, whose being is se^sible, they would submit their uncertain (if not
false) expositions of scripture, not only to the sense of all men, but also the
most certain expositions of the Church and Fathers. But this shows, that in
their belief they are guided neither by sense nor scripture but out of them
both borrow a show of proof for that which of their mere wilfulnes or fancy
they choose to believe.

10. Thus thou see (Christian Reader) for how vain a sophisme, whose Mayor
is manifestly false and so false, as that out of this matter it is generally
denied of Protestants themselves, and so improbable also, as that it cannot be
proved in no show or color, and whose Minor is more doubtful, then the
conclusion it self, and the manner of proving sophistical, and no other then
the proofs of al Heretics be: for how vain a sophisme (I say) then the which
scarce any can be more vain, Protestants believe, or rather will seem to
believe, a thing wholly incredible, and in a thing sensible, against the sense
of al mankind, to wit, that before Luther there was a Church which held the
whose substance or all the substantial and fundamental points of Protestancy;
nor in so weighty a matter respect either their o^^e consciences, or the
judgments of men, or tribunal of God, or danger of their eternal damnation.
Surely, Homil. cont. Sabel.
that I may end with S. Basils words, I moan and bewail them that for a mean
sophisme and counterfeit paralogisme they cast themselves into hell.

11. Out of all which has bin said in this chapter, I thus frame my tenth and
last demonstration: If no sufficent testimony, nor any probable argument, but
only one sond sophisme, can be brought to prove that the Protestant Church was
before Luther, this is not to be believed of any wise and prudent man: But no
other proof can be brought. Therefore etc. And if it were not before Luther,
surely he is the Author of it. The Mayor is evident by it self, and the Minor
by what has bin brought in this chapter. Certainly if every one of the
demo^strations which we have brought, do not convince that the Protestant
Church and religion was not before Luther, at least all of them together
manifestly convince it. For by the first five demonstrations was showed that
before Luther it was not at all, it was in no place, was unknown of all the
world, was not seen of any, nor had any Pastors: And with the rest has bin
demonstrated, that after Luther arose no ancienter Protestant did ever appear
and adioyne himself to Luther, that all the first known Protestant had bin
Papists before times, that the Protestant company and religion is new, that
Luther and other plainly confess, that he was autho of that religion, and
finally that no proof besides one frivolous fallacy can be brought to show,
that such a Church or religion had bin in former times. And if yet any
Protestant doubt hereof, let him at least compare all the foresaid
demo^strations, wherewith so many ways out of the very testimonies of
Protestants we have showed, that no such Church was before Luther, with their
vain sophisme, wherewith they make show to prove the contrary, and he will
easily perceive on whose side this so important truth is like to stand. And if
he make any account of truth, of Gods service, of his own reputation, or
eternal salvation he will forsake the Protestants Church, and put himself in
the lap of the Catholic Church. Which (as S. Augustine speaks) even in the
testimony of all mankind has not only been in all ages since Christ, De vtil.
credendi cap. 17.
but also has had Pastors, nor has been visible only to her own, but to
others also, and to the whole world, and has most valiantly fought, overcome,
and triumphed over Jews, Pagans, Heretics, Schismatiks, and all the gates of
hell. To prefer before this most ancient, most glorious church, another newly
start up, many ages lurking, known to none not to her own, and destitute of
Pastors, flock, seat, and appearance, and in truth feigned, and devised, and
(to omit all other proofs) wounded deadly with so many confessions of her own
champions, and proved by one only vain fallacy; what other thing were it,
then to prefer lies before truth, darcknesse before light, death before life,
the synagogue of Satan before the Church of Christ, and finally wilfully to
cast himself headlong into hell?

What he must observe who will answer the foresaid demonstration. CHAP. XVI.
SEEING I have yielded so much to Protestants, and condescended to so unequal
conditions, as that I have undertaken to prove that Luther was the author of
their Church and religion by the only Confessions of Luther and other
Protestants, it is reason, that if any one of them go about to answer my
foresaid demo^strations, he hold observe these most just laws, which I will
here set down, and which themselves have prescribed to others.

2. See Iuel. defens. Apol. par. 2. c. d. 5. Kemnice Exam. tit. de script.
Epist. Monit. p. 145. Calu. cont. Seruet. p. 643.
First therefore touching the words of Protestants which I have alleged, let
him either confess that they are truly cited by me, or if he deny that, let
him not say it only, but let him show, that they are supposed, falsified, or so
changed, as that the sense which I allege and urge to my purpose, be either
quite altered, or else obscured. For if in any place for breuities sake the
words be so little changed, as the sense which I press, remain whole and
clear, it skilleth not. Because I argue not out of the mere titles or
letters, but only out of their sense and signification. Besides, if at any time
there be some color of cauiling about the alteration of the sense of one or
other place (for just cause I hope there will not be, though in so many places
as are here cited it were no marvel if some were mistake^) let him not
therefore cry, that all the testimonies are falsified, or think that thereby he
has satisfied all the rest.

3. Secondly touching the testimonies themselves, let him observe, that either
he answer them all, or at least those, which are the stronger, as for the most
part those are, which are noted in the m^rgent, otherwise by the judgment of
the Fathers and Protestants also, he will show in effect, that though he could
not hold his peace, yet could he not answer sufficiently. For as S. Augustine
Lib. 1. cont. Gaudent.
says: Surely that he held his peace, not his tongue, but his cause sailed
him. And in an other place Lib. 2. cont. Maxim.
: I take your silence for consent. S. Epi. 61.
Hierome: You confess more by silence then you deny by dispute. And again
Epi. 83
: It skilleth little, whether I bind mine adversary sleeping or waking, only it
is easier to bind one that is quiet, then one that resists. Tom. 7. fol.
384. 388.
Luther also: Evil consciences speak much besides the matter, but little to
the purpose, and seldom come to it. And he notes that it is the art and
nimblenes of Heretics, to skip over the matter and difficulty. Whitaker
pronounces it to be a sign of a most desperate cause not to touch the Matter.
And D Defens. of sermon. p. 243.
Bilson: To this thou answearest nothing and therefore all wise men conclude
that thou can not maintain that which I then did disprove. D, Sucliue lib. 2
de Eccles. cap. 1: The rest because they say nothing to it, I will take for
granted. For if there had bin any hope of r^futing it, or any place of
calmuniating without doubt they would not have bin silent. And M Pro Tortura
forti c. 1.
Burhill: Amongst the wiser both of our side and yours a^tergiuersatour does no
less hurt his cause then a bewrayer. For he seems to consent and grant, who
then holds his peace when silence is suspicious.

4. Thirdly touching the exposition of the testimonies, let him observe, that
when the words are clear and their sense manifest, he do not expound them or
wrest them to another meaning. For first, if clear words must be expounded,
there would be no end of expounding. Again, to what purpose should he expound
those words which need no exposition? This were, as Sermon. 14. de verb Apost.
S. Augustine says, no other then to go about to bring darkness into open
light. Besides, Protestants themselves say, that clear words ought not to be
expounded. For thus Luther co. 2. ep. ad Carolstad.
Luther: This rule (that one place is to be expounded by another) without doubt
is particular, to wit a doubtful or obscure place must be expounded by another
that is certain and clear. For to expound certain and clear places by
conference of other places is wickedly to mock truth, and to bring clouds into
light. The Ministers of Saxony in Pa. 303.
Colloq. Aldeburg. say to their fellows: Let them remember that exposition is
not to be admitted in clear places. And those of Hospin. fol. 161.
Zurich: Then there is need of declaration, when the words and sense thereof is
obscure. And Melancthon: Nothing can be said so properly, so plainly,
advisedly, which may not be depraved by some cauillation. Beza Ep. 41
also: It is easy to wrest other men's writings. And M. Dominis: l. 1. c. 3.
Let those words which are clear be kept in their proper and plain sense.

5. Fourthly let him observe, that in expounding the Protestants testimonies he
devise not hyperboles or figures at his pleasure, but let him bring good reason
why he expounds them figuratively. Either deny (says Cont. Prax. c. 13.
Tertullian) that these are written, or who art thou that thou deniest that
they ought to be taken as they are written. And the Protestants in Admonit. de
lib. Concord. cap. 3. say: If they would not that these should be understood as
they sound, why speak they so? And Brentius in Recognit. page 148. What
liberty what temerity is this of abusing words and devising a new Grammar? For
first the rule of understanding men's words is, that they be taken according to
their proper and common signification, unless the writer or speaker do by some
way declare the contrary. Whereupon Tom. 2. fol. 473.
Luther says: We have overcome, that words are to be taken in their natural
sense except the contrary be demonstrated. And Colloq. c. 8. Diu. 4.
D. Rainolds: That is the sense of words, in which they are commonly taken.
Besides, otherwise all force of proving any thing by any words of God or man is
quite gone. Note.
For since all the force of such proof stands in the sense, if this be
uncertain, and must be proper or figurative according as the hearers or
readers will, all the force of the proof shall depend upon the will of the
hearer or Reader. And hence it proceeds, that the proofs which Catholics
make out of Scripture against Heretics seem to some not to convince the^,
which falls out, not for defect in the proofs themselves, but for the manner
of the^, to wit because they be taken from words, which Heretics will expound
at their pleasure. And if there be no rule observed in expounding words, but
they be wrested at every ones fancy, what marvel is there, if Heretics
cannot be convinced either by the words of Scripture or any other whatsoever.
Moreover, if at the will of the Reader or hearer words may be expounded either
properly or figuratively, he that tells the greatest untruths, may be thought
to tell the greatest truths, and contrariwyse, be that speaks most piously,
may be judged to speak most impiously. Hereupon said Tom. 2. fol. 489.
Luther: If this license reign, I may interpret all things fitly, whatsoever
either Heretics or the devil himself has done or said, or can do or say for
ever. Where then shall be the means to refell an heretik or the devil? And
Ib fol. 220.
again: If it be lawful to play with figures at pleasure without yelding any
reason, what hinders but that all words have new senses? Furthermore, it was
the custom or heretics to devise figure of their pleasure. Thus Epist. ad
Serap.
S. Athanasius: Heretics rashly devise figures And Cont. Hermog. c. 27.
Tertullian: These are the subtilties and sleights of Heretics to call in
question the simplicity of common words. And this namely he notes of the
Praesc.
Valentinians, as l. de Haeres.
S. Austin does of the Priscillianists. And the same condemns Luther in the
Sacramentaries, and the Sacramentaries in the Anabaptists. Finally Protestants
themselves condemn this wresting of words from their proper signification
without just cause. Luther li cont. Ecchium tom. 1. fol. 354: If words do serve
thee as another Mercury at thy pleasure. And fol. 55: To say that Augustine
speaks excessiuely against Heretics, is to say, that Augustine almost every
where lied. And Praefat. in Artic. Smalcald. he bitterly inueigheth against
some who expounded his words against his meaning. The Ministers of Saxony in
Colloq. Aldeburg page 343. greatly complain of the Electorall Ministers, that
they miserably crucify Luther with their glosses, and page 337. say: It is
uncivil to feign a sense, which the words bear not. And page 304:
Whosoever goes about to cloak opinions which by themselves as the words sound
are false, he is guilty of them, especially if he be a Doctor of the Church
and Minister of the word of God. And in like sort the Ministers of the Electour
say to those of Saxony page 252. that they avoid Luthers words by sophistical
interpretation, and by opposing other places. And page 447: Let power be given
to expound and wrest Luthers writings according to pleasure and fancy, like the
Sybills oracles or Sphinx his ridles Besoldus also Praefat. in Comment. Luther
in Genes. tom. 6. fol. 497. thus writes of some: If they fall upon any such
places in Luthers interpretations by the clearness of which they may be
refuted, they feign that they are figuratively spoken, they devise tropes and
figures. And when the Sacramentaries expounded the words of the Confession of
Auspurge commodiously and dexterously, as they speak, according to their
opinion, Lobechius Disput. 1.
the Lutherans said: May not any in this manner subscribe to the Turkish
Alcaron, and make the canons of Trent or other sentences howsoever contrary,
Survey. ca. 17.
to be orthodoxall? M. Ba^croft thus writes of Puritans: You must bring strange
discords of which these men will not make some harmony. Again: To their profit
they can make Quodlibet ex Quolibet. Pareus lib. 2. de Iustificat. cap. 13.
says that it rises of a naughty cause to deprave the nature of words. And
lib. 4. cap. 1. calls it a heinous slander in Bellarmine, when he said that
many protestants speak one thing and mean another. The Ministers also of
Zurich in Hosp. part. 2. fol. 161. affirm, That he may justly be condemned of
madness of all who gives credit not to sound and clear words but to some
explication not of him whose the words are but of some other whose they are
not. Ye see how mad they are to be accounted, who should believe not the
plain and evident testimonies of Protestants rehearsed of us, but some other
man's exposition of them. Luther to. 2. Colloq. Aldeb. fol. 303. Schuss. to. 4.
Catal.
To which I add, that Luther and other Protestants do command, that according
to the civil law, words be expounded against him, who could speak more
clearly, and did not. Seeing therefore Protestants could have uttered their
meaning more clearly, if they had meant otherwise then in the foresaid
testimonies their words do signify, justly we may interpret their words
against them. Lastly Luther according to his own and other men's verdicts did
utter his mind plainly, and did condemn all doubtful manner of speech in
matters of religion. For thus writes D. Whitaker of him: He was an open and
plain man. D. White: Praefat. ad Demonstr. Sanderi. Defe^s. c. 33. Tom. 2 fol
114 215. Epist. ad Amsdorf.
They speak not always so plainly as Luther does. And Luther himself: I will
be plain. Again: I had never this dissimulation to pretend to dispute that
which I meant to determine. And in another place: I will not abide to be
suspected of such hypocrisy, to think otherwise then I write. And yet more: To
what is this double-tongued and hateful kind of speech, but under words and
letters to sow the seed of all heresies? The Confession of Saxony cap. 3: In
the Church we must avoid ambiguities. And Calvin de vera Eccl. reform. page
335: When in all matters plainness is to be used especially when religion is
handled it is not lawful to use craft and dissimulations. And the
Sacramentaries in Admonit. de lib. Concordiae cap. 3. page 62: We endeavor
nothing less then to seem to be of one opinion with them with whom we are
not. To conclude howsoever it may be, that one or other Protestant, in some one
kind of writing, had written hyberbolically or figuratively when he declared it
not; yet that so many, and so princ^p^ll Protestants, so often, and in so many
kind of writings as we have cited, and in a matter of so great moment, should
speak hyperbolically or figuratively, and yet not declare that they meant so,
is altogether incredible. Wherefore unless Protestants will overthrow the
very rule of understanding men's speeches or words, Note.
and make the fancy of the hearer or reader the rule of understanding them,
take a way al force of proofs out of any words what soever, imitate both old
and new heretics, follow that manner of expounding words which themselves have
condemned, expound Luther contrary to his own protestation, and confess that
Protestants in so great a matter spak one thing and thought another, and
finally affirm a thing so incredible, as one^ now we showed this to be, they
cannot interpret the foresaid testimonies of Protestants hyperbolically or
figuratively, unless they yield a sufficient reason or proof thereof.
Besides, if in this question of fact they not only reject the testimonies of
Catholics and of all other men besides their own, but also expound their own
men's testimonies as they list, they manifestly show, that in this matter they
will hear no testimony nor abide any judgment whatsoever, which is the most
evident argument that can be of a naughty cause. For to admit testimonies, not
according to the proper sense of the words, but to your own liking, is only
to admit the sound or figures of the words, and to reject the sense or
signification, which is the soul and form of them, and in which alone the
force of the testimony or judgment does consist.

6. Fifthly touching the reason or argument wherewith he will prove, that
Protestants in their testimonies by me alleged meant hyperbolically or
figuratively, let him not account it sufficient to show, that the same
Protestants in other places have said the contrary. First, because this will
not show, that they said not that which in the places which I cite they most
plainly and evidently did say, but only, that according to the manner of
Heretics and liars they gainesayd themselves. May a man accused of crime
expound figuratively his open Confession of that crime, because at other times
he denied it? Again Protestants themselves reject this kind of proof. For (as
we did see) the Ministers of the Prince Electour did reprehend those of the
Duke of Saxony, because they avoided Luthers testimonies by opposing other
places of his. And the Ministers of Saxony page 303. say: It is a frivolous
kind of argument; He said well sometimes, therefore here. Besides, it will be
as equal for me to infer, that Protestants in those testimonies which he
produces, did speak figuratively, because in those which I allege they
manifestly said the contrary. For to use Luthers words: Tom. 2. fol. 220.
By this rashness and license ye give your adversary leave to turn it against
you. Certainly if they clearly have said both, we cannot deny, but they thought
both, or ye must confess, that your pleasure shall be the rule and square to
know what they speak properly and what figuratively. Moreover, Protestants
cry, that the holy Fathers contradicted themselves. How often (says Luther)
do the Fathers fight with themselves. Tom. 2. Assert. Art. 2. and cont.
Cochleum. Praefat. Institut.
They are men that fight against themselves. We find the Fathers to have
taught contraryes, to have slumbered. And Calvin: The Fathers do often
skirmish amongst themselves, and sometimes fight with themselves. The like
says Melancthon com. 1. Lutheri fol. 341. Iacobus Andreae cont. Hosium page
282. Beza Praefat. in nouum Testamentum and in Schusselburg lib. 4. Theol.
Calvin. art. 32, Pareus lib. 2 de Great. and lib. arbit. cap. 14. and lib. 4.
cap. 4. Polanus part. 1. These. de Notis Eccles. Apologia Anglica. And D.
Whitaker lib. 5. cont. Dureum. Wherefore, either they must show some privilege
whereby Protestants be more excepted from contradicting themselves, then the
holy Fathers in their opinion were, or they must not infer, that they said
not that which they did in places by me alleged, because other where they said
the contrary. Furthermore, Hosp. to. 2. fo. 12. Beza in Co^spicil. Zuing to. 2.
fol. 412. 458. 460.
because both the Fathers and Protestants also (as I showed in the Preface) do
teach, that Heretics are wont to contradict them selves. And the
Sacramentaries both say and show by many examples, that Luther oftentimes has
gainsayd himself. And of Sacramentaries Schusselburg lib. 1. Theol. Calvin
art. 20. writes: That it is their property to contradict themselves.

7. Lastly, touching the weight of the Protestant Confessions which we produce,
let him not think, that it is any way impaired in that they have at other times
said the contrary, as if in this matter they were not to be believed, because
they have been taken in two tales. For the Confessions of those that are accused
be of greatest force against themselves, because (as I said) no man willingly
lies against himself, neither can these be discredited by any words of theirs
spoken in their own behalf. For what will it avail a criminal person, if he
deny an hundred times the crime, which he once openly confessed. And
protestants have not once, but oftentyms, most plainly, most openly, most
freely confessed those things which I allege. Again, though no credit be to
be given to a liar who gainsayth himself in matters for his own behalf or
against any others, nevertheless in a matter against himself, the greatest
yea even the devils open and free Confession ought more to be credited then any
other man's testimony whatsoever. Wherefore we allege Protestants sayings not as
testimonies, but as Confessions, neither produce them as witnesses, but as
Criminels confessing the truth against themselves. And as Saint Ambrose said:
Sermon. 5. de ^^uctis.
I admit not the devils testimony but his Confession: so I accept not the
Protestants testimonies, but their confessions. Let their testimony be of no
credit, either for themselves, or for others, or against others, undoubtedly it
is of great force against themselves. As the Latin Orator said: Thy testimony
which in another man's matter would be light, is in thine own matter, because
it is against thg self, most weighty. Besides Protestants cric, that it is
found to produce the Criminels as witnesses in their own cause, and that any
witness in his own cause is to be rejected. Vorstius Antibel. page 44^. 456.
Iu^^. Def. part. 2. c. 3. D. 5. Whitaker. cont. 4. q. 6. c. 2. and q. 4. c. 2.
Whereupon in the question of Supremacy they refuse the testimonies of all
Popes though never so ancient, never so learned, never so holy. How much better
may we reject the testimonies of Protestants, when they speak in behalf of
their religion, and yet admit their Confessions, when they speak against it.
These therefore laws of answearing so just, so equal, and approved of the
Protestants themselves, if he will not keep, who goes about to answer my
foresaid arguments, it will easily appear, that in very deed he could not
answer them. And if none endeavor to answer them, it will yet more
appear, that they can no way answeate them, and that this kind of dealing with
Protestants out of their own Confessions, is the fittest of all to stop their
mouths.

FINIS.
The Translatour to the Reader.
THE Author adjoined hereto a Catalogue of the Protestant Books with their
several impressions, out of which he gathered the testimonies by him alleged:
but because I thought it not needful for those that read this English copy, I
have omitted it. The Reader, if he please, may see it in the Authors Latin Copy.

THE INDEX OR TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS CONTAINED IN THESE BOOKS.
The first book of the essence or substance of the Protestant Church and
Religion.
CHAPTER 1. That sometimes Protestants admit very few into the Church, and
^equire very many things to the making of a member thereof. Chap. 2. That at
sometimes Pro^estants account P^pists to be of the Church. Chap. 3. That
sometimes Protestants acknowledge all that deny either fundamental or other
articles of faith Heretics, Schismatikes, and their professed enemies to be
members of their Church. Chap. 4. That sometimes they do grant Idolaters,
Infidels, Atheists, and Antichrist himself to be members of their Church.
Chap. 5. That Protestants sometimes account all their brethren, who under the
name of Christians, oppose themselves against the Pope. Chap. 6. That it is
necessarily required to a Protestant, that he believe Justification by only
special faith. Chap. 7. That it is also necessary to a Protestant, to believe
all the fundamental points of Protestancy. Chap. 8. Which are the fundamental
points of Protestancy, and what a Protsteant is.
THE SECOND BOOK. Of the Author or beginner of the Protestant Church and
Religion.
Chap. 1. THat Protestants confess, that their Church and Religion was
substantially perished when Luther began. Chap. 2. The shifts, wherewith
Protestants would delude their confessions of the substantial destruction of
their Church and Religion, refuted. Chap. 3. That Protestants confess, that
all and every one followed a differen^ Church and Religion from the^rs, before
Luther began to preach. Chap. 4. That Protestants grant that their church and
Religion was quite invisible b fore Luther appeared. Chap. 5. Those, which say
there were any visible Protestants before Luther, refelled. Chap. 6 That the
Church cannot be so invisible, as Protestants confess theirs to have been
before Lut e s time. Chap. 7. That Protestants acknowledge, that there were no
Protestant Pastors before Luther. Chap. 8. That the Church cannot be without
Pastors. Chap 9. That the Protestant Church was no where before Luther arose.
Chap. 10. The Sophistries, wherewith some Protestants would seem to prove that
in times past the Protestants Church was in Popery, refuted. Chap. 11. That all
the first known Protestants, had been Papists before times. Chap. 12. That no
auncienter Protestant then Luther stepped forth and adjoined himself to Luthers
company when he preached securely. Chap. 13. That the Protestant Church and
Religion is new. Chap. 14. That Protestants do in plain terms confess, that
Luther was the Author and beginner of their Church and Religion. Chap. 15. That
Protestants cannot prove by any sufficient witness, or any probable argument,
that their Church was before Luther. Chap. 16. What he must observe, who will
undertake to answer this Work.
FINIS.

