THE PRVDENTIALL BALANCE OF RELIGION, Wherein the Catholic and Protestant
religion are weighed together with the weights of Prudence, and right Reason.

THE FIRST PART,

In which the foresaid Religions are weighed together with the weights of
Prudence and right Reason according to their first founders in our English
Nation, S. Austin and Mar. Luther. And the Catholic religion evidently deduced
through all our Kings and Archbishopps of Canterbury from S. Austin to our
time, and the valor and virtue of our Kings, and the great learning and
Sanctity of our Archbishopps, together with diverse Saints and miracles which
in their times proved the Catholic faith; so set down as it may seem also
an abridgment of our Ecclesiastical Histories.

With a Table of the Books and Chapters contained in this Volume.

PSALM. 118. The wicked have told me fables, but not as thy Law. Printed with
License. 1609.

EPISTLE TO THE MOST Noble and renowned ENGLISH NATION my most dear
Countrymen.
1. RIGHT Honorable, right worshipful, and dearly beloved Countrymen give me
leave to join you all in one Epistle, whom I contain in one breast of love,
and include in one lincke of entire affection. Because the end for which I
write unto you concerns you all alike and equally, to wit, the true
Religion and worshipp of God, and salvation of your own souls. A matter us of
the greatest weight and worthiest of Search, fo in these our miserable days of
most controversy and perplexed difficulty. Wherein to help you the better to
discern true gold from shyninge brass, true religion from false and
counterfeit. I have framed for you a Prudentiall Balance of Religion. by which
every one of you, may by the weightes and rules of right reason, and true
prudence weighe the Roman Catholic and the Protestant religion together, and
distincklie perceive whither of them is more likely to come from God and to
lead you to him.

Why this course of comparinge religions is taken.
2. And this course of comparinge these two religions together I have taken
before any other, because as the Philosopher teaches and experience
confirms. Contraria iuxta se posita magis elucescunt: Contraries put together
do more apppeare. As beauty in presence of deformity seems more gracious
and deformity more ugly; Truth before lies appears more love lie, and lies
more odious; virtue before vice more amiable, and vice more detestable. Every
thing as it were striuinge to show it self more when it is set as it were to
wrestle with the contrary. And I have made choice of comparinge these
religions according to the rules of ttue prudence and right reason, Why the
comparinge of religions according to rules of vvisdome is chosen before others.
rather then otherwise, as the most general, most easy, most evident, and
most effectual for all sorts of people. for albeit Catholics and
Protestants agree that to be the true religion of God which is most agreeable to
his word, yet since they neither agree which is his word, (Protestants
reiectinge much of that which Catholics reverence for Gods heavenly word) nor
which is they sense thereof, Thus Tertullian lib. de praescript. proved by*
reason the Cath. religion to be preferred before any heresy.
they can not be brought to agree about one balance of Gods word whereby they
may weigh their religions together. Besides that not only Catholics teach but
also Protestants confess, that the weaker sort of Christians can not judge
which is the true exposition of Scriptures. And therefore to weighe religions to
them by the balance of Scripture, D. Reinolds Confer. page 149.
were to weigh one unknown thing by an other. But the weights of Prudence and
right reason are both commun and evident to all, and therefore the weighinge of
religions by them must needs be most general, most easy, and most effectual
with all sorts of people. And if any refuse to have their religion tried by
these kinds of weights, What religion is against wisdom and reason is folly.
they confess thereby that they fear their religion to be contrary to wisdom
and reason, which is as much as to be fabulous and foolish. For what can be
opposite to wisdom and reason but folly and fables?

3. Nether let any think that that religion which is most agreeable to Prudence
and the light of reason, is not also most agreeable to Scripture. Because reason
and Scripture are both God his word and Gods truth, the one natural, written
by his own hand in our souls by creation; the other supernatural, written in
paper with the hands of his holy Scribes by revelation. The agreablenes of
Religion and reason.
And therefore though these two words be of different degree they can not be
contrary, but rather as twins of one and the self same parent have great
sympathy and connection together. For as God does not by his grace destroy the
natural inclination of our will to good but perfecteth it: So by his word and
faith he extinguisheth not but increases the natural insight which our
understanding has of truth. yea such is the force of our understanding to
pearce into Gods truth as that by it the Philosophers (as the Apostle
witnesses Romans 1.) came to know the invisible proprieties of God and his
everlasting power and divinity. S. Paul.
And since we see that men by the light of reason know so much of other moral
virtues as without all other teaching they perceive in many things what is
honest, what dishonest, what just, what unjust, what is virtue, what vice, why
should we doubt that God has given to us equal knowledge of matters of
religion and worship of him self. Which virtue as it is the cheifest of all
moral virtues, so the knowledge thereof is most necessaire of them all unto us.
Yea S. Austin accounted so much of Reason as lib. de vtil. credendi cap. 12. he
said that Recta ratio est ipsa virtus. S. Austin.
because it is the natural square and rule which God even in creation gives
to every one to know what he ought to do. Calvvin.
And Calvin says that Semen religionis est in mente humana. And Jewel art. 6.
diuis. 12. that natural reason holden within her bonds is not the enemy,
Iuel.
but the daughter of Gods truth. And therefore he must be very unreasonable that
will without cause be angrye with reason. Doct Reinolds.
And Doctor Reinolds in his conference page 207. says, Reason is a notable
help of man's weakness. This rule therefore of natural reason and prudence given
unto us by God, common and evident to all authorized by verdit of the Apostle,
confirmed by reason and approved by consent both of Catholics and
Protestants is that wherewith I intend to direct you in the choice of Religion,
and the Balance wherewith I purpose to to weigh before your eyes the two more
famous religions which are in our Land.

4. Not because I think that only natural light of reason is able without
all supernatural illustration from God to discern in all points which is the
true religion. But because it is able to discover which is false Religion, and
amongst many religions it can judge, which is most likely to be the true for
albeit God has not made his faith and religion evidently true, S. Greg. hom.
26. in Euang.
because then as S. Gregory says our faith should have no meritt. Nay as
Saint Thomas, S. Thomas. 2. 2. q. 1. ^rt. 5.
and the said S. Gregory show, it should be no faith, because faith, as the
Apostle defines, it is. Argumentum non apparentium, Hebr. 11.
of things not seen. Yet has he made his faith and Religion evidently
credible, and worthy to be believed, or as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 92.
Credibilia nimis. for if both God and man's law judge the testimonye of two or
three such eye witnesses, Gods religion evvidently credible.
as no just exception can be taken against them, to be evidently credible and
worthy of belife even in matters of life and death, much more will they judge
the testimony not of two, Deuter. 17.
but of twelve eye witnesses, which (as they say) have heard, Math. 18.
have seen, have fully perceived with there eyes, and have been beholders,
their hands have handled, and fingers have touched, 1. Joan. 1. 2. Pet. 1.
Joan. 20.
and against whose fidelity no just exception can be made; yea whose virtuous
and upright carriage in all other matters the world admired, Eye vvitnesses, and
they many holy. fortold by prophetie past and confirmed by present miracles.
and besides have there saying and testimony contested by such wondrous facts
as no man's wit can devise how they should be done by any power of nature or
art, but be true miracles wrought only by the divine power of God who is
above nature, much more (I say) will the law of God and of man too, (if it
proceed according to it self) judge the testimony of so many, and so
substantial witnesses, contested both by divine propheties before hand (as is
evident by the old law, which that they feyued not nor Devised themselves, is
manifest to the world by the attestation by their enemies the Jews) and by
many wonderful factes present, and those facts so authentically recorded and
regestred, as it can not be doubted; but they were done, unless against all
sense and reason we will deny all records of time past; and so wondrous, and
so far above the course and order of nature and art, as no man can justly
think, but they be true miracles and contestations from God himself. And this
is that kind of authority whereof S. Austin speaks when he says, Lib. de
vtil. Cred. cap. 16.
that if God have any care of mankind he has undoubtedly appointed in earth
some kind of authority, upon which we relyinge, may as it were by some steps
mount up to God. And no marvel; for since we have no means to be certain of a
thing, but by euidencie of the truth or by sufficient authority, and that we
cannot have euidencie of the true way to heaven, because it is as supernatural
as the end it self, and therefore as well out of the reach of our understanding,
as other supernatural things are, unless god had provided some certain
authority, whereby we might be assured of that way, we could never be certain
thereof but ever either erringe or doubtful. But god having left such
sufficient authority as he has to show us the way to heaven, has made it
thereby evidently credible, and worthy to be believed, and far more certain to
us, then, is they way to a traveler in a strainge country by the testimony
of those that dwell in the country.

5. And on the other side as he has endewed our will with a natural taste and
relishe of virtue, whereby of nature we abhor all vice and love virtue. So
also has he infused into our understandings a proportionable and
correspondent light and natural insight of truth, which shows unto the will,
which is indeed vice, which virtue. This light cheiflye consists in certain
general principles of virtue which God has given to our understanding as it
were rules and squares to direct it self in particular actions, by means of
which it is assured that what is agreeable to them is true and virtuous, and
what disagreable false and naught, and what seems to be most suitable to them,
most likely to be true and good. Of these kind of principles for choice of
religion one is that principle which S. Paul mentions Hebr. cap. 11. That
god is rewarder of them that serve him. And that which the Psalmist mentions
that Lex Domini est immaculata; Psalm. 18.
condemninge no virtue, nor admittinge any vice, but contrariwise most
exhortinge to virtue. and deterringe from vice; That only Gods religion can
be confirmed with true miracles. That his Religion has preachers lawfully sent
by him, and the like. And what religion we see clearlie to be contrary to
these principles, we may be sure comes not from God. And contrary wise
amongst all religions, what we see most agreeable to them, that we may think
most likely to be Gods Religion. As what religion we find amongst all to be
most immaculate from vice, and most vrginge to virtue, whose Preachers we see
to show best warrant for their commission from God to preach it, and to bring
best proofs of Gods miracles to testify it, that we may be full assured is
most likely to be Gods religion. For if all reason judge him to be the most
likely to be the true Ambassador from a Prince, who brings the best
assurance and letters of Commission from that Prince, and consequently that
which he delivers to be the Prince his message, rather than any other! what
reason, what wisdom, what sense can there be to tinke, but that is most likely
to be Gods message and meaning which being in it self void of vice, is
delivered by those, who show better proofs of there sendinge and testimonies of
there doctrine then any others? And heervpon it comes to pass that whenever
Gods true religion came in question with heresy before men addicted to
neither, but guided only by the rules of reason and natural insight of
religion given to them by God, it was always judged more likely to be Gods
truth then heresy. When in the time of the old law the Samaritanes contended
with the Jews for the truth of religion before the King of Egypt, the King
having heard the reasons and proofs on both parties, gave sentence for the
Jews. Joseph. 18. Antiq.
And in the time of the new law, when Manes the heretic contended with
Archilaus a Catholic Bishop before Heathen Philosophers, Hieron in Archla^
Epiphan. haer. 66. Cyril. Cateches. 6.
judgment was pronounced against the Heretic. Yea generally all sects, as
Jews, Turks, Heretics in judgment prefer the Catholic Christian
religion before all other religions besides there own. See infra l. 2. c. 13.
Which is a great argument, that it alone is indeed the true religion of God.
For as when diverse Cities of Greece contended whether of them deserved
greatest praise for a victory which they obtained against the Persians,
Plutarch.
the judges before whom the cause was brought demanded of every one of them
whom they thought to have deserved best after them selves, and all answeringe
that the Lacedaemonians; the wise Judges gave sentence that indeed the
Lacedaemonians had deserved best of all, for they saying every cittye to
prefer the Lacedaemonians before others, they perceived thereby, that if their
affection had been as indifferent between them selves and the Lacedaemonians, as
it was between the Lacedaemonians and others, their judgment would have
preferred the Lacedaemonians before them selves, as well as it preferred them
before others. And in like sort all sectaries who prefer the christian
Catholic faith before all others but there own, would also prefer it before
there own, if there judgment were guided with as much in differencie to there
own religion, as it is to others, and not ouerweighed with custom of likinge
there own and affection to there preconceited opinions.

6. Wherefore saying that on the one side Gods true religion is thus evidently
credible, and on the other side our understanding when it is not miseled with
passion or affection, Force of understanding.
but guided by the principles of religion engrafted in our soul by God and
directed by the light of reason is of such force that even by Creatures it can
come to the knowledge of God as it is said Romans 1. that my dear Countrynen may
with more facility and perspicuitie find out this so important matter as upon
which depends their eternal salvation, I have framed this Prudentiall
Balance in which by the weightes of prudence and light of Reason they may
weighe and compare the Roman Catholic, and Protestant religion, and see
whether of them is more like to come from God, and direct men to their
everlasting happiness. And in the first part thereof (which here I offer to
them) I compare these two religions according to their first founders in our
English nation: And in the second God willinge, I will compare them according
to their claims to the word of God, their translations or Copies of that word,
according to their manner of expoundinge it and other such general grounds
of Religion: In the third I will compare them according to their Doctrines:
And in the fourth and last part according to the effects which either of
them has wrought, especially in our English Nation.

7. In this first part I prove that the Roman Catholic, Se l. 1. c. 2. l.
2. cap. 1. What is sevved of luther many by also Provved of Calvvin or any
other sect master of our time.
and Protestant Religions in our English Nation, came first and originallie
from S. Augustine, and Martyn Luther. And therefore I compare these two religions
together in these two first founders of them in our Nation: and lay the
qualities and conditions of them fit for Preachers, in the two first books,
as it were each of them in his several Scale. And in the third I compare them
together according to the qualities discribed, that thereby the Reader with
indifferent judgment may weigh them, and consider, whether is the more likely
to come from god and to bring his religion, whether, from the Devil and to
preach his deceites. The qualities wherein I compare them are these five.
Learning, virtue, motives to preach, In what S. Austin and luther are
compared.
lawful vocation or mission, and right orders to preach the word of God and
administer his sacraments. And the points wherein I compare the Doctrins which
they brought, are these few Approbation of Christendom, VVherin their
doctrins are compared.
allowance of adversaries, Divine attestation by Miracles, and continuance. And
I show evidently by many irrefragable proofs (whereof ever one is the
confession of Protestants) that S. Austin was very learned, Luther ignorant;
S. Austin virtuous, Luther vicious; S. Austin moved to preach by heavenly
motives, Luther by human and naughty, Saint Austin lawfully sent to preach
his doctrine, Luther not sent at all to preach his; S. Austin rightly ordered to
administer his sacraments, Luther not ordered at all to administer his; Saint
Austins doctrine to have been the universal doctrine of Christendom in his
time, Luthers doctrine to have been contrary to the universal belief of
Christians in his time; Saint Austines doctrine to have been confessed by his
adversaries then, and ours now, to have been sufficient to salvation, Luthers
doctrine never acknowledged of us to be able to assure any; And finally Saint
Austines doctrine to have been confirmed by true, evident and confessed
miracles, Luthers to have wanted all color of such confirmation.

8 All these points (I say) I have proved by evident and irrefragable proofs
and testimonies, yea even by the confession of Protestants. Which, what man of
judgment and careful of his salvation considers, will (I hope) make choice
rather to follow Saint Austin and his doctrine, than Luther and his. For what
wisdom or reason, yea what sense should there be to think that God and his
truth were with ignorance, vice, naughty intention, want of mission and
orders, want of consent of Christianity, of confession of adversaries, and of
miracles; And the Devils lies should be with learning, virtue, holy motives,
lawful mission, right order, consent of christianity, confession of
adversaries, and divine miracles. If any say that though Luthers Doctrine want
the fore said titles of commendation and credibilitye, yet it has the gospel
which is to be preferred before them all: I desire such to consider with
themselves, how unlikely it is, Note.
that the gospel should stand with ignorance against learning, wirh vice
against virtue, with wordlie against holy motives, with runninge of his own
head against lawful sendinge, with no orders against right orders, with
auersion of Christendom against consent of the same, with detestation of
adversaries against there allowance, and finally with want of all miracles,
against certain and confessed heavenly miracles; and I hope they will be
easily persuaded that howsoever some make show thereof, yet the gospel cannot
indeed, and in the right sense stand with Luther against Saint Austin. Or if I
cannot persuade such men thus much, yet let me entreat them to suspend their
judgment concerning the Ghospells being on either side, till they see the
second part of this Balance, wherein God-willinge I shall weigh Saint Austins
and Luthers religion according to their claims to the gospel, and the right
sense thereof, and by Gods assistance evidently show, that Saint Austins
religion has as much advantage over Luthers, touching the true possession of
the gospel, and right sense thereof, as it has concerning the foresaid
titles. All our ancient Clergy, Catholic.


9 I have also in this part showed that the Roman religion of Saint Austin
has continued ever since unto our time in all our Bishopps, Prelates, Pastors,
Deuines, and Clergy (except Wiclife and his small crew) by the example of
their heads the Archbishopes of Canterburye, whom I show to have been in
number sixty nine, Likvvise all our laity.
and in religion perfect Roman Catholics. The like I show of the Queens,
ladies, Princes, Dukes, Earls, Nobles, gentile and commons, and generally of
all the laytie by the example of their heads the kings and princes of this
land, who sucessiuely (besides Seauentie more, who raygned in some part of
England, whiles this land was divided into many kingdoms) have been in number
sixty three, and in religion as perfect Roman Catholics as may be. See infra
lib. 1. c. 21.
In so much that it is confessed by Protestants that they knew not so much of
Protestancie, as that which they term the head, fountain and soul thereof.
Amongst whom you shall see the ancient and renowned king Inas of the Saxons,
lib. 1. c. 23.
professinge S. Peter's supremacy all most nine hundred years ago, and that
by letters engraven in stone; buildinge a Seminary in Rome for his subjects
there, Henry. 2. led P. Alexa^ders horse. Hen. 5. sued to have his Country
accounted a nation that owes devotion to the Church of Rome. lib. 1. cap. 25.
26.
and making his kingdom tributarie to S. Peter. And of the Normans blood you
shall see the most victorious Prince Edward the third professinge by public
letters, that it is heresy to deny the Popes supremacy, or (as the king
speaks) that the Popes judgment, omni humanae praesidet cecatura. Amongst
them you shall see the ancient and worthy king Ethelred, so devout to mass,
as he would rather adventure the loss of his army, of his kingdom and life,
than he would miss the hearing of a whole Mass: lib. 1. c. 26.
And yet by his devotion miraculously puttinge his enemies to flight. lib. 1.
c. 2. 3.
You shall see that wise Prince Henry the third to hear many Masses every day,
to kiss Priests hands at Mass time, cap. 26.
and prefer the saying (as he said) of his Savior there, before the hearing
of the best preacher speaking of him. finally to omit many other evident
testimonies hereafter rehearsed not only of their assured Romayne Religion,
cap. 2^.
but also of there zeal and fervor therein, And as many Queens.
fourteen of them even in the two hundred years after the conversion of our
Nation surrendered there scepters, Crowns, and kingdoms, and became either
Monks at home, or traveled in pilgrimage to Rome.

Lib. 2. cont Julian. cap, 10.
10. And were all these Archbishopps and their clargie, were all these kings and
there people blind? And has time (to imitate Saint Austins words in the like
case) so changed all things vpside down, that light is accounted darkness and
darkness light, that (to omit very many others confessed of Protestants to be
profound divines as you shall see herafter) S. Austin, S. Theodor, Lanfrancke
and S. Anselme who were the very lights of the land and of Christendom also in
there time for learning and virtue were blind, and Cranmer. Parkar. Grindall
and Whitgift (men of mean learning and as little virtue) did see? what in
Gods name should make any think so. for number we have all most seauentie for
four, for continuance all most a thousand years for fiftye; for learning we
have profound knowledge even by Protestants confession against mean skill;
for virtue we have famous and confessed sanctity against ordinary, if not
vicious life. If therefore either number, or time, or learning help any thing
to find out Gods truth, our Catholic Archbishopes are far more like to see
and epsy it than the Protestant Prelates: or if virtuous life move God to
reveal his truth, surely the Catholic Archbishops are more like to know it
than the Protestants. And in the like sort touching Princes, for two which
Protestants can produce, we can bring above one hundred and twenty: for their
child of Nine years old, and there woman we can produce above an hundred,
mature, grave, and wise men; who have they in valor comparable to our King
Egbert, first author of our English monarchy? to King Alfred the great
vanquisher of the daines, and deliverer of his Country; to our King William
Conqueror of England? to our Edward the first, Edward the third, Henry the
fifth, and many more most valiant and victorious Princes? whom in magnanimity
have they aunswerable to our King Ethelstan, to our King Edgar, King Canute,
King Richard Ceur de lion, and diverse others? who in largenes of Dominion to
our King Canute, our King Henery the second King Richard the first and
others? who in learning to our King Ethelwolf, King Alfred the great, King
Henry surnamed beuclarke and others? who in wisdom to King Inas King
Alfred, King William conqueror, King Henry the first, second, fourth, and
Seventh? whom finally have they to compare for virtue and sanctity with
King Ethelbert. King Edmund, the two Edwards. Henry the sixth and very many
more?

11. And shall we think that one child and a woman in so short time should
epsy that divine truth which so many Princes in a thousand years could not
find? That the infancy of a child and weakness of a woman should discover that
which the rare learning, wisdom, and judgment of so many grave Princes
could not attain unto? That the fruitles life of a child, and the ordinary,
(if not far worse) life of a woman should deserve of God to have that
revealed unto them, which the rare virtue and holiness of so many excellent
Princes who preferred his service before their kingdoms, could not obtain?
what were this but in matter of religion and everlasting salvation to give
that judgment and make that choice which in no other matter we would do? for
who is there if it lay in danger of leasing liuinges liberty or life would not
make choice to follow rather seauentie then four, an hundred rather than two,
men than children and women, and men of famous and confessed learning wisdom
and virtue than others of mean learning and ordinary (if not naughty)
lives? And will we when it is danger of loss of soul and salvation make the
contrary choice? what defense or excuse can we make of this proceedinge either
before God or man? will we say it is prudence in monye matters and temporal
affairs to follow many rather then few, men then children and women, learned
wise and virtuous, before others less qualified, and not to trust to much to
our own judgments; And can we think it prudence to observe the contrary
course in matters of religion and eternal salvation? does the matter so alter
the case? Is prudence become contrary to it self? or is Gods religion so
against all reason wisdom and judgment? Can we not become christians, but we
must leave to be reasoable men, admit Christ's faith, but we must banishe all
reason discreation and wisdom? No surely.

12. I would to God protestants would consider with what confidence and
securitye of conscience we may answer and appear before god at the latter
day for our faith. For if any faith or belief of Christianitye be laudable or
excusable before God, Conversion of our Nation to the Cath. faith prophetied of.
surely our is. Because we have taken no new faith, but (to omit all
external profes and keep within the compass of our nation) we retain that
faith of Christ, Boeth Histor. St^t. lib. 9. page 159. Bale Cent. 1. cap. 61.
to which that our nation should be converted from there Paganism, was
prophetied and foretold by holy men, as both Catholics and Protestants
record, that faith, which our forefathers and nation received above a thousand
years ago and from great learned and holy men, lawfully sent, and rightly
ordered to preach it, which all christendom, then and ever since held, which
the adversaries of it then and now confess to have been sufficient to
salvation; and finally which was contested by God by true and confessed
miracles. Causes of Catholics confidence for their faith.
And therefore we may confidentlye say to god in the day of judgment, that if we
were deceived in our faith, virtue, learning, lawful mission, right order
consent of Christedome, confession of adversaries, heavenly miracles, and
consequently Gods own testimony have deceived us, which is also gether
impossible. And contrariewise I would Protestants would think with what fear
they must come to render account to God, Causes of distrust of Protestants.
for forsakinge so ancient a faith and the faith of their forefathers for so
long time, which so great learning, so much virtue so lawful mission, so
right orders, such consent of christendom, such acknowledgment of adversaries
such divine miracles did comend unto them, for a new faith never hard of by
their forefathers, nor commended unto them selves by any of the forsaid titles,
but rather discommended by the contrary; as coming from an ignorant and
vicious man, neither lawfully sent, nor rightly ordered, and which was
contrary to the faith of christendom, condemned by all the chiefest
adversaries, and wholly destitute of all miracles, or divine testimonye.
Surely if want of learning, of virtue, of lawful mission, of right orders,
of consent of Christianytie, of confession of adversaries, of attestation from
God; Nay if ignorance, unlawful coming, naughty orders, Doctrine condemned
of christendom and of the chifest adversaries, be like (as they are most like)
to deceive, then surely our Protestants be deceived.

13. Open therefore your eyes for Gods sake, my most dear Countrymen, and be not
wilfully deceived, for wilful ignorance does not excuse, but increase your
fault before God. And consider that we exhort you not to a new religion, but to
a most ancient, and as it is commonly termed the old religion; not to a
strange religion but the religion of our own Country, Prelates, and
forefathers for almost a thousand years together; Not to an untried Religion,
but that which has been tried so many hundred years, and by which it is
confessed of our adversaries that diverse have been saved and are yet saved. Our
first Christian forefathers had good reason to relinquish the Pagan
stuperstition of their progenitors, and to embrace the Christian Religion, See
this proved lib. 1. cap. 4. 5. 13. 23.
which Saint Austin and his fellow laborers preached unto them, because they
saw it taught by great learned and virtuous men, to work great piety and
godliness in them that embraced it, and to be confirmed from God by assured
miracles, such as Britons then and Protestants now confess to be true
miracles. And we their children have the same motives, and besides the
experience and approbation, of one thousand years continuance to abide and
persevere in the same religion. But what cause alas had you my dear countrymen
Protestants to foresake so ancient, See all this proved. lib. 2. c. 6. 7. 8.
12. 14.
so godly a Religion of your forefathers, and embrace this new? what excuse or
color of reason can you make of this your condemninge your Ancestors for
blind, and their religion for folly? Did you see their religion confuted by
public disputation? No. Did you see yours defended by such rare learned men,
as never were in England before? No. Did you see it preached by such virtuous
men as never England had before? No. Did you see it bring forth such virtuous
effects and holy life as never was the like before? No D^d you see it
published by men that had better proof of there commission and orders from God
than any had here to fore? No. Did you hear it to be more approved of the rest
of Christendom than before? No. Did you know it to be approved for good of
adversaries more than the religion before? No. Finally did you see it
confirmed by more certain and true miracles than was the ancient Religion?
No. What reason then can you give either to men now or to God at the day of
Judgment, of your forsakinge your forefathers faith so gravely, so advisedly
and prudentlie embraced of them, and so long time continued, but a vain
pretense of Gods word wronglie understood, which every Heretic can and does
give, and which when it is opposite (as it is here) to true virtue, lawful
mission, right orders and undoubted miracles, is (as is showed before and shall
more hereafter) but a vain color show and shadow of reason, much less able
to defend your doings either before men now or God at the latter day. I will
here make an end, only requesting you for Gods sake to lay all passion aside
whiles you read this book, but peruse it with as great diligence, and desire
of your own Good as I composed it, and presented it unto you. And God who is
the Author of all truth, grant that it work that effect in you which him
self desires. farewell my most dear Countrymen this 6. of January. 1609.

TO THE READER.
Two only means (Gentle Reader) has almighty God given us to be assured
of truth. Two only ways to be certain. Science. Belief.
The one by Science of evident truth which we our selves do know. The other by
Belief of evident authority of others, who in like manner do know, and whose
testimony we have no just cause to mistrust. And therefore as he who should
reject evident reason, should both be unreasonable in fightinge against reason
and injurious both to God and himself by refusinge a mean which God has
given him to atttayne to truth. Why good authority aught to be believed.
So likewise he who should reject evident Authority should both do against
reason which bids him give creditt to such authority, and be injurious to
God and him self by castinge away such a mean as God gave him to assure him
self of such truth as by himself he could not know, and finally should be an
enemy to human society which cannot stand unless men do creditt one an other
in things wherein they have no cause to distrust them for what should we know
of things past before our time, or of things done out of our sight, if we
would not believe such as were present and knew them, and either by word or
writing have reported them to us. How should we know such to be our parents but
by belief? How should any matter be tried in Law but by belief of men's words
or writings, what familiarity, humayne society or friendship could stand if
we admit not belief? VVherfor abbeit it be a fault to believe upon light or
small testimony (which kind of believers the scripture terms light of heart)
as it is a fault to assent to any frivolous reason: yet contrariwise it is a
greater fault not to give credit to evident sufficient authority, as it is not
to yield to evident reason. For in beleuinge upon weak authority we do but
prejudice our selves, but in not beleeuinge sufficient authority we hinder our
selves from knowledge of truth, discredit our own reports to others, do
against reason which as well binds us to yield to evident authority, as to
evident reason, discredit our neighbors and cut in sunder the very sinowes of
humane friendship and society. lib. de vtil. Cred. cap. 16.


VVherfor well said S. Austin that though it be miserable to be deceived by
authority, yet most miserable it is not to be moved with authority. And most
unreasonably do some Ministers, How many things which are not in scripture
are yet to be believed.
say that they are not bound to believe the great virtues or miracles of Saints
in times past, though never so authentically recorded, because they be not in
scripture. Indeed if we urged them to believe these things with divine and
christian faith they might have some colorable excuse of such speech, because
(as they say) all points of christian faitb are in scripture. But since we urge
them only to give humane belief to such matters, either they must show some
cause why the authority of such writers is not sufficient to give humane
credit unto the things by them recorded, or they must reject all humane
authority, all men's words or writings, and believe nothing but what either
God has written, or them selves have seen. for if Scripture must be the
only square of all our belief both humane and Dyuine, we must believe nothing
but what God haeh written, no not that such were our parents, that there are
Turks Moors ar any such thing as the Scripture mentions not. Or if we
admit (as we must needs) that humane authority by either word or writing may
be sufficient for us to believe things with humayne faith, as we believe such
to be our parents, and the like, we must not think it reason to reject a
thing, because it is not in Scripture, Inconveniences of not believing men's
authority
but we must also show some reason, why such authority as testifies it,
is not sufficient for a wise man to give credit unto: or else we must confess
our selves to be vvilfull, to reject sufficient authority without, yea
against reason; to be in iurious to God and our selves in rejecting a mean
which he has bestovved upon us, for to know truth; Injurious to our
neighbors in discreditinge them without cause; and finally pernicious to all
good frendshipp and society which without belief of humane authority
cannot stand. And to prevent Ministers that they shall not delude the Reader by
saying that the authority which I allege for what I say of Saint Austin
and Luther is not sufficient. Only Protestants alleged for what is said of
Luther.
I beseech him to consider that the Authors which I allege for what I say
of Luther are only Protestants, uch as by other Protestants are greatly
commended. for albeit I might justly allege the testimonies of Catholics
against Luther as I show hereafter lib. 2. cap. 1. yet partly to avoid all
cauills, but principally because Protestants testify enough against him, I
omit this advantage. And the vvitnesses which I produce for what I write of
S. Austin, are partly the said Protestants, partly Catholics, but such
Catholics as some of them are great Saints, some great Clerks, some lived
when the things were done which they writ, some were domestical, some
forrayne, and all were before this controversy between Protestants and
Catholics arose, and all are greatly esteemed of Protestants as shall appear
in the Catalogue ensuinge, and finally all are contested and approved in their
testimonies of diverse Protestants as shall appear hereafter. Which kind of
testimony I hope no indifferent man guided with reason will account
insufficient. And for other obstinat persons who (as S. Hierome says) are
wount shutting their eyes to deny what they will not believe, I wrote not this
work for as S. Austin advises us we should rather pray for these kind of
men than reason with them. For what Readers this book is written.
But now let us come to the Catalogue of the Catholic vvriters, and after of
the Protestants.

A CATALOGVE Of the chief Catholic vvriters Upon whose testimonies the
Author relieth for what he writes of Saint Austin.
A ALCVIN, lived in the eight age after Christ lib. 1. cap. 12.

B BEDA, lived with in the first hundred years after lib. 1. cap. 12. cit.
only because his testimony is that, upon which I principally rely in what
I say of S. Austin. I would here add what Godwin in the life of Tatwin
Archbishop of Canterbury says, that His history is the most ancient that
England has worthy of credit, And that Cambden in Britan. page 12. gives him
this testimony that he is. Inter omnes nostros scriptores veritatis amicus
amongst all our writers a friend of truth. And what himself has in his Epistle
to King Cealwulph to put (as he says) all that hear or read it out of doubt
of the verity thereof, that what he writes of S. Austin and his fellows he
learned of Albinus a man (says he) of great learning, brought up under S.
Theodor Archbishop, and Adrian both men of great worship and learning, which
things (says he) the said Albinus knew partly by writing, partlye by
tradition of Elders, and sent to me by Nothelmus, Bale. Cent. 2. cap. 8.
calls this Nothelmus a learned and grave man
who after was Archbishop of Canterbury. Besides this the said History was
approved by the said King Cealwulph, and by all writers since, and is the very
fountain of all our English Chronicles, whose credit depend upon it. And
therefore if it be rejected, all our ancient Chronicles may be contemned as
fables, or uncertain tales.

C CAPGRAVI, lived under King Henry the fixed. He was ( says Bale Centuria. 8.
cap. 1.) Doctor of Divinity of Oxford, and Provincial of the Austin friars,
the chief divine and Philisopher of his time, of a clear wit and utterance,
he loved the Scriptures singularly, and commented the greatest part of the
Bible, and was Confessor to Humfrey Duke of Gloucester.

E EALRID lived under King Henry the second. (says Bale Cent. 2. cap. 99.
famous for birth, for learning, and for innocent life. He in short time
excelled all his fellows in all ornaments of life, left no kind of learning
untouched, refused a Bispoprike the better to exercise virtue, and to preach
the Gospel. He was an other Bernard, mild in disposition, pious in action, and
most modest in Counsel, and was a godly man. And in all kind of vvriting most
like to Bernard. Thus Bale.

ETHELWERDVS, seems ( says Cambden in descrip Brit. 100.) to have been great
grand child to King Adulph, and lived about the year. 950. His book was
published by Protestants with Malmes buriensis and others. Sauill who published
him, says, he is to be commended for his nobility and antiquity.

F. FLORENTIVS, lived under King Henry the first. He was ( says Bale. Cent.
2. c. 66.) very learned both in divine and humane literature, and got great
fame by his vvriting. He had (says Bale) a wit apt for any thing, and an
excellent memory, let no day pass vvherin he did not some what for the
honor of his Country, and calls his Chronicle an excellent comment, which
also is printed by Protestants.

G S. GREGORY, the great was the chief Author next after God of the conversion
of our lib. 1. cap. 5.

GILDAS, syrnamed the wise, a Britan, flourished He was (says Bale Cent. 1.
cap. 66. out of Polidor) a most grave Author, having well learnt liberal
sciences, gave himself wholy to study the Scriptures and ledd a most
innocent life. This man's writings also have been published by Protestants,
and I produce his testimony cheiflie to show what was the Religion of the
ancient Britons.

GEFFOREY of Monmonth lived under King Stephen. He was (says Bale Cent. 2.
cap. 86,) a Briton and learned both in verse and proof, and he highly
commends his diligence, and says he excellently deserves of his Country.
Thus he and other Protestants account of this Geffrey, which makes me to
allege his authority against them though Catholics for the most part
account him but a fabulous Author, and his books be forbidden by the Council
of Trent, and Cambden Britan. page 8. calls his history, Ineptias, fooleries.

H He was (says Bale Cent. 3. cap. 55) of a noble race, and a famous
Chronographer. His history was published by Savill, and dedicated to Queen
Elizabeth, where together with Huntington he is called a very good and diligent
Author, and most true guide of the times past.

He was (says Bale cent. 2. cap. 82. out of Polidor and Leland) an excellent
Historiographer, and approved Author, and writ (says he) finely and
learnedly. He is acounted of Cambden in Britan. page 306. an Author priscae
fidei. Of Doctor Caius lib. de antiquit. Cantabr. page 64. Summus Historicus.
And his history was publ^shed by Savill with the foresaid commendations. Fluyd
in descript. Monae calls him eg^egium Historicum.

I. is much desired (says Sauil who published him) of very many, who desire
to know our Antiquities.

M MALMESBVRIENSIS, lived under King He was (says Sauil who published him,
in his epistle to Queen Elizabeth) amongst the faithful recorders of things
done the chief, both for truth of History, and for Maturitie of judgment,
very learned, and has comprised the history of Seven hundred years with
such fidelity and diligence, that he may seem of all ours to have been the
only Historiographer. Camb. in Brit page 514. calls him. Optimum
Historicum. an excellent Historiographer. Bale Cent. 2. cap. 73. says
playnelie he was the most learned of his age in all kind of good learning, and
of singular wit, diligence and industry in searchinge all Antiquites, and
compiled a fine and most excellent History. And this man so highly commended
by Protestants is the Author upon whom next after S. Bid I rely, and the
edition which I cite of his history and of Huntington, Houeden, and Ingulph,
is of Franckford Anno. 1601. infol.

MARIANVS, lived at the time of the Conquest, (says Bale Cent. 14. cap. 45.)
learned both in divinity and Humanity, and lived all most thirty years
solitary with admiration of all men and continually studied He is accounted
an excellent Historiographer a singular Calculator, and a grave divine, which
titles says he to this d^y all vvriters de give him. Thus Bale. Cambd. in
Brit. page 321. calls him an Historiographer. Antiquae fidei.

N. NEVBRIGENSIS, lived under King John. (says Bale Cent. 3. cap. 53.) Doctor
of divinity scarce let any hour p^sse without reading of learned books, and
vvrote a History with a clear style.

O. OSBERNE, lived under King William Conqueror. (says Bale Cent. 2. cap. 54)
most familiar and inward with Archbishop Lanfrancke, was the excellentest
Musycion of his time, and had a flourishing and eloquent style.

OTTERBVRNE, He vvrote (says Bale Cent. 7. a history sincerely, though his
chief studies were in Phi^osophy and Divinity.

P. PARIS, lived under King Henry the third. He was (says Bale Cent. 4. cap.
26.) from his infancy brought up in learning, and continually at study. And
vvrote a History from the conquest unto the thirty fifth year of the said
King Henry with most great diligence and fidelity. And for his singular
gifts both of body and mind was dear to that King, at whose command he
wrote his Acts. This author is much esteemed by Protestants, because some
times he inueigheth bitterly against some acts of the Pope of his time, and
therefore was published by them, and greatly commended in the preface by the
pretended Archbishop Parker, as it is thought.

W. He was (says Bale Cent. 7. cap. 88. out of Leland) studious and diligent
in Histories. He is much commended by the Protestants, who published him, in a
Preface before his history, who is thought to have been pret. Archbishop
Parker. He did (says Bale Cent. 6. cap. 31.) labor singularly in vvriting,
and was in all kind of learning of his time very learned, and composed a
Chronicle with notable pains, which Bale termed an excellent and fruitful
work, and it has been printed by Protestants with great commendations. And
in the arraignment of F. Garnet, he is called by a Protestant noble man a
witness of best regard according to the state of those times. Thus many, thus
ancient (to omit the famous Baronius and other later writers also alleged)
and thus esteemed of Protestants the^^ selves are the Authors whose testimonies
I produce for what I say of S. Austin and his successors, and of our Kings, and
our forefathers religion. Whose testimony whether Ministers admit or refuse
they are overthrown. For if they admit them they are clearlie condemned, and
if they refuse them, they are contemned. For in matters of Antiquity to refuse
to be tried by so many, so ancient, so indifferent writers, and so much
commended by them selves, and to say, and that without testimony of one equal
writer to the contrary, that they were all either deceived or lied, what other
is it, than utterly to condemn them selves and their cause, as not able to
abide the only trial, which can be made of ancient matters, that is by
histories and ancient records? will they not credit such histories as them
selves judge worthy of credit? will they not believe such writers as them
selves account especial friends of truth, of singular fidelity, diligence,
and indifferent and most excellent Historiographers? will they not follow them
in matters of Antiquity, whom them selves term the most true guides of the
times past? What other thing were this than obstinately to refuse truth it
self. But much more will this appear when they shall be found not only to
refuse our writers, though never so ancient and indifferent and esteemed of
them selves, but even their own best writers or else be condemned. Let us see
therefore the Protestant writers whom we produce as witnesses in this trial of
Religions.

A CATHALOGVE Of the chief Protestant vvriters On whose testimonies the
Author relieth for what he writes of S. Austin and Luther.
A. ABBOTS, Doctor and Professor of Divinity,

B. Antiquitatum penetralia, and incognitas orbi Historias, and in the Epistle
before the thirteenth Centurie that he had read the histories and Chronicles
almost of all Antiquities. And how earnest a Protestant he was, appears both
by his said sufferinges, and also by his most spiteful kind of writing
against Catholics, which is so great, as it seems malice did possess the
heart, tongue, and penn of that man, and himself is feign to excuse it in his
epistle to the Count Palatin. Of the Author of the dangerous positions he is
reckoned amongst their learned men who in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's
raygne Came out of Germany and of other Protestants often times cited.
Reinoldes in his Confer. Abbots de Antichriso
The book which I allege of this man is his Centuries of the writeers of
Britanie, edit. Basileae. 1559. in fol.

C. the Antiquarie.

almost the rule of Controversies.

CAMBDEN, well known for his description an excellent Antiquarie and greatly
commended of diverse in verses before his book. The edition of his book cited
by me is Londini Anno. 1600. in quarto.

COWPER, pretended Bishop first of Lyncolne

D DAVNGEROVS Positioner, So I term the Dangerous Positions, by some thought
to be the work of Doctor Bancrofte now pretended Bishop of Canterbury, by
others of Doctor Sutclife.

F. FOX, most famous amongst Protestants for his most holy father. Doctor
Abbots in his book of Antichrist cap. 8. terms him a man of most famous
memory; a most grave, and most pious man, and plainly a divine man. Bale
Cent. 9. cap. 92. says he was his Achates.

FVLKE, Doctor of divinity and a great writer against Catholics: whom I. B.
alias Bacster in tail of two legged foxes. cap. 13. thus prayseth profound
fulke, whose truth and great travel the Church of God has tried, many a fox
have thou had in chase not able to abide thy hot pursuit. Doctor Reynolds in
his preface before his Six Conclusions calls him a stout and faithful
soldier of Christ.

G

H

Humphrey of much reading in thy time past, was then a chief hunter of the
Romish fox. And Bale Cent. 9. cap. 93. highly commends him.

I

L lib. 3. cap. 1.

R. has the old fox and his cubbs in the chase.

S.



SVRVEYER, so I call the unnamed Author of Survey of the pretended holy
Discipline, by some taken to be the work of the said Doctor Sutclife, by
others the work of the Lord of Canterbury.

W. WHITAKER, Doctor and Professor of vvorthie Whitaker of never dyinge fame.
Doctor Willet in his Tetrastylon page 9. terms him a vvorthie and learned
man. page 10. a godly learned man. Doctor Bucley in his Apology of religion
page 84. An excellent man of blessed memory. These and thus esteemed of
Protestants are the Protestant writers, upon whose confession or testimony I
chiefly rely in what I write of S. Austin and Luther. Against whose verdict no
Protestant can justly take exception either of ignorance, because they are of
the cheifest writers they have, or for partiality, for they were all most
earnest Protestants. And therefore no Protestant can justly reject their
testimony as insufficient.

THE BOOKS AND Chapters contained in this first part of the prudentiall
Balance of Religion.
First Book or Scale in which the qualities of S. Austin and of his doctrine
are set down.
1. What Religion was in this land before the coming of S. Austin. Chap. 1.
2. That Saint Austin was the first preacher of the christian says to our
English Nation. Chap. 2. 3. That Saint Austin preaching took great effect in
our Nation. Chap. 3. 4. That Saint Austin was a great Clarke and excellent
Divine. Chap. 4. 5. That Saint Austin was A great Saint. Chap. 5. 6. Certain
slanders against S. Austin disproued. Chap 6. 7. That S. Austin was moved by
holy motives to come to preach to our Nation. Chap. 7. 8. That S. Austin was
lawfully sent to preach to our Nation proved by diverse authorities. Chap 8. 9.
That S. Austin was lawfully sent hither to preach proved by reason grounded in
Scripture. Chap. 9. 10. That S. Austin was rightly ordered to administer the
word and sacraments. Chap. 10. 11. That the faith which S. Austin preached was
the universal faith of Christendom in his time. Chap 11. 12. That faith which
S. Austin preached is confessed by the adversaries to have been sufficient to
salvation. Chap. 12. 13. That the faith which S. Austin preached was confirmed
of him by true miracles. Chap. 13. 14. That the faith whi h S. Austin preached
was the present Romayne Catholic faith proved by his Master and sender S
Gregory Chap. 14. 15. The same proved by S. Austins and his fellows deeds and
Doctrine. Chap. 15. 16. The same proved by the confession of learned
Protestants. Chap. 16. 17. The same proved by the faith of the English Church
which he founded. Chap. 17. 18. That the faith of all the Archbishopes of
Canterbury from S. Austin to our time was Roman Catholic proved by general
Reasons. Chap. 18. 19. That the faith of every Archbishop of Canterbury from
S. Austin to the time of the Conquest was roman Catholic proved in
particular. Chap. 19. 20. That the faith of every Archbishop of Canterbury
from the Conquest to our time was Roman Catholic proved in particular Chapter
20. 21. That the faith of all our Christian English Kings from S. Austins time
to King Henry the eight was Roman Catholic, proved by general reasons.
Chap. 21. 22. Certain obiectio^s against the Catholic faith of our Ancient
Kings answered. Chap. 22. 23. That the faith of all our Christian Kings to
the time of the Monarchy of England was Roman Catholic proved in
particular. Chap. 23. 24. That the faith of all our Christian Kings from the
Monarchy to the Conquest of England was Roman Catholic proved in particular.
Chap. 24. 25. That the faith of all our Kings from the Conquest to King Edward
the third was Roman Catholic proved in particular. Chap. 25. 26. That the
faith of all our Kings from King Edward the third, to King Henry the eight
was Roman Catholic proved in particular. Chap. 26. Epilogue or Conclusion.
The second Book or Scale wherein the qualities of Luther, and his doctrine are
set down.
1. That Luther was the first Author of the Protestants Religion. Chap. 1. 2.
That VVicklef and his followers were no Protestants. Chap. 2. 3. That the old
ancient Britons were no Protestants. Chap. 3. 4. When, where, wherefore, and how
Luther began Protestancie. Chap. 4. 5. How Protestancie spread so far. Chap. 5.
6. When, hy whom, wherefore, and how Protestancie began in England. Chap. 6. 7.
That Luther was but meanly learned. Chapter 7. 8. That Luther was a vicious and
naughty man. Chap. 8. 9. That Luther was moved to preach Protestantisme with
humane and noughtie motives. Chapter 9. 10. That Luther was never sent or called to
preach Protestantisme. Chap. 10. 11. That Luther was never ordered to preach
the Protestants word, or administer their Sacraments. Chap. 11. 12. That
Luthers doctrine was contrary to the universal faith of Christendom at that
time. Chap. 12. 13. That Luthers doctrine was never confessed by Catholics to
be sufficient to salvation. Chapter 13. 14. That Luther never confirmed his
Doctrine by Miracles. Chap. 14. 15. That Luther has had no succession or
continuance of his Doctrine here in England. Chap. 15.
The third Book in which S. Austin and Luther and their Doctrines are weighed
together, according to the foresaid qualities of them.
1. SAint Austin and Luther weighed according to their learning. Chap. 1. 2.
S. Austin and Luther weighed according to their virtue or vice. Chap. 2. 3. S.
Austin and Luther weighed according to their motives of preachinge. Chap. 3,
4. S. Austin and Luther weighed according to their Mission or sendinge to
preach. Chap. 4. 5. S. Austin and Luther weighed according to their orders of
preachinge and administering the sacraments. Chap. 5. 6. S. Austin and Luther
weighed according to the universality or singularity of their Doctrine. Chap.
6. 7. S. Austin and Luther weighed according to their adversaries allowance of
their Doctrines. Chap. 7. 8. S. Austin and Luther weighed according to their
Miracles. Chap. 8. 9. S. Austin and Luther weighed acccordinge to the
succession and continuance of their Doctrines. Chap. 9.
THE FIRST BOOK OR SCALE, IN WHICH The qualities of S. Austin, and of his
Doctrine are set down.
THE FIRST CHAPTER. What Religion was in this Land, before the coming of S.
Austin.
THE ancient Inhabitans of this Island, were the Britons, whom we now call
Welch-men. Amongst whom the faith of Christ was first planted by the glorious
Apostles S. Metaph. in Sur. Iun. Cambd. descript. Brit. pa 52. Baron. an. 58.
p. 597. 401.
Peter S. Theod. l. 9 de Graec. Sophron. Natal. Apost. Fortunat. Bale cent. 1.
c. 26 Cambd. in Britan. p. 52.
Paul, S. Nicep. l. 2. c. 40 Doroth. in Synop.
Simon, and the Apostolic men S. D. Caius de antiq. Ca^tabr. Capgrau. in Ios.
Bale cent. 1. c. 22. vbi and citat Fleming, Scrop. Polid. Geo. maiorem Cambd.
l. cit.
Joseph of Arimathia (who buried our Savior) and S. Doroth. in Synop.
Aristobulus, of whom S. Paul makes mention in his Epistle to the Romans. All
these, Protestants grant to have preached Christ's faith in this Island, except
Saint Peter; to whom some of them will not have this Land so much behoulden.
Which question, because it is besides my purpose, I will not stand to discuss.
Only I assure the indifferent Reader, that S. Peter's preaching to the ancient
Britons on the one side is affirmed, both by Latin and Grecke, by ancient and
new, by foraine and domestical, by Catholic writers (such as Camb. pa. 80
627. 628. de Baron.
Protestants them selves account most excellent, learned and great
Historiographers) and by Protestant Antiquaries, such as D. Bucley 8. Reas.
art. vlt. p. 175. of Camb.
Protestant Divines term excellent Antiquaries, and excellent men: And on the
other side denied by no one ancient writer, Greek or Latin, foraine or
domestical, Catholic or other. And what better proof will we require to
believe a thing done so long ago, than the assertion of men so many, learned,
of such different ages, of such different contries, of such different religion,
who have not ben gainsaid by any one ancient writer? To argue against such
variety and gravity of testimonies without any ancient writers testimony to
the contrary, is indeed rather to cavil (which is no maistery to do against
such ancient facts) than to reason, and to show a mind more auerted from S.
Peter and his Successors, than desirous of truth or honor of his Contrie.

2. This faith thus planted amongst the Britons by the Apostles and Apostolic
men, perished not after their departure, but remained, as Gildas c. 7. writes
apud quosdam integre, amongst some entire, and about the year of our Lord 158.
was meruaillously increased, and confirmed by means of Pope Eleutherius, who
sending hither at the request of Lucius then King of the Britons, his two
Legates, S. Fugatius and S. Damian, the King, Queen, and almost all the people
were baptized, and this Land was the first that publicly professed the faith
of Christ, and justly deserved the title of Primogenita Ecclesiae. For
testimony of this, we can produce not only such variety, and weight of
witnesses, as for the former, to wit English. Beda l 1. c. 4. Malmes. in fast.
Ethelvverd l. 1. Hunting li. 1. Florent. an. 184. Westminster. an. 185 Sander. lib
de schis. ^eland in Bale p. 23. Welsh. Ga^fred l. 4. c 19. Nannius hist.
Land^ffen. King Arthur. Foraine. Damasus in Pont Ado. Marian in Chron. Platina
in Eleuther Geneb. Martin. Polon. Ponticus Virun. Polidor. Boethius l. 5. hist.
Baron. mart. Romans 26. Maij. Protestants Bale cen. 1. c. 22. 28. 29 Camb. in
Brit p. 51. and 628. Stow anno 179 Holins. p. 74. Caius l. 1. de ant. Godvvin
in S. Austin Bilson of obedience p. 57. Cooper an. 180. Fox l. 1. p. 51. l. 2.
p. 106. 107. D. Sutclif. answer to 3. Conuers. c. 2.
Latin, English, domestical, strangers, Catholic, and Protestants, but even
all our English histories, and in a manner all foraine writers, which entreat
of these times. And finally, the letters patents of King Arthur alleged by D.
Caius a Protestant lib. 1. de Antiq. Cantab. where he says, that all know this
to be true, and Godwin in the life of S. Paulin, adds, that it cannot be
denied. Whereby we may see the impude^cy of a Minister, who is not ashamed
without all testimony to the contrary, to deny this Conversion of Britany by
the Popes means, and to say, that no authentical author avouches it: but
that it is a fable, and seems to be devised by some favorers of the Church
of Rome. Which here in the beginning I note, to advertise the indifferent
Reader, that he give no belief to such impudent fellows denial without any
sufficient witness.

3. The Christian faith thus received, the Britons kept not only sound, Gildas
de oxcid c. 7. Bed. l. 1. c. 4
and undefiled from heresies a long time, but quiet also from troubles, and
persecutions until the reign of Diocletian the Emperor, Gildas c. 7. Bed. l. 1.
c. 6
who began in the year of our Lord 286. and for ten years space raised a more
cruel persecution against the Christians, than ever had been before: which
passing into this Island honored it with the glory of many holy Martyrs, Gildas
c. 8.
who constantly stood, and died in the confession of their faith. Of whom
chiefly are named Saint Alban, (whose miracles and martyrdom are largly set
down by S. Beda lib. 1. c. 7.) and Julius, and Aaron. This storm of
persecution being ouerblown, Constantin the Great, a Briton borne, received the
Christian faith, and exalted it in the whole Empire of Rome. In whose time
arose the Arian heresy, which running through the world, corrupted also this
Island, and shortly after all manner of heresies flowed in, Heresies enter into
England.
and was there received of the inhabitants, being men (as says S. Gildas their
Countryman) ever delighted to hear new things, and steadfastly retainning
nothing certain. And for these heresies, and other vices were the Britons
plagued by God with extreme famine, wonderful pestilence, in so much as the
quick were not sufficient to bury the dead, and with most cruel, and blooddy
war of the Picts and Scotts, as you may read in Gildas, and in Beda lib. 1.
c. 12. and 14. But for the accomplishme^t of their iniquities, after all this,
they admitted the Pelagian heresy, Heresy bane of a Country.
which hastened their desolation, and almost utter destruction brought sone
after upon them by the Saxons, or English. For as S. Beda says lib. 1. c. 17.
a few years before the coming of the Saxons into this Land (which says he
lib. 1. c. 15. was in the year of our Lord 429.) the Pelagian heresies were
brought in. See S. Bed. l. 1. c. 17. and seq.
But of this heresy the Land was after rid by the disputation and miracles,
first of S. German and Lupus sent by Pope Celestinus anno 429. and after by the
same S. German and Seuerus anno 435. ex Baronio.

4. After this time in this place the faith long time (says S. Beda lib. 1. c.
21.) remained sound and undefiled. But at last, in all, or most of the Britons
it was corrupted by an erroneous opinion about the time of keeping Easter, The
Brito^s error about Easter far different from the Quartadecima^s See Eusebius. 5.
hist c 24. 25. Austin ser. 29 Epiph. haer 50. Theod li. 3. de haeres.
which was not (as Beda well quoteth lib. 3. c. 4.) the error of the Jews, or
Quartadeciman heretics. For the Quartadecimans always kept their Easter on
one set day of the moon, to wit on the 15. day after the equinoctial, and
regarded no set day of the week. The Britons contrary wise celebrated their
Easter always on one set day in the week, to wit on Sunday, as Catholics
do, and observed not any set day of the moon, VVherin the Brito^s erred
touching Easter.
as the Quartadecimans did. The only difference between them and Catholics
was, that whereas Catholics according to the appointeme^t of the Co^ncel of
Nice kept their Easter on the So^day from the 15. day of the moon to the 21.
the Britons kept it on the Sunday from the 14. of the moon to the 20. and so
they both included one whole day within the co^pas of celebrating Easter, to
wit the 14. day of the moon, which neither Jew nor Christian else included, and
excluded the 21. day, which the law expressly commanded. Exodus 11.
Which proceeded of mere ignorance in them. For as S. Beda says lib. 3. c. 4.
They knew as Christian men do, that the Resurrection of our Lord ought always
to be celebrated on Sunday, but as ignorant men (in that point) they had not
learned, when that Sunday should come. Because (as S. Wilfrid in S. Beda li. 3.
c. 25. said) no cunning Calculator of times or Astronomer had come to them.

Herby it appears how fondly some Ministers have inferred that the Britons,
Magd. cent. 2. c. 2. Fox p. 95. The Brito^s error came not from Asia.
because of this error in keeping Easter, learned their faith of the Asian
Churches, where the Quartadecimans were. Both because the Britons error was not
the lib. 3. de vita Constantini, c. 8. witnesses that the same keeping of
Easter was observed in the City of Rome in Italy, Africa, Egypt, Spain,
France, Britannie, Lybia, and all Greece, in the Diocese of Asia, and Pontus,
and finally in Cilicia, Vna and consentiente sententia, with one uniform
consent. Moreover because li. 1. c. 11. says, that after the forsaid expulsion
of the Pelagian heresy, the Britons kept the faith, sound and undefiled,
which he never would then have said, if then they had held their error of
Easter, because this error he utterly detested, as him self says lib. 3. c.
16. and lib. 2. c. 19. calls it Heresy. And finally B. Colman pleading in
England for the Britons observation of Easter, and alleging thereto the
antiquity of his Countrymen, ascends no higher than Abbot Columba, When the
Brito^s error rose.
who came out of Ireland into Britanie, but anno 563. as Beda says lib. 3. c.
4. which was 33. years before S. Austins coming hither, and dyed as Sigebert
in Chron. and Bale write anno 598. that is, two years after Pope John 4. in
Bed. l. 2. c. 9. attributes it to ignorance. Whence it arose.
and by imagining that S. John Evangelist kept it so, whereof nether was true,
as S. Wilfrid proved to his face, in Beda lib. 3. c. 25. The author therefore
of this error among the Britons was no Asian, but their own ignorance (through
rude simplicity, as Saint Wilfrid says) of true calculation of finding the
true time of Easter. And the time when this ignorance took effect (as it
apeareth by S. Beda's forsaid words lib. 1. c. 11.) was not long before S.
Austins coming. And for Scotland, Beda lib. 2. cap. 29. writes that by the
letters of Pope John 4. written in the year 638. or as Baron. says, 639. to
the Scotts, it appears plainly, that at that time this heresy was but a
little before risen in Scotland, and that not all the Contrie, but certain of
them only were infected therewith. Which also appears by S. Gregory lib. 9.
epist. 61. which he writes to Quirinus and caeteris in Hibernia Episcopis
Catholicis. But as for the Britons it seems by Saint Beda lib. 2. cap. 2.
that they were generally all infected with this error, Galfrid monum. li. 11.
c. 12. VVestmon. an. 596. Godvvin Catalog. of Bishops, in S. Paulin.
when S. Austin entered this land. And as for the rest of this Kingdom where the
English dwelt they (as both Welsh and English Historiographers agree) pagana
superstitione caecati etc. blinded in Heathenish superstition they had
extinguished all Christianity in that part of the Land where they dwelt. And
as S. Beda writes lib. 2. c. 1. were all then Pagans and had been ever until
that time bondslaues of Idols. Miserable estate of Britany before S. Austine
coming.
This was the lamentable estate of England and Wales before S. Austin came,
miserably oppressed, partly with heresy, partly with infidelity.

CHAP. II. That S. Austin was the first Preacher of the Christian Faith to our
English Nation.
THat our English Nation came hither out of Germany, being sent for of the
Britons to aid them against the Scotts, and Picts, all Historiographers agree,
but they disagree somewhat about the time. For some write that it was in the
year of Christ 449. but S. Beda lib. 1. c. 15. says that it was in the year
449. and later indeed it could not be. Sigeb. Chro. says. an. 431. Malmesb l.
1. an. 449. Bal. cent. 2. c. 43. an. 448. Ca^bd. in Brit an. 450. When our
English nation entered this land.
Because at S. Germans first coming hither (which was in the year 429. as S.
Prosper who then lived records) the Saxons (as S. Beda. lib. 1. c. 20.
affirms) waged war with the Britons. For being Pagans, and ignorant of God,
and seeing the Land fruitful, and the Britons feeble, they measured right by
might, and turned their wepons against the silly Brito^s, whom they partly
killed, Galfrid Mon l. 17. c. 12. Godvvin in vit. Paulin.
partly drove over seas or into those hilly places, which now are called Wales.
And in this part of the Land; which they possessed, extinguished (as both
English and Welsh writers record) all Christianity, and continewed in their
Paganism, which they brought with them, for the space almost of 200. years,
til (as S. Beda lib. 2. c. 1. and others record) S. Gregory seeing certain
English youths sold for slaves in Rome, Upon what occasion S. Gregory sent S.
Austin hither
and learning of them that their nation was Heathen, got leave of the Pope
(being then him self a Monk) to come to preach to them: but was recalled at
the importunity of the Romans: yet him self being after made Pope (and as S.
Beda speaks high Bishop over the whole world) did in the year 596 send
hither S. Austin, and his company to preach Christ's faith unto them. Which
truth, that S. Austin was the first preacher of Christian faith unto our
English Nation here in England, S. Austin the first preacher of Christianity
unto our nation.
has been always hitherto as undoubted, as it is evident, and manifest. But
now because D. Sutclif in his Subversion of the three Conuersions, c. 3. has
called it in question, and is desirous rather to give the glory to a French
man and woman, to Queen Bertha, and Bishop Luidhard, who were then in England,
or to captive Britons, whom he supposes to have lived amongst the English,
than to S. Austin, I will prove it by as many proofs as can be desired for
the belief of any ancient thing.

S. Gregory.
2. S. Gregory himself, who sent S. Austin, writing lib. 7. Epist. 30. to
Eulogius Patriarch of Alexandria, says thus: VVhiles the English Nation
dwelling in a corner of the world, remained til now infidel in the worship of
wood and stones, by the help of your prayer it seemed good to me, God being the
Author, to send a Monk of my monastery to preach to them. The same he
testifies lib. 27. Moral. c. 8. and in diverse letters lib. 9. Epi. 52. 56. 59,
and in S. Beda lib. 1. c. 27. 29. 30. 31. 32. which for brevity I omit. And
the same witness diverse other Popes as Boniface, Honorius, Vitalian, Sergius,
Gregorius and Formosus, whereof some were alive in S. Austins time, and others
lived not long after, whose letters are extant in Malmesb. lib. 2. Pont. Ang.
page 208. page 209. S. Austins companions.
Likewise S. Laurence, S. Mellit, S. Iustus, three companions of S. Austin, in
their public letters to the Scotts in S. Beda lib. 2. c. 4. write, that the
English, to whom they were sent to preach the word of God, were Paynim people,
and heathen men. Englishmen,
In like manner the English youths before mentioned being asked of S. Gregory,
whether they were Christians or no, answered (as testifyeth Ethelwerd an
ancient Historiographer of the blood royal of England) No: nor as yet has any
preached this unto us. The merchants.
And the merchants added ex Beda lib. 2. c. 1. that they were all Paynims. And
the very Epitaph set upon Saint Austins tomb after his death testifies, S.
Austins epitaph.
that he converted King Ethelbert and his Realm from the worshipping of Idols
to the faith of Christ, in Beda lib. 2. c. 3. Thus you se both private and
public, both foraine and domestical testimonies, even of that time when S.
Austin lived, contest, that before his coming our English Nation was Heathen.
whereto I will add a few witnesses in the ages after, that the reader may be
assured how undoubted a truth this has been hertofore.

3. S. Beda who lived within 80. years after S. Austin says plainly lib. 2.
c. 1. that our Nation had been ever to that time the bondslaue of Idols. And
Alcuin his scholar, S. Beda.
but master to Charles the Great in Malmesb. lib. 1. Pont. Ang. page 199. and
1. Reg. c. 14. calls S. Austin our First Teacher, Alcuin.
and Canterbury the First Seat of faith. King Kenulph, who lived within 200.
years after S. Austin, King Kenulph.
writing letters to Pope Leo 3. in his own name, and in the name of the
Bishops, Duks and all the Nobility of his Realm, confesses, that from Rome
Nobis Fidei veritas innotuit, and that, that Sea imbued his Nation rudimentis
fidei. K. VVithlaf.
King Withlaf in his Charter in Ingulph. page 858. calls S. Austin the
Apostle of our Nation. Odo.
Odo Archbishop of Canterbury, writing about 800. years ago to his
Suffragans, says that from the Sea of Canterbury, Augustini and aliorum
studiis Religio Christianitatis primum cunctis finibus Anglorum innotuit. And
in a Synod held in the year 747. of all the Bishops of England in presence of
the King, Two English Synods.
and Nobles, S. Austin is called Pater noster, and in honor of him they were
wont to keep his day most solemnly. And in an other Synod held about 500.
years since, Lanfranc Archbishop of Canterbury says: Quis nesciat quod a
Cantia manauit Christi credulitas in ceteras omnes Angliae Ecclesias.
Superfluous it were to add to these the testimonies of such as have lived
since, Protestants confess S. Austin to have been our first preacher. Fox.
both foraine and domestical historiographers, who all deliver this for as
certain a truth as can be. Only for the confusion of Sutclif and such as he, I
will add the confession of some Protestants. Fox in his Acts and Monuments lib.
4. page 172. The Saxons ouercomming the Land divided them selves into seven
Kingdoms: And so being Infidells, and Pagans continued til the time that
Gregory, being Bishop of Rome sent Austin to preach unto them. The like he has
lib. 2. page 110. 115. and in his Protestat: Holinshead.
page 9. Holinshead in descript. of Britany lih. 11. c. 7. Austin was sent by
Gregory to preach to English men the word of God, who were yet blind in Pagan
superstition. And an. 596. Gregory sent Austin into this I Will to preach the
Christian faith unto the English-Saxons, which Nation as yet had not received
the gospel. Godwin in the life of S. Austin: Godvvin.
The Saxons not only expelled Christian Religion, but the followers of the
same into a corner of this Island. And our Contrie being in a manner all grown
over with Paganism, for there was no public allowance of Christian Religion
anywhere, but in Wales, It pleased God to give this occasion of repla^ting
the same here again. And tells, how Saint Gregory seeing English boys sold
at Rome, The English without any inckling of the gospel before S. Austin.
was moved to send Preachers. And in the life of S. Paulin: When the Saxons
had gotten possession of this Realm, the Britons that were the old
Inhabitants being driven into a corner thereof; The rest was without any
knowledge, or inckling (Note) of the Gospel. And Cambd. in descript. Brit. page
104. writes, Cambden
that S. Austin having rooted out the Monsters of Heathenish superstition,
ingrafting Christ in English men's minds with most happy success converted
them to the faith. Who will see more Protestants, may read Bale cent. 1. c. 73.
cent. 13. c. 1. Whitaker contr. Dur. page 394. Fulk 1. Cor. 4. Cooper Chron.
an. 599. Stow 596.

4. Now let us see what Sutclif can say against this so confessed a truth. For
sooth that the English had notice of the Christian Religion before S. Austin
his coming, because some Britons lived amongst them, and also because King
Ethelberts wife Bertha was a Christian, and had a Christian Bishop with her
named Luidhard. Are not these (think we) sound reasons to wrestle withal
against such uniform consent both of his own, and our writers? As if we denied
that the English had any notice of Christianity before S. Austins coming, but
such it was as the great Turk has without any belief, or liking thereof. And
as for the Britons they were so far from preaching of their own accord, as by
no persuasion, entreaty, Britons refused to preach to the English.
or threatful prophecy of Saint Austin they could be brought to do it, as
testifies S. Beda lib. 2. c. 2. and Galfrid lib. 11. cap. 12. Besides that as
Bale writes cent. 1. c. 7. and Boeth. hist. Scot. lib. 9. page 171.
Aspernabantur Angli dogmata Brita^norum. The English (for the hatred of the
men) despised the Religion of the Britons. Q. Betta neglected to persuade King
Ethelbert to the faith.
And concerning the English Queen, she was no English but a French woman, and
before S. Austins coming she had neglected to persuade her husban as S.
Gregory lib 9. Epi. 59. testifies, who rebukes her therefore. And her Bishop
was not sent to preach to the English, Other nations neglect us, and only Rome
helps.
but as Beda says lib. 1. c. 25. to assist her, and help her in her faith.
Nether does he make any mention of this Bishops preaching to our Nation. And
for other Nations about us S. Gregory lib. 5. Epist. 59. writes that he heard
that the English would willingly be come Christians. Sed Sacerdotes qui in
vicino sunt Pastoralem erga eos Curam no^ habere: but that the Priests about
them took no care of them. Be it therefore certain that the first that preached
Christian faith to our English Nation was S. Austin, How S. Austin is our
Apostle. Malm. l. 1. Hist. c. 2. Godvvin in vit. Augustine. Holinshead Chro. an.
602. Apology for oath of allegiance p. 92. 93. Iouius descript. Britan.
whom therefore Pope Honorius lit. ad Regem Edwin. apud Bedam lib. 2. c. 17.
King Withlaf as we heard before, and catholic English writers, and some
Protestants also as Cambden Descript. Britan. page 515. and 178. Bale cent. 13.
c. 7. cent. 14. c. 13. call the Apostle of England. Nether ought Sutclif or
others to be offended with this title, because we call not him absolutely an
Apostle, or Apostle of the whole world as the 12. were, who were sent in
Vniuersum mundum, but with this restriction of England. So S. Paul called
Epaphroditus the Apostle of the Philippians, Philip. 2. and Protestants call
Tindal and Latimer Apostles of England, as you may see in Bale cent. 8. c. 72.
85. and Fox.

CHAP. III. That S. Austin and his fellows preaching took great effect in ou
English Nation.
BEcause some Ministers albeit they can not deny but S. Austin preached the
faith of Christ here in England, yet will extenuatt his benefit as much as they
can, and say that only a few Saxons were behoulding unto him, Ministers
vngratul. Sutclif lib. cit. c. 3.
and that nether Austin nor Gregory deserved any great praise for the
conversion of the Saxons, or English. I will breefly touch what great good he
and his fellows here did. First therefore him self, Kingdom of Kent converted by
S. Austin.
though (through the excessive pains which he took) he lived but a short
time: yet did he convert Ethelbert King of Kent, whose dominion reached unto
Humber, and many of his people as S. Beda witnesses lib. 1. c. 26. and
christened at one time ten thousand as Saint Gregory lib. 7. Epi. 30. Epitaph.
of S. Austin says he converted this Kings people.
Fox Acts page 119. Cambden in Britan. p. 105. and others do testify. Fox. p.
116. adds, that he converted innumerable. And page 118. Baptized a great
part. And Godwin in vit. Aug. says, he converted all the said Kings people.
Besides this he sent S. Mellit to London, where he converted Sebret King of
Essex. And after he had gained (says Malmesb. 2. part. histor. p. 250) Kent to
Christ, S. Austin trauaileth through almost all England.
travailed throughout all the rest of the English Provinces, so far as the
Kingdom of Ethelbert reached. Yet Fox Acts p. 119. and Cambden lib. cit. say,
that he passed beyond the dominion of King Ethelbert, and christened many
thousands in the river Swale. Christened ten thousands at once. Trauaileth
barefoote. Erecteth Archb. Bishoprics and monast. Beda l. 1. c. 26. 33. li. 2.
c. 3. Capgr. in vit. Augustini. Cambden in Brit. p. 178. 438. 490. Ealred in
vit. Edvvardi. Laboreth to reduce the Britons.
And this trauail he took (says Capgraue in his life) on foot, and for the
most part barefoote, and had great knobbs on his knees with continual kneeling
in prayer. Besides in his time he procured the erecting of the Archbishopric
of Canterbury, and the Bishopric of London, and Rochester, and the foundations
of the Monasteries of the Austins in Canterbury, Westminster in London, Ely in
Cambridgshier, and Cernel in Dorsetshier. And as S. Beda lib. 2. c. 4. Laid
the foundation of our Church well and strongly. And not content to labor thus
for the conversion of English me^, endeavored also to reduce the Britons to the
right faith, and took therein (says Godwin) much pains. Gathered (as you may
see in Beda lib. 2. c 2.) two meetings of their Divines, and convinced their
error both by disputation and miracles. All parts of England beholden to S.
Austin.
Whereby we may see that all parts of England both South, West, East, North,
and Wales to are greatly behoulden to Saint Austin. The labores of S. Austins
fellows. S. Laurence.
2. After Saint Austins death (which was as some write about ten years after
his coming hither) S. Laurence his fellow laborer, and successor, converted
Edbald second Christian King of Kent. And taught the Papists faith (says Bale
cent. 13. c. 2.) almost in all the dominions of the English men. And besides
wrote letters which are extant in Beda lib. 2. c. 4. to the Scottish, and Irish
people who were entangled in the Britons error. And as Bale writes cent. 1. c.
74. held a Counsel with the^ for that purpose in the I Will of Man. Yea as
Capgraue has in his life, he went to Scotland, and there converted Tenan
Archbishop of Irland to the true observation of Easter. S. Iustus.
S. Iustus also another fellow worker, and successor of S. Austin, converted so
many, as Pope Boniface in Beda lib. 2. c. 8. writes to him thus, you may show
whole Contries plentifully multiplied in the faith by you. And both of him, S.
Mellit.
and S. Mellit his Predecessor S. Beda lib. 2. c. 7. gives this testimony,
they ruled, and governed the English Church with great labor, S. Paulin.
and diligence. Finally S. Paulin an other of S. Austins fellow laborers, and
first Archbishop of York, converted, and baptized Edwin King of the North part
of England, and by conquest over England, Wales and the Hebrides Isles, with all
the nobility (says Beda lib. 2. c. 14.) of his Contrie and most part of the
common people. And, as he adds c. 17. all his subjects of the Northen parts.
And such pains herein S. Paulin took, that as S. Beda says c. 14. cit. he
stayed in one place 36. days together from morning to evening, instructing
and baptizing the people. And by means of King Edwin was also Redwald King of
Est-england and for a while the potentest King of England, converted and
Christened, and also his son Carpwald. Finally to conclude by Saint Austin
and his fellow laborers were six English Kings converted from Paganism to
Christ's faith, to wit, Ethelbert, Sebert, S. Austin and his fellows converted
six English Kings and four Kingdom.
Edbald, Edwin, Redwald, Carpwald. Amongst whom Ethelbert, Edwin, and Redwald
were the most puissant Kings of their time. And of the 7. Kingdoms which then
were, they converted four viz. the Kingdom of Kent, Kingdom of Est-Saxons,
Beda lib. 2. c. 16. Cambd. p. 178. Founded two Archb. two Bishop. five
Cathedral Churches, six monasteries.
Est-angles and the Kingdom of the North, and preached, and founded Churches in
the fifth Kingdom of Mercia at Lincoln, and in the sixth of Westsaxons at Cernel
in Dorsetshier. Founded the two Archbishopricks of Canterbury, and York, and
the Bishoprics of London, and Rochester, erected the Cathedral Churches of
Canterbury, Rochester, London, Lincoln, and York, Beda sup. Cambd. p. 490.
Capgrau in Augustino Ealred in Edvvardo.
and the Collegiat Church in Southwel. Began the monasteries of the Austins,
and Christ's Church in Canterbury, of Westminster in London, of Ely in
Ca^bridgshier, of Cernel in Dorsetshier. Whereby it appears that not only a
few Saxons (as Sutclif speaks) but the whole nations of English, English.
Scottish Welsh, Irish greatly bound to S. Austin and his fellows.
Scottish, Welsh and Irish were infinitely behoulde^ to Saint Austin, and his
fellows, for leaving their Contrie, for coming so far a journey as is from
Rome, for venturing into a barbarous, and unknown Contry as ours then was, for
hazarding their lives among fierce, and savage people, for recalling so many
Kings, and Kingdoms from Paganism to Christianity, for laboring so much to
reduce Heretics, for erecting so many Episcopal Sees, and Monasteries, and
finally for spending their lives here among us. And if any part of this land
took no great commodity by them, it was not to be attributed to them, but to
the peoples own negligence, and obstinacy. D. Whitaker. more grateful than
Sutclif.
Wherefore D. Whitaker as far more gratfull than Sutclif lib. 5. cont Dur. page
394. speaking of our conversion by S. Gregory means, says: That he did us a
great benefit we will always gratfully remember. And now having showed that S.
Austin. was the first Preacher of Christ's faith to our Nation in England, let
us see what qualities he had fit for so high a function to wit what learning
and virtue.

CHAP. IIII. That Saint Austin was a great Clerk and excellent Divine.
SOme Ministers are so spiteful against S. Austin our Apostle, as they seek
all occasions they can to dishonor him. Where upon Bale cent. 13. c. 1. says he
was ignorant in holy scriptures, and the questions which he sent to S. Gregory
and are extant in S. Beda lib. 1. c. 27. were most unsavory and void of all
knowledge of the Gospel, and law of God. But no marvel if he, and suchlike
condemn S. Austin as unlearned, who dare condemn the gloriousest lights of
Christianity, the greatest Doctors of Gods Church of blindness, and ignorance.
But how great a Clerk S. Austin was, Arguments of S. Austins great learning.
though we had no evident testimony, we might our selves gather by many ways.
For as touching his wit, and capacity of learning, it may suffice that he was
an Italian, and Roman, His wit.
whom in wit we know to excel. The place where he studied was Rome, His place
of study.
where at that time as Joan. Diacon. in vit. Gregor. lib. 2. c. 13. Rerum
sapientia cu^ septem artibus floruit. His Master.
His Master was S. Gregory him self, one of the four Doctors of the Church,
as witness S. Beda Epi. ad Ceolwolph Regem, Ethelwerd lib. 2. c. 1. Malmesb.
lib. 1. Pont. p. 195. Amongst his schole-fellowes one was (as it seems) that
great Doctor of Spain S. Isidore. His scoole fellows.
For as Genebr. and Sigebert in Chron. do write, he was scholar to Saint
Gregory. His endeavor.
And for S. Austins endeavor to attain to learning, for proof thereof it may
suffice that he was a Monk of Saint Gregoreis own Monastery, where men were
not (doubtless) suffered to loose their time, brought up there under regular
discipline, and at last made Praepositus eiusdem Monasterij, Superior of the
same Monastery. All which testifies S. Gregory him self lib. 7. Epi. 30. 112.
and lib. 2. c. 13. and S. Beda, lib. 1. c. 27. His profit.
And finally for his profit in learning, it may suffice that it appears by
the choice made of him among so many learned men, as then were in Rome, and
made by so great a Doctor as S. Gregory was, and so careful to choose sufficient
men, and made for so great a matter as to be Dux verbi, First Preacher of
Christian says to Infidells, and conuerter of learned heretics. For if S.
Gregory required so great skill in every Pastor of souls as he wrote lib.
Pastor. that Government of souls is the art of arts; How much would he
require in him to whom he committed the care of all the Infidells, and
Heretics in so great a Kingdom as this is? And besides this the care of S.
Gregory to send hither a great learned man, may apeare by the like great care
which Pope Vitalian had afterward, as is to be seen in Beda lib. 4. c. 1. to
provide a great, and famous Divine for the Archbishopric of Canterbury even
after all England was converted. For neither was Pope Vitalian more ready to
furnish England with learned Pastors, tha^ S. Gregory was, nor was he more able
to judge of their learning, nor had he more choice of learned men. If therefore
Pope Vitalian sent hither such learned men as S. Theodor and S. Adrian were,
what shall we think of S. Austin and his fellows sent by S. Gregory?

2. But besides these collections of ours we have a testimony of S. Austins
great learning Omni exceptione maius. S. Gregory's testimony of S. Austins
great learning.
For S. Gregory his Master who best knew him, and was best able to judge, and
for his holiness and rare humility was least likly to lie, or praise his
scholar beyond his deserts, writing to King Ethelbert in Beda lib. 1. c. 32.
and exhorting him to follow S. Austin in all points says. He was replenished
with knowledge of the holy scriptures. Ethelvverd.
And Ethelwerd, one of our ancie^test historiographers, lib. 2. c. 1. says he
was diuino eloquio nimis instructus, S. Iustus great learning.
excedingly instructed in the scriptures. Iustus one of S. Austins fellows,
and successors, Pope Boniface writing to him says: He had brought up King
Edbald with great learning, and instruction of holy scriptures, as is to be
seen in Beda l. 2. c. 8. And doubt we that S. Austin had not done the like to
King Ethelbert? S. Honorius great learning.
And of Honorius, another of S. Austins fellows Beda lib. 5. c. 20. says he
was a man profoundly learned in holy scripture. And why shoud we think that S.
Austin was inferior to him? Besides S. Beda lib. 1. c. 22. speaking of the
British Preachers, whom he accounted most learned men, yet comparing them with
S. Austin, and his fellows says, that these were more worthy Preachers. And
besides these testimonies of S. Austins great learning we have an evident
proof by the effect thereof. For albeit there were among the Britons many viri
doctissimi, most learned men. as Saint Beda says lib. 2. c. 2. Yet Saint
Austin feared not twice to challeng them all to public disputations, S. Austin
confuted most learned Heretics.
and at the first overcame them, and at the second they durst not (as it
seems) encounter with him. The like disputations had after S. Laurence, and
other of S. Austins fellows in the I Will of Man with Scottish and Irish Deuines,
and wrote also to the Britons as saint Beda lib. 2. c. 4. speaks worthy
letters, and fit for their Degree. Protestants confess S. Austin and his
fellows learning. Cooper.
Yea the Protestants them selves when they are void of passion confess saint
Austin, and his fellows to have been great scollers. For B. Cooper Chron. an.
599. says that Austin, John, Mellit, and others were godly, and well learned
men. Holinshed
Holinshead an. 596. calls saint Austin, and his fellows learned men. And
Godwin in vita Honorij, says: Godvvin
Honorius (a fellow and successor of saint Austin) was very learned, and some
times disciple of Saint Gregory. And in vita Laurentij, that S. Laurence (his
immediate successor) was a well learned man. That Deusdedit who was an English
man, and scoller to saint Austin, was very famous for his learning, and other
virtues. And if the scoller were very famous, what may we think of the Master?
Bale
Yea Bale him self cent. 13. c. 2. says that saint Laurence, successor and
fellow of saint Austin was very skillful in logic and other Philosophy.

3. But how think you does Bale prove that saint Austin was ignorant of
scripture, or his questions void of all knowledge of the Gospel? Surely not at
all. But it must suffice that this Aristarchus has so judged. But perhaps it
displeased Bale that saint Austin should in them enquire about the ceremonies
of Mass, Why S. Austins questions were unsavory to Bale.
and about the offering upon the Altar, of saying Mass after pollution in the
night, or of receiving the blessed Sacrament after a man has carnally known
his wife, which questions (no marvel) if they seem unsavory to Bale, and
void of all knowledge of his new Gospel. Indeed the questions are not of any
profound divinity, but of practical matters about the government of the Church
and holy ceremonies, and administration of Sacraments, in which matters the
greatest Deuines unless they have been practiced therein (as S. Austin had not
been in his monastery) are not always the most skilful. Besides that Saint
Austin proposed those questions to saint Gregory not upon ignorance, but upon
humility, and desire to be directed by him even in smallest matters. This
saint Gregory him self testifies in these words in Beda lib. 2. c. 23. I doubt
not but you have required Counsel in these matters, and I think also I have
already made you answer herein, S. Austin could have ansvvered his own
questions.
Yet that which your self could say, and think herein, I think you would have
it confirmed with my answer. The like account made the French Ministers of
Calvin as appears by the Surueie of the holy discipline c. 3. p. 43. in these
words. As any doubts did arise amongst them concerning Church causes, though
they were but very simple, and such as any student of mean capacity and
judgment might very easily have satisfied, yet no man but M. Calvin for his
time, and M. Beza afterward was accounted of sufficiency or able to dissolve
them. You hear what simple questions the French Ministers sent to Calvin and
Beza, and yet without any prejudice of their opinion in learning. And why
should not S. Austin do the like? And surely I here admire the goodness of God
toward our Nation, that he would Saint Austin should enquire such small
matters of S. Gregory, and that his questions should remain to our days. both
to show us by our first Apostle what account we should make of the resolution
of the Sea Apostolic, What account S. Austin made of the resolutions of the Sea Apostol.
and (as S. Irenaeus lib. 3. c. 3. wrote above 1400. years ago) in all
difficulties recur to her, and also to assure us that S. Austin, who in so
small matters would do nothing of himself, but by the direction of S. Gregory,
would much less vary from him in matters of faith or religion; And
consequently, that the faith which he taught our Ancestors, was the faith of
the greatest Doctor that ever since S. Peter sat in the Church of Rome, Belt.
Woeful cry p. 3.
and by the confession of Protestants was as famous and as learned a man as
ever was Bishop of Rome, yea omnium Pontificum, Of all the Bishops of Rome, the
most excellent for life and learning. Bale cent. 1. c. 68. Which thing well
considered, can not but breed great comfort in them, who had the faith of their
Forfathers delivered to them by S. Austin, and as great discomfort in them, who
have forsaken it. And thus much of S. Austins learning: now let us see his
virtue.

CHAP. V. That Saint Austin was a great Saint, and holy man.
IF Ministers were before unwilling to grant that S. Austin was our first
Preacher or a learned man, much more loath they are to confess that he was a
holy man. And not without cause, because thereby they perceive it will follow,
that his faith was the true faith of Christ. For as S. Paul says Romans 10. The
just man lives by faith. and Heb. 11. without faith it is impossible to please
God. By how many kinds of testimonies S. Austins great holiness is proved.
But I will prove not only by the testimony of them that saw, and knew S.
Austin, but also by the testimony of his Master, his own life and death, by
public and private testimony of them that lived with him, by all kind of
writers following, by the virtuous life of the Church which he founded, and
finally by the confession of diverse Protestants that S. Austin was a saint and
virtuous holy man.

2. As for S. Austins Master, Ambros. lib. 2. de Virginibus. says: How
virtuous S. Austins Master was.
The first spur to learning is the excellency of the Master. And no doubt but
the example of an excellent Master is a great spur to virtue. And what Master
either in that age, or long before, or after could S. Austin have had comparable
to S. Gregory, who for his great virtue, and noble acts is surnamed the great:
whom S. Isidor lib. de viris illustrib. c. 7. who knew him says, S. Isidor.
was by compunction full of the fear of God, in humility cheifest, and endued
with such light of knowledge, as the like was not then, nor before. 8. Council
Tolet.
And the 8. Council of Toledo doubts not to prefer him in moral doctrine
before all other Doctors. S. Ildefonsus.
S. Ildefonsus also lib. de vir. illustrib. c. 2. writes that he excelled so
high in perfection of all virtues, as setting a side all famous men, antiquity
could not show the like. For in holiness he surpassed S. Antony, in eloquence S.
Cyprian, in knowledge S. Austin. S. Gregor. Turon.
S. Gregor. also of Tours, who knew him greatly commends him lib. 10. de
Gestis Francorum. c. 1. S. Beda lib. 1. c. 13. says, S. Beda See S. Damasen
orat. 2. de defunctis.
He was a man of the greatest virtue and learning of his time. And who will see
more of this virtuous man may read his life in Ioannes Diacon. in S. Beda lib.
2. c. 1. Here I will content my self with the judgment of our famous and
ancient King Alfred: K. Alfred
who thus commends him. The true servant of God the Roman Pope Christ's Vicar
Gregory, a man of considerat fortitude, King Alfred Praefat. Pastoral.
without rashness, endued with chief wit, wisdom and Counsel, an infinite
treasor, because he won the greatest part of mankind to heaven, the best man
of the Romans, most abounding in greatness of courage, and most free of
Majesty. This was the judgment of our great King touching S. Gregory, and of
the same mind were all our Catholic writers, as you may see in Flore^t. an.
605. Malmesb. 1. Reg. c. 3. Westmon. an. 605. and others. In so much as D.
Reinolds in his Confer. p. 583. Ancient English men.
writes that our Ancestors had a reverend opinion of the Pope long after S.
Gregory for S. Gregory's sake. To these Catholics I will ad also the verdict
of a few Protestants. Protestants. D Whitaker.
D. Whitaker cont. Dur. p. 397. says: He was a learned and holy Bishop and p.
502. I confess Gregory to have been a good and holy man. Godvvin.
Godwin in vita August. a good man that blessed and holy Father Gregory. Item
This good man being made Pope took especial care of sending Preachers into
this Land. D. Sutclif Subuers. c. 2. D. Sutclif.
Gregory and Eleutherius were Bishops, and famous men in the Church for their
painful labors, and constancy in teaching the truth. Bale cent. 1. c. 68. says
he was the excellent of all the Bishops of Rome for learning and life. That
against his will and striving to the contrary, and at last compelled, he
succeeded Pope Pelagius. That he was a learned, and good man, founded hospitals,
invited pilgrims to his table, sent things necessary to the Monks of
Jerusalem, and maintained three thousand Virgins. And c. 7 He reduced the
Goths from Arianisme to the Church, professed himself by writing the Servant
of Gods servants, that thereby he might appear most far from all ambition, and
desire of command. Bell in his Woeful Cry p. 62. says: Bell.
Gregory was a holy Bishop indeed. And in his Survey p. 156. He was virtuous
and learned. page 480. D Humfrey. Luth, Gal. 4 I tink Greg was loved. c. 5.
the world has in admiration the holiness of Gregory.
A man of sufficient credit. Willet in his Synopsis, A modest and humble
Bishop. D. Humfrey, Iesuitismi part. 2. page 624. Gregory surnamed Great, and
indeed great, a great man, and endued with many virtues of divine grace. Thus
Protestants account of saint Austins Master.

2. As for S. Austin himself, Godwin in Aug. says: He was a man of exceeding
tall stature, well favored, S. Austins virtuous deeds.
and of a very amiable countenance. And as for his great holiness it appears
many ways. For first, being very virtue. Where, (as Greg. says ex Beda lib.
1. c. 27.) he was brought up from his youth in regular discipline, and
according to his rule imitated the form, and rule used in the Primitive Church
of the Fathers, among whom all things were common. where he so exceeded in
virtue as he was made Superior over the Monastery. ex Greg. lib. 7. epist. 112.
Secondly, at Saint Gregory's commandment he left his own Contry, where he
served God in quietness, and came to preach the Gospel both so far of as our
Contry is from Rome, and to such barbarous people, as our Nation then was.
Thirdly, after he entered into England, he lived so virtuously, that albeit he
proved, no doubt, his doctrine by great learning, and confirmed it (as shall be
showed hereafter) by many and great miracles, yet as saint Beda affirms lib.
1. c. 26. our Contry was converted more by the holiness of him, and his fellows
lives, than by any other means. See Hunting. lib. 3.
After they were now entered (says Beda lib. cit.) into their lodging they
began to exercise the Apostolic order of living of the primitive Church, S.
Austins and his fellows Apostolic life.
serving God in continual prayer, watching, and fasting, and preaching the
word of life to as many as they could, despising the commodities of the world
as things none of their own, taking of them only whom they instructed so
much as might serve their necessities, living them selves according to that
they taught other, and being ready to suffer both troubles and death it self in
defense of the truth they taught. VVherby many did believe and were baptized,
marueling much at the simplicity of their innocent living, and at the sweetness
of their heavenly doctryn. Infra. The King him self being much delighted with
the purity of their life, and the example of their godly conversation, as also
with their sweet promises, which to be true they proved with many miracles
did believe, and was baptized. What pains he took first in persuading our
Nation the Christian faith, which was then addicted to Idolatry, after in
instructing them, who were so rude and ignorant in all faith, and lastly in
baptizing, and administering the sacraments having some times to Christen ten
thousand at a time, none can express. Capgraue in his life says, he went
trough England on foot preaching, S. Austins pains and frequent prayer.

Had the gift of miracles and of Prophecy.


and most commonly barefoote, and had callum in genibus by frequency of
prayers. Much pains also he took with the Welsh men in two Councels, and
besides disputation wrought miracles in their sight. He had the gift of
miracles ex Greg. apud Bedam lib. 1. c. 31. And of Prophecy, Beda lib. 2. c.
2. This briefly was the admirable and Apostolic holiness of life of Saint
Austin and his fellows, which no doubt he concluded with a happy death. For
his Epitaph recorded by S. Beda lib. 2. c. 3. witnesses after he had converted
King Ethelbert and his people to the faith of Christ, fulfilling in peace the
days of his office, died the 26. of May.

Vvitnesses of S. Austins holiness. S. Gregor.
4. Thirdly, for the witness of those, that lived with S. Austin. First is S.
Gregory himself, who best knew him, and was best able to judge of his virtue. He
writing to King Ethelbert in Beda lib. 1. c. 32. says, that S. Austin had been
brought up in the rule of Religion, and was by the grace of God of much virtue.
And lib. 9. epist. 58. writing to S. Austin him self, says: I have much hope,
that by the grace of God thy Creator, and our Redemer, Lord and God, Christ
Jesus, thy sins are already forgiven thee, and that thou art therefore choosen,
that by thee other men's sins may be pardoned. Nether shall thou have sorrow of
any sin hereafter, who endeuourest by conversion of many, to make joy in
heaven. And surely who considers what great perfection Saint Gregory lib. 4.
epist. 24. requires in a Pastor, to wit, that he be Pure in thought, notable
in work, discret in silence, profitable in speech, near to all in compassion,
above all in contemplation, fellow by humility to all that do well, stout
through zeal of Justice against the vices of the offending, will nothing doubt
but Saint Austin, whom he chose to so high a function, was an excellent
perfect man. And lib. 5. epist. 52. he says: Austins zeal and endeavor is well
known to us. and repeateth it epist. 53. 58. 59. Likewise of the Popes, soon
after succeeding to S. Gregory, Diverse other Popes
he is highly commended: Of Pope Boniface 4. in Malmsbury lib. 1. Pont. p. 208.
he is called the holy Doctor: Of Pope Honorius ibidem p. 209. Austin of holy
remembrance. Of Gregory 3. ibidem p. 210. Austin of blessed memory: Of Leo 3.
ibid. p. 211. Blessed Augustine. Besides by them who lived with him, and saw his
happy end, he is called in his Epitaph, Authors of his epih.tap
Blessed Austin. Stow Chron. p. 67. or as Godwin has, Saint Austin.

5. Fourthly, Vvitnesses of S. Aust. holiness after his time.
touching the testimony of those that lived after Saint Austins time, the first
is Saint Beda, whose testimony of his holy life is already set down, to which
I add, that lib. 2. c. 3. he calls him the deerly beloved man of God, holy
Father Austin. S. Beda.
and lib. 4. c. 27. The blessed Father Austin. In a Council of all the Bishops
of England held anno 747. A Cou^ncell in England.
in presence of King Ethelbald and all his Nobility, it was appointed, That the
day of our Father Saint Austin be kept holy, as writes Malmesbury 1. lib.
Pont. p. 197. and Fox lib. 2. p. 128. After that, King Kenulph and all his
Bishops, Dukes, K. Kenulph and his Bishops and Nobles.
and Nobility writing to Pope Leo 3. say thus: Austin of blessed memory most
gloriously governed the Churches of England. ex Malmesb. 1. Reg. page 31. S.
Odo.
In the letters of S. Odo Archbishop of Canterbury in Malmesbury 1. Pont. page
201. he is called Austin of blessed memory. Of Ethelwerd lib. 2. Ethelvverd.
c. 1. and 5. he is called Holy Austin servant of Christ, and innumerable
miracles wrought by him. Malmesbury 1. Pont. page 196. Malmesb.
says thus: How great the merits of Austin are before God, the great miracles
do show, which after so many ages he works, not suffering Kent, yea all
England to become slow in honoring of him. Huntington.
Of Huntington lib. 3. page 321. he is called the servant of God, man of God,
to have imitated the Apostolical life of the Primitive Church, to have led a
most clean life. Of Houeden 1. Houeden.
part. Annal. he is called the glorious Doctor of the whole Kingdom, the
notable Founder of Christian Faith and Religion. And in like sort is he
commended for a great saint, of Westmon. Chron. an. 596. Westminster. Marian and
others. Odo chron. 583. calls them tim^^tes Deum.
Marianus ibidem. And finally of all writers domestical and foraine, who writ
of him before our times.

6. Fifthly, touching the proof of Saint Austins holiness by the holy life of
the Church which he here founded, that is evident to all them that read our
Ecclesiastical Histories. The holiness of our church founded by S. Austin.
And so manifest as Fox lib. 2. page 114. cites and approves these words out
of ancient Chronicles: In the Primitive Church of England Religion shined most
purely, so that Kings, Princes, Dukes, Consuls, Barons and rulers of the Church
incensed with a desire of heaven entered into Monkerie, volontary exile and
solitary life, forsook the world and followed Christ. And the same has
Huntington lib. 5. in Prolog. and Houeden 1. Confessed by Protestants. Fox.
part. Annal. page 412. And the same Fox p. 123. says: I do read and also do
credit that the Clergy of that time (S. Austins time) of England applied
nothing that was worldly, but gave themselves to preaching, and teaching the
word of our Savior, See more in Fox p. 132. 133. Cambden
and fillowed the life that they preached by giving good example. Cambden in
descript. Britan. page 345. says: that time was most fruitful of Saints. And
page 628. he braggeth that no Kingdom has so many canonized Martyrs and
Confessors as England has, Of some England was called religios^ Anglia of
others Paradisus Dei See Baron. to 9. Serra. de reb. Mogunt. lib. 3. nota 55.
Protestants confess S. Austine holiness. Fox.
and that it, which before times was called a fertile Province of Tyrants; may
now be called a fertile Contrie of Saints. And who will see more of the great
holiness of our Clergy may read Beda lib. 3. c. 26. Othlon in vita S.
Bonifacij. Marcellin. in vita S. Suiberti. Serrarius de Mogunt. lib. 3.

7. Lastly, for the confession of Protestants, Fox in his Acts page 105. says
of Saint Austin and his fellows thus: At length when the King had well
considered the honest conversation of their life, and moved with their
miracles, wrought through Gods hands by them, he heard them more gladly and
lastly by their holsom exhortations and example of godly life, he was by them
converted and christened in the year 596. And the same he repeateth again
page 116. Bilson.
Bilson lib. Of Obedience, page 57. says: Austin and his fellows came with
religion to God, and submission to Princes. Cooper.
Bishop Cooper anno 599. calls Austin and his fellows, godly and learned
men. And anno 630. calls Paulinus (one of the company) a holy Bishop; Stow
Chron. page 65. Stow.
says, that S. Austin and his fellows lived in the fear of God. Godwin in
vita August. says: Godvvin.
He was a Monk of great virtue; and calls him, Saint Austin. And in vita
Paulini, says: Paulin (his companion) was called away to receive the glorious
reward of his blessed labors. Holinshed
And Holinshed in the History of England: Austin and his company arrived at
Canterbury, where he made his abode by the Kings permission, exercised the life
of Apostles in fasting, watching, and prayers, preaching, the word of God to as
many as they could, despising all worldly pleasures, as not appertaining to
them, receiving only of them whom they taught, things seeming necessary to
the sustenance of their life, and living in all points according to the
doctrine, which they set forth. Ite^: King Ethelbert was persuaded by the good
example of S. Austin and his company, and by miracles showed, to be baptized.
Hereto I might add what diverse Protestants have written of the great holiness of
some of S. Austins company, who succeeded him in the Archbishoprik of
Canterbury: But for that we shall have more convenient place hereafter. Now let
us see what the malice, and hatred of some Ministers against Saint Austins
doctrine, has caused them to object against his person.

CHAP. VI. Certain slanders imposed upon Saint Austin, disprooued.
CIcero, in his Oration for Roscius, says: that as fire falling into water is
straight put out: so a slander put upon an innocent man, is quickly
extinguished. Which (I doubt not) will prove true in the calumniations
objected against S. Austin. The first whereof is cruelty (say they) in exhorting
Ethelfrid a Heathen King of the North, against the British Monks, of whom he
slew at once above 1200. But this is an impudent slander, devised first (for
any thing that I can find) by Bale, who centur. 1. capit. 70. Bale slandereth
S. Austin upon reports.
fearfully broached it, and therefore refers it to reports, saying: Vt ferunt,
as some report. But afterward Cent. 13. cap. 1. he confidently avouches it.
After him took up that slander Iuell Defens. Apolog. part. 5. Abbots in his
Answer to Do. Bishop, p. 198. Sutclif Subuers. c. 3. and 7. and others.

That S. Austin was no cause of the death of the British Mo^ks.
This false slander is many ways refuted. First, because it is avouched without
all testimonies of antiquity. Bale (as I say) having no one to name before,
refers him self to uncertain reports, if he be lib. 4. cap. 4. Thirdly,
because the slanderers of Saint Austin disagree in their tale more than the
accusers of Susanna, and therefore if Daniel might be judge, these would be
condemned as well as they were. For some say S. Austin excited King Ethelfrid
to this murder, others say, not Saint Austin but K. Ethelbert his scoller: Some
say, that Ethelfrid made this slaughter: others, that K. Ethelbert, as Gray
cited by Sutclif. So they agree nether in the Author nor Actor of this matter.
Fourthly lib. 2. c. 2. Saint Austin was long before that slaughter, taken out
of this life to the Kingdom of heaven, and no way caused it but rather
forwarned the Britons thereof by prophecy. But it came to pass (says Beda) by
the secret working of Gods judgment upon that unfaithful and naughty people.
And the same testify our best Historiographers both Catholics and
Protestants. Namely Malmesbury lib. 3. Reg. page 325 Hunting. lib. 3. Florent.
an. 603. Westmon. an. 603. Sigebert an. 602. 615. Stow Chron. page 66. Godwin
in the life of Saint Austin. Fox Acts pagina 119. where he writes that Saint
Austin forspoke the destruction, and by report of others was dead before it
happened.

2. To this Sutclif cap. 7. cit. answers, Sutclif feigneth corruption in S.
Beda.
that those words of Saint Beda touching Saint Austins death before the
slaughter, are added by some forger. First, because after this war Saint Austin
ordained Iustus and Mellitus Bishops, as Beda (says he) reports. Secondly,
because they are not in the Saxon Translation of Beda made by King Alfred.
Thirdly, because the Chronicle of Peterbrough and Flores Histor. testifye, that
Saint Austin dyed three years after this execution. Confuted.
But this surmise of forgerie in Saint Beda his Latin History is altogether
incredible, both Christendom, or that in all Christendom men would ago to
corrupt Beda in that who threatfully (says Saint Beda) prophesied it, if he
had been alive, as King Ethelbert was, when it chauced. But little will he
marvel to hear Sutclife to suspect Saint Beda as corrupted, who considers
how many and how undoubted books of Fathers in his Challeng he had rejected as
either forged or corrupted, Usual with Sutclif to say Authors are forged
as Saint Athanas. de vita Antonij, Saint Hierom de vita Pauli and Hilarionis,
S. Gregory's Dialogues, Saint Ambrose de Viduis, and many others. Which kind
of shift, at it is most usual with Sutclif, so in the eye of any wise man it
is most desperate. As for his proofs, the first is a manifest untruth. Sutc.
belieth S. Beda.
For Saint Beda reports not that S. Austin ordained Bishops after the said
slaughter of the British Monks, but only talks of the slaughter before he
speaks of the ordination. The cause whereof was, because having told of Saint
Austins prophecy of the Britons destruction, which prophecy was before he
ordained Bishops, to show that it was a true prophecy adds, that after it
hapened as S. Austin had fortould, and how long after, he soon after
declares, to wit, long after S. Austins death. Sutclifs second proof I
greatly suspect to be a forgerie of his own. But how so ever that be, there is
nether reason that he should urge, nor that we should believe one translation
before all originalls. Originals to be believed before tra^slations and many
before one.
For who would not think that, that translation were defective in that place,
rather than that all Originalls had more than they should. As for the Chronicle
of Peterbrough and Flores Histor. we might take just exception against them,
as having past through the corrupt fingering of diverse Protestants, but who are
they to oppose against so many cited before to the contrary, especially seeing
that Flores Histor. clears Saint Austin from this slaughter, and attribueth
it to Prophecy. And besides his Chronology (as Godwin in the Bishops of York
page 442. a Protestant confesses) is very uncertain, When the British Monks
were slain.
and in this point is very false. For as Sigebert in Chron. and Bale him self
Cent. 1. cap. 74. reports out of Masseus the slaughter was done an. 615. At
what time as all writers agree S. Laurence was Archbishop, and Saint Austin
dead, When S. Austin died.
either an. 614. as Malmesbury says in Hist. and in Fastis; or an. 605. as
Sigebert says in Chron. or 608. as Bale has cent. 13. cap. 1. or an. 604. as
Baron. gathers out of Beda, and Florent. in Chron. and Stow page 62.
affirms. How then could Saint Austin cause this slaughter, which was so long
after his death, and much les go in the army to the slaughter as Sutclif
cites out of an old Chronicle, if he do not lie himself.

3. For this Bilson in his Book of Obedience page 114. says, that the King
Ethelbert King of Kent (whom Saint Austin converted) moved King Ethelfrid to
commit this massacre, and cites thereto Galfrid of Munmouth lib. 8. cap. 4. and
so indirectly deriueth the fault to Saint Austin his teacher. That K.
Ethelbert caused not the British Monks to be slain.
But first, if this slaughter were done (as we have seen out of Bale) in the
year 615. certain it is, that Saint Austin lived not till that time, but dyed
before, as is already showed, and therefore he could not be the author of this p.
119. Fox defe^deth King Ethelbert.
that it seems rather suspicious than true, that Ethelbert being a Christian
King, either could so much prevail with a Pagan Idolater or else would attempt
so far as to commit such a cruel deed. And in truth who so considers lib.
1. cap. 33. where he is compared to a ravening wolf, will easily see, that he
needed no stirrer up to make war against the Brito^s. And therefore Fox loco cit.
rightly ascribes it to the fierce fury of Ethelfrid, which was so great as he
is surnamed Ferus. Besides that K. Ethelbert was more lib. 1. cap. 25. and
Ethelfrid only the North. And therefore if he would have revenged Saint Austin
by war, and bloodshed, he would rather have done it him self, than stirred an
other Heathen King against them. But this good King was so far from causing the
lib. 1. c. 26.) he would not force his own subjects to receive it. As for
Galfrid there is no such thing in the place cited by Bilson, which argues that
he cited it out of Iuell without seeing the book. But indeed lib. 11. c. 13.
Galfrid says that Ethelbert excited Ethelfrid to go to Bangor and destroy
Abbot Dimoth and other Monks, who had resisted S. Austin. But Galfrid is a
very fabulous Author, the first broacher of Merlins Prophecies, Cambd. in Brit.
p. 8. calls his history inepties fooleries, and his book is forbide^ by the
Council of Trent.
and of other incredible fables, and lived many hundred years after Saint
Beda, who testifyeth lib. 2. cap. 2. that King Ethelfrid came not of purpose to
kill the Monks, (but to get Chester, as he, loco cit. and Malmesbury lib. 1.
Reg. c. 3. do insinuat) and being to join battle with the Britons, espying
the Monks at prayer, and understanding that they came to pray against him, set
first upon them, and slew them.

4. The second fault, which Ministers impute to S. Austin, That S. Austins not
rising to the Britons proceeded not of pride.
is pride, because he sat still in his chair when the British Bishops, and
Deuins came to confer with him. True it is, that S. Austin did so, but that it
proceeded not of pride appears, lib. 2. cap. 4. Honored the Brito^s with
great reverence while they thought they were Catholics. Therefore Saint Austins
not rising to them proceeded not of pride, in S. Austin to give them none.
What kind of men they were to whom S. Austin did not also.
For besides that they were heretics, S. Beda lib. 2. cap. 2. calls them
unfaithful, naughty and detestable people. And Gildas their own Contry man
says, that they were wolves, enemies of truth, and friends to lies, enemies of
God, and not Priests; merchants of mischeef, and not Bishops, Impugners of
Christ, and not his Ministers, more worthy to be drawn to prison, or to the
cage, than to Priesthood. And much more of the like sort. And Fox adds out
of an old Chronicle Acts lib. 2. page 114. that all things whether they
pleased or displeased God, they regarded alike, and not only seculer men did
this, but their Bishops and teachers without distinction. Which being so I
appeal to the judgment of any indifferent man, whether these men deserved any
honor at S. Austins hands, especially he being lawfully appointed their
Archbishop and Superior by Saint Gregory. Great humility in S. Austin to
confer with those to whom he did not rise.
And whether it were not great humility in him to seek conference with this
kind of people now the second time after he had once before confuted them both
by disputation and evident miracle, which made them to confess that he taught
the truth. The cause therefore why he arose not to them, why S. Austin arose
not to the Britons.
was either because he followed the advice of his Master Saint Gregory, who
albeit he were one of the humblest men, that ever was, yet lib. 4. Epist. 36.
gives this counsel to Bishops: Let us keep humility in mind and yet maintain
the dignity of our order in honor. Or else perceauing the Britons to Epist. 2.
Protest. condemn that in S. Austin, which they commend in Cranmer.
If any come to you and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your
house, nor say to him, God speed. But whether S. Austin would not arise to the
Britons for these or other just causes to him known, Protestants can no way
co^demn his fact, who commend a far les excusable fact of Cranmer, Fox Acts:
edit: 1596. p. 1599. 1699.
Latimer, and Ridley. For Cooper Chron. an. 1555. says, that because the
Bishops of Lincoln, Gloucester, and Bristow declared themselves to be in the Popes
Commission, nether Ridley, nor Latimer would show any reverence to them, nor
put of their capps. The same he writes of Cranmer page 373. And if this
behavior be commended in protestant Prelates, toward their superiors and
Judges, why should the like be condemned in S. Austin toward his inferiors?

5. The third fault is that which the soldierly-Minister Sutclif obiecteth to
him c. 3. cit. to wit, extreme Cowardice not beseeming an Apostolic man.
Because being sent with his company to England they determined with common
consent that it was better to return than go forward. S. Austins fear for a
time, excused.
This we confess was a fraylty. Yet first, See inf. l. 2. c. 11. How the
Protest: Apostles a^iure their faith.
such cadere in constantem viru^. For our Nation was then (as they said truly)
Barbarous, fierce, and Infidel, and who daily made war upon Christians, and
whose Ancestors says Beda l. 2. c. 15. had slain Priests at the Altar, and
murdered Bishops with their flocks without respect of dignity. And, as our
stories record, had made such hauock of Christians, as they made great hills,
yet extant, of their bodies, and were therefore as S. Gildas terms them, Deo
and hominibus inuisi. Let Sutclif go now to preach to such Pagans, or to the
Indian Caniballs, and then he may be the better suffered to object fear to
Saint Austin. Besides, that Godwin also in his life clears Saint Austin of
this fear. For that he says not all, but in a manner all were afraid to
prosecut the journey, Godvvin excuses S. Austin.
and they as it were compelled Saint Austin to go back to crave license to
return. Whereby we see that Saint Austin was little or nothing faulty in this
point. Thirdly, I say, that such a fear it was as Saint Austin and his company
manfully overcame, S. Austins Apostlick courage.
and stoutly performed the journey, and abode here, being ready (says Saint
Beda lib 1. cap. 26.) to suffer both troubles, and death it self in defense of
the truth they taught. Which is courage well beseeming Apostolic men.

6. The fourth slander or rather many slanders is that, wherewith Iuell charge
him Art. 1. diu. 21. where he writes thus: He was by judgment of them that
saw him nether of Apostolic spirit, Iuell slandereth S. Austin and belieth the
Britons.
nor any way worthy to be called a Saint, but an hypocrit, and superstitious,
cruel, and bloody man. and cites Galfrid lib. 8. cap. 4. But this is most
slanderous. For nether is there any word in that place of Galfrid of Saint
Austin, or the Briton Bishops, nether lib. 11. cap. 12. where he talks of
this matter, does he say that the Britons charged Saint Austin with any crime,
but that they refused either to be subject to him, or to preach to the English.
Because said they (as he reports) they had an Archbishop of their own, and
the English continewed taking their Contry from them. And this was all the
cause which Galfrid says they gave. But as for these other crimes of hypocrit,
superstitious, cruel, and bloody, as Iuell says, they that saw him and knew
him, judged him, that no Briton though then his enemies, but the ungrateful
English heretics Iuell has imposed upon him. And if Cham were justly accused
of his Father for revealing his carnal Fathers shame, what deserves he who
falsely imposes upon his and upon all English men's spiritual Father, for (to
use Saint Paul's words) in Christ Jesus he begat us through the Gospel,
shameful crimes never imputed to him by his enemies. And this dealing of Iuell
with Saint Austin brings me in mind of his damnable writing against the
Catholic faith. For a little before his death he charged his Chaplin named
John Garbrand, that as soon as he was dead, Iuel vvrote against his own
conscience.
Garbrand should publishe to the world, that what he had written, he had done
against his own knowledge and conscience only to complie with the State, and
to vphould that religion which it had set up. And albeit Garbrand did not for
fear publish this so openly as he was charged, yet did he avouch it to diverse
in Oxford. Author of this is a Protestant of good account, whom I could name,
yet living at Lewis in Sussex, who told it to two Catholic Gentlemen of whom
I learnt it. And the more credible this is, because I could name a Minister, a
Doctor, Learned Ministers impugn known truth.
and of great account among the Ministers, who confessed to a friend of his, of
whom I heard it, that he taught against the truth and his own knowledge. And
the same he doubted not to affirm of the rest of his brethren that are
learned. And thus having showed that Saint Austin had great learning and
virtue, requisite for a first preacher of Christ's faith unto Infidells: let us
see what authority he had to preach and how he was sent to do it.

CHAP. VII. That S. Austin was moved with holy motives to come to preach to
our Nation.
ALthough what can be said of this matter, will be clear enough, partly by what
has been already said, partly by what shall hereafter: yet because it helps
much to the perfect judgment of religions, to know what moved the first
Authors and Founders of the^ in any Co^try to preach and publish them, for
thereby they may judge of their sincerity or fraudulent meaning, and whether they
seek the glory of God, and salvation of the Co^try, or their own good:
Therefore I will declare now what motives Saint Austin had to teach us his
religion, and afterward, in the Second Book, what motives likewise Luther had
to teach us his. First therefore, Saint Austin could not be moved by that
proper motive or spur of all Archereticks or Sect-maisters to abducere
discipulos (as the Apostle says of them) post se: Vain glory moved not. S.
Austin.
that is to be the head and founder of a Sect, because (as shall be showed anon)
his religion was the usual and common religion of all Christendom in his
time. Secondly, he could no be moved in hope of honor, Nor honor.
for in Rome he was head of his monastery, and in England among a fierce,
strange and barbarous Nation, he could expect none. Wherefore albeit (beyond all
human expectation) he was made Archbishop, yet having no hope thereof, that
can not be justly thought to have moved him to undertake that voyage. Thirdly,
profit could not move him to this enterprise. For what profit could he expect
here, or what profit did he expect, who (as Saint Beda lib. 1. Nor profit
cap. 26. says of him and his fellows) despised the commodities of this world
as things none of their own, taking of them whom they instructed, only so
much as might serve their necessities. And being made Archbishop did according
as Saint Gregory appointed him in Beda lib, 1. cap. 27. live according to his
religious rule, not a part from his Clergy, but followed that trade and form
of living which was used in the primitive Church among the Fathers, among whom
there was none that said that to be his own, which he possessed, but all
things were common.

2 And as for worldly pleasur what should move Saint Austin (think we) to leave
his native Contry, Nor pleasure.
and to seek pleasure in a strange Contry, where he knows nether place,
person nor language? What pleasure should move an Italian to change Italy for
England, Rome for Canterbury, especially when our Contry (as then it was) was
savage and barbarous? What pleasure can we imagine can move a Christian to go
to preach Christ's faith among barbarous infidells? Or what pleasure did Saint
Austin seek here who with his fellows lived here so Angel like, that as Saint
Beda writteth lib. 1. cap. 26. our Nation maruailed much at their simplicity,
of their innocent living, and our King was then much delighted with the purity
of their life and the example of their godly conversation. And being
Archbishop, yet left not his religious life, and as is before showed, took
exceeding pains in teaching, and baptizing our Nation, and wonderfully labored
to convert the Britons also. Who (as is before said) went still on foot, and
for the most part barefoote, and had his knees hard like the knees of a camel
by continual prayer. Motives of S. Austins preaching
Wherefore no human motive, but the divine motives of obedience to his Master
and lawful Bishop the great Saint and glorious Doctor of Gods Church Saint
Gregory, Obedience.
who sent him and commanded him to come hither to preach. And of Charity,
Charity
to save our Nations souls, by bringing them out of heathenish infidelity to
the faith of Christ. Gods glory.
And glory of God were the incitements, motives and causes of Saint Austins
coming hither, and preaching that religion which he did. And this is manifest
both by the testimonies of Catholic Writers and confessions of Protestants
which we cited before touching Saint Austins holiness, and shall allege in
this next Chapter where we shall prove that this great Clerck and holy man
Saint Austin moved by these saintly motives to preach to our Nation, was also
lawfully sent thereto with sufficient authority and commission.

CHAPT. VIII. That Saint Austin was lawfully sent hither to preach, proved by
diverse authorities and confession of Protestants.
TWO things there are required to every lawful Pastor, to wit, both right
Orders, and lawful Commission to administer the Sacraments and Word of God.
And albeit by order of doctrine, we should speak first of Saint Austins
orders, yet because his Commission being cleared, his orders will easily
appear to be good, I will speak first of his Commission where with he was
sent to preach. And that he was sent of Saint Gregory, we need not prove. For
as Sutclif says in his Subversion cap. 3. It is not denied, that Gregory sent
Austin. The only difficulty can be whether he were lawfully sent, and by
sufficient authority or no. How many vvayes S: Austins mission is proved.
But that he was lawfully sent to preach I will prove first by sacred
testimony from Heaven; Secondly, by authority of Catholics; Thirdly, by
confession of Protestants; Fourthly, by examples; and lastly by reason. The
testimony from Heaven is of Saint Peter, By S Peter's testimony from heaven.
who appearing in a vision to Saint Laurence successor of Saint Austin, when he
upon the revolt of our Contrie to Paganism intended to abandon the Land,
scourged him (says Saint Beda lib. 2. cap. 6.) with sharp stripes a great
while in the close night, and asked why he would forsake the flock which he him
self had committed unto him. Behold Saint Peter from Heaven testifies that he
had committed English men to the teaching of Saint Laurence, one of Saint
Austins fellow laborers, and whom Saint Austin him self appointed and
consecrated for his successor. And when Saint Laurence awaked (says Godwin) he
found it more than a dream, for all his body was gore blood. Wherefore going
immediately to the King Edbald, he showed him his wounds, and together related
to him the occasion of them, which struck such a terror into the King, as by
and by he renounced his Idols, and caused him self to be baptized. The
apparition of S Peter to be true.
Now that this apparition to S. Laurence was no dream or illusion appears
many ways. First, by the real wounds, which his people, who doubtless examined
it thoroughly, before they would upon the credit thereof forsake their Idols.
lib. 1. Reg and lib. 2. Pont. Huntington lib. 3. Marianus an. 617. Westmon.
anno 616. ibidem. Florent and others, who have credited and recorded it as a
Protestants confess S. Peter's apparition.
Lastly, by the confession of diverse Protestants, as Godwin in the life of
Saint Laurence, and Holinshed in the life of King Edbald. And surly who well
considers it, can not but account it a singular favor of God, and honor to
our Contrie, that first in the Britons time it should receive the faith of
Christ by the preaching of S. Peter, S. Peter's care of this Country.
by whose month as he says Acts 15. From ancient time God has made choice
that Gentiles should hear the Word of God and believe. And afterward in our
English Ancestors time should recover the same faith again by the means of
Saint Gregory one of the gloriousest successors of Saint Peter that ever was,
and moved thereto by him from Heaven. Which amongst other things declares that
to be true which the same Saint Peter said to Saint Brithwald, Ealred in vit.
S. Edvvardi. Sur. tom. 1.
Regnum Anglorum, regnum Dei est. The Kingdom of England, is the Kingdom of God.

2. As for the authority of Catholics, S. Austins mission proved by
authority of Catholics.

S. Gregory.


the first place is due to Saint Gregory, who writing to Eulogius Patriarch of
Alexandria lib. 7. epist. 30. says: VVhiles the English Nation abiding in a
corner of the world, remained hitherto in infidelity in the worship of wood and
stones, by the help of your prayers it seemed good to me, God being the Author
to send a Monk of my Monastery thither to preach. Lo he ascribes the sending
of S. Austin to God as Author, and to holy men's prayers as helps thereunto. And
again writing to Saint Austins company in Beda lib. 1. c. 23. says: Let
nether the trauaill of the journey, nor talk of evil tongues dismay you. But
with all force and feruor make up that, which you have by the motion of God
begun. And lib. 5. epist. 52. says, he sent Austin, auxiliante Domino; By Gods
help. and 54. disponente Domino; by Gods disposition. Superfluous it were to
cite the rest of the Popes, who followed Saint Gregory, and cooperated all they
could to our conversion, as Boniface 4. and 5. Diverse ancient Popes.
Honorius, Vitalian, and the rest who undoubtedly taught Saint Austin to have
been lawfully sent. Only I will add the names of those Princes and Bishops
whom Saint Gregory testifies to have helped, and encoraged Saint Austin in
his Godly enterprise. Bishops of Germany or France.
First, he says lib. 7. epist. 30. that by his license Saint Austin was made
Bishop of the Bishops of Germany, and with their comforts brought to the
English Nation. And epi. 114. he sends a Pall to Siagrius Bishop of Aust, and
makes his See next to the Sea Metropolitan, because in the business of Saint
Austins mission (says he) we know thou shewedst thy self so careful, devout
and helper in all things as thou should. lib. 9. Kings of France.
epist. 53. writing to Theodorick King of France. What great favors your
Excellency showed to our most reverent brother, and fellow Bishop Austin in his
journey to England certain Monks coming from him have told us. And 55. to
Clotarius another French King writes thus: Some who went with our most
reverend brother, and fellow Bishop Austin unto the English Nation returning to
us have told us with what charity your Excellency refreshed the said brother
of ours in your presence, and with how great help you furthered him in his
voyage. Queen of France.
And 56. writing to Brunechild the Queen of France, he has these words: With
what favor and help your Excellency succored our most reverend brother and
fellow Bishop Austin going to the English Nation, nether did fame before
suppress in silence, and afterward some Monks coming from him to us have
particulerly related. You see the mission of Saint Austin was not only allowed
as lawful, but also holped and furthered by the Christian Bishops and Princes
of that time.

3. After Saint Austins time Beda lib. 1. S. Beda
cap. 22. speaking of Saint Austin, and his fellow Preachers, says: the
goodness of God provided them for our English people, And c. 23. says, that
Gregory being moved by inspiration of God thereunto, sent the servant of God
Saint Austin. After him Ethelwerd lib. 2. cap. 1. Ethelvverd
Gregory sent Saint Austin, confirmat eum diuino admonitu. Florent Chron. ann.
596. says: Gregory moved by Gods instinct, sent Austin and others to preach
the Word of God to the English Nation. Of Protestants, Stow page 65. says:
Protestants confess S. Austin to have been sent of God.
Gregory was moved of godly instinction to send Austin to preach to the
Angles. Godwin in vita August. Yt pleased God, etc. Apology for the oath of
allegiance: Albeit Gregory sent Aust^n and others as he said with divine
revelation into England unto King Ethelbert, Kings Majesty in his oration to
the parle. 19. Nouemb. 1605. D. Couel defense of Hooker. p. 77. Buny Treatises
of Pacificat. p. 109.

Some in Peury. Hooker


yet etc. Luther lib. cont. Anabapt. Fatemur in Papatu esse verum praedicandi
officium. We confess, that in the Popedom is the true office of preaching.
The lawfulnes also of Saint Austins sending must needs all such Protestants
confess as do derive the authority of preaching in Luther, and their first
Preachers from the Church of Rome, of whom we shall speak in the second
book. And also all such as do grant, 3. book of Eccles. of Polic p. 188 D.
Baron. his 4. sermons p. 448. Field. lib. 3. of Church. p. 183. Fox Iuel
Calvin. 4. Iustit c. 17. paragr. 49. Whitaker. cont. Dur. p. 397. Bell Survey
page 257.
that the Church of Rome is a true Church of Christ, or that Papists may be
saved, which comes to one, because none can be saved out of the true Church.
For if the Church of Rome be yet a true Church, and can send preachers
lawfully, it can not be denied, but it had the same goodness, and power to send
in Saint Gregory his time. And this also are they likly to grant who will needs
have S. Gregory and likewise the Church of Rome in his time to have been
Protestant, or at least Saint Gregory was a true and virtuous Bishop. Finally
they also must needs grant that Saint Austin was lawfully sent who say (as D.
Field does lib. 3. Of the Church, cap. 6. 8. and others do) that before
Luthers division their Church was all one, and the same Church with ours. For
suerly that Church allowed of Saint Austins mission. And therefore if she had
authority to approve Saint Austins mission, he was lawfully sent.

S. Austins mission proved by examples. Rome 1000 years ago used to send
preachers into all the world.
4. Fourthly, I prove that Saint Austin was lawfully sent of Saint Gregory by
examples. For as Saint Laurence, Saint Mellit, and Saint Iustus fellows and
successors of Saint Austin write in their letters to the Bishops and Abbots of
Scotland in Beda lib. 2. cap. 4. The accustomable manner of the Sea Apostolic
was to send into all places of the world to preach the word of God. And this
custom of the Church of Rome, sending preachers to all places of the world may
be proved by induction ever since Saint Peter's time. S. Clement
For Saint Clement 3. Pope after Saint Peter, sent Saint Dennis into France, as
testify Hilduinus in Areopagit. and the French Chronicles. Whereupon the French
Bishops writing to Pope Leo anno 400. acknowledge the Sea of Rome fontem and
originem religionis suae. Pope Eleutherius about the year 170, S. Eleutherius.
sent hither Fugatius and Damian, as is before showed. S. Victor.
And Pope Victor his successor about the year 203. sent others into Scotland,
as witness Boethius libr. 6. Hist. Scot. Genebr. in Victor. Baron. and others.
About the year 255. S. Stephen
Pope Stephen consecrated Saint Mellonus a Briton, Bishop of Ro^e, and sent him
thither to preach, as testify the Author of his life, and Bale cent. 1. cap.
31. In the year 432. (says Bale cent. 1. cap. 43.) died Saint Ninian, who
being a Briton (as he says there after Beda lib. 3. cap. 4.) coming from Rome
preached to the South Picts, and converted them to Christianity. S. Celestin
About the year 429. Pope Celestin sent hither Saint German and Lupus to
confute and expel the Pelagians, as testifies Prosper in Chronic. Bale cent.
1. cap. 45. Baron. an. 429. And the same Pope about the year 434. consecrated
Palladius Bishop for Scotland, and sent him thither, as testify Prosper Chron.
Beda lib. 1. cap. 13. Baron. an. 429. Hunting. lib. 1. and others. And about
the same time also he sent S. Patrick to Irland, as testify Marianus in Chron.
Cambd. in Hibernia. Bale cent. 1. cap. 49. where he says that Saint Patrick
preached sinceram Christi religionem. And thus you see how before S. Gregory,
Ancient Britons Scotts Picts and Irish received preachers from Rome.
Popes sent preachers hither to all the ancient inhabitants of these two
Islands, and that they received his Legates, which Legates also for the most part
were Britons. Which declares plainly what opinion those ancient Nations had of
the Popes authority to send preachers hither.

5. In like sort after S. Gregory's time, the Pope sent preachers both hither,
and into other Contries. For about the year 635. Pope Honorius sent hither
Saint Birin, P. Honorius.
who converted the West Contrie, as Beda says lib. 3. cap. 7. Godwin in vita
Birini. Bale cent. 13. cap. 4. And cap. 5. he adds that he sent also Saint
Felix, who converted the East Angles. In the year 668. P. Vitalian
Pope Vitalian sent hither S. Theodore and Saint Adrian, as writes S. Beda
lib. 4. cap. 1. Godwin in Theodor. Bale cent. 13. cap. 6. and others. About the
year 690. Pope Sergius 1. P. Sergius.
sent S. Willebrord and other English Mo^ks to preach to the Frisons and
Saxons, as testifies Marcellin in Sur. tom. 2. Beda lib. 5. cap. 11. 12. Bale
cent. 1. page 78. cit. About the year 719. Pope Gregory 2. sent Saint Boniface
an English man, called the Apostle of Germany, P. Gregory.2.
thither to preach, as testify Bale cent. 1. page 79. and all German writers.
About the year 870. Pope Adrian 2. P. Adria^ 2.
sent Saint Cyrill and Methodius to preach to the Morauians and Slauonians,
Baron Martyrol 9. Martij. Sigebert. in Chron. About the year 970. Pope John
14. invited (says Bale cent. 2. P. John 14.
cap. 30.) the Kingdom of Polonie to Papisme, and sent thither Cardinal Giles.
About the year 989. Pope John 15. P. John 15.
sent S. Adilbert to preach to the Hungarians and Bohemians. About the year
1000. Saint Boniface was sent by the Pope to the Russians. About the year
1145. Pope Eugen 3. sent Adrian an English man, and afterward Pope, P. Eugen.
into Norway, as Bale says cent. 2. page 178. About the year 1252. Pope
Innocent 4. P. Innocent. 4.
sent the Franciscans and Dominicans unto the King of Tartarie, whom they
converted, and christened, as writes Bale cent. 4. cap. 17. About the year
1494. Pope Alexander 6. sent Bucill and 11. P. Alexander 6.
Monks more into the West Indies then newly discovered by the Spaniards. And
at the same time were Franciscans sent by the Pope into the East Indies, and
since that Dominicans, Jesuits, and other religious men have been sent into
diverse barbarous Provinces of both Indies, Africa, and Brasile. And in almost
all these missions have those which were sent by the Pope, converted those
Nations, to whom they where sent, God cooperating with them, and confirming
their words with miracles following, and are therefore termed the Apostles of
those Contries. And if this so long continuance of the Popes sending Preachers
into all parts of the world, and Gods marvelous and miraculous concurse with
them, by the conversion of the Nations, to which they were sent, be not enough
to prove that S. Gregory had sufficient authority to send Saint Austin
hither, I know not what authority can be sufficient.

CHAP. IX. That Saint Austin was lawfully sent hither to preach, S. Austins
mission proved by reason.
proved by reason.
BY reason I will prove it. First, Out of what protest grant Bilson.
out of that which Protestants have granted. For, It is well known (says B.
Bilson de Obedien. part. 1. page 60.) that the Pope was not only Patriarch of
the West parts, but of the four Patriarchs which were the chief Bishops in
Christendom in order, and accounted the first. And page 318. Patriarch of the
West we grant he was. The same in other terms confesfeth Iuell art. 9. diuis.
26. where he says: Iuell.
The Pope had in his province one great part of Christendom. Reinolds.
And Reynolds Confer. page 541. where he calls his diocese a Princely
diocese, and insinuates it to contain all the West Church. the Popes
Patriarchat lavvfull.
For the East he divides among the three other Patriarchs, Likewise the grant
that he usurped not his Patriarchat. But (says Bilson, page 60. cit.) it was
given him by consent of men. and page 319. it came by custom, as the Council
of Nice witnesses. D. Dove of Recusancy p. 80. What authority the Pope has
had over the Latin Church, has been given him by human constitutions, and
general consent of Princes and States. Calvin lib. 4 Institut. cap. 7.. 1
Decreto Nicenae Synodi primus inter Patriarchas locus tribuitur Romano
Episcopo. Finally, they grant that the Popes Patriarchat over the West is not
new, Popes Patriarchat ancient.
but begun even in the time of the primitive Church. For Field lib. 3. of the
Church, cap. 1. says: In the time of the Nicen Council, and before, as
appears by the Acts of the Council, there was three principal Bishops or
Patriarchs of the Christian world, namely the Bishop of Rome, of Alexandria, of
Antioch. Thus breefly you see the Popes Patriarchat over the West granted to be
most ancient, and lawful. Hence I argue thus. A Patriarch has authority to
send preachers to all parts of his Patriarchie: Ergo the Pope had authority to
send preachers to England, England ever under the Popes Patriarchat.
which is a part of the West. The Antecedent none can deny. The Co^sequent
notwithstanding Bilson lib. cit. page 320. does strangly deny. But no marvel
if strange and unheard of shifts be found to maintain falfe doctrine. For
says he: Pope Innocent 1. epist. 91. inter epist. Aug. confesses he had no
authority to call one poor Briton out of this Realm. And the Britons would
yield no subjection to Austin the Romish Legate. Therefore England was not within
the compass of the Popes Patriarchat.

2. But the first of these proofs is a manifest untruth, and the second a
mere folly. For untrue is it, that Saint Innocent confessed he had not
authority to call one out of Britany. For the Briton of whom he spoke was
Pelagius the heretic, who at that time was not in Britany, but in Palestine,
as testifyeth Saint Austin epist. 32. written the same year, which was an. 416.
Nether had Pelagius been in Britany long time before that. For as Baron shows
an. 405. out of Saint Chrysostom and Isiodor Pelusiot. He was brought up in the
East, and after that lived, as Saint Austin says epist. 95. long time in
Rome, where being discovered, he fled, as Baron tells an. 412. into Sicilie,
and thence into Palestine, where (being by his hypocrisy and fraud absolved
from heresy, and finding favor at the Bishop of Jerusalem, but contrariwise
condemned by Pope Innocent and Zozimus) he stayed, and for any thing I find
there dyed. For if him self had brought his heresy into Britany, Beda lib. 1.
cap. 17. Would never have ascribed the bringing of it to one Agricola long
after. And therefore I doubt of that which Bale cent 1. cap. 38. cites out of
Walden. that Pelagius was a suis Britannis pulsus in exilium ob heresim, unless
by driving into banishment he meant keeping out of the Country, as perhaps
Pelagius was. Besides Innocent says not, that he had not authority to call
Pelagius wheresoever he were, yea he insinuates the contrary; but that
Pelagius if he were obstinat would not come at his call, and that others, that
dwelt nerer to him might do it more conveniently, than he who dwelt so far of
as Rome is from Palestine. His words are these, Qui Pelagius si confidit, etc.
Which Pelagius if he trust and know that he deserves not to be condemned of
us, because he reiectets that which he taught, he should not be sent for of us,
but he himself should make haste that he may be absolved. For if he think yet
as he did, when will he present himself to our judgment upon any letters
whatsoever, knowing that he shall be condemned? And if he were to be sent for,
that might be better done of them who are nerer, than so far of as we are. But
there shall want no care of him if he will be cured.

3. Bilsons proof out of the Britons denial of subjection has no more color
or reason, than a few rebels denial of subjection has to prove a Prince to
have no authority over a part of his Kingdom. Cathol. Britons ever took the
Pope to be their superior.
For their Catholic Ancestors did ever acknowledge themselves under the Pope
his jurisdiction, as appears both by that which has been said before as also
because the Archbishops of the Britons not long before Saint Austins coming
were the Popes Legates, as writes Galfrid a man of good account among
Protestants lib. 9. cap. 12. Dubritius (says he) Primat of Britannie, and
Legate of the Sea Apostolic was famous with such great piety. And had Palls
from Rome, as is evident in the life of Saint Sampson. Nether did the heretic
Britons refuse to be subject to Saint Austin, because they thought Saint
Gregory to have no authority to apoint an Archbishop over them, (for
undoubtedly they would have alleged this as a reason of their refusal if they
had so thought it) but only because, as Saint Beda reports lib 2. c. 2. Why
the Britons refused to be under S. Austin.
they said with them selves. If he would not so much as arise to us, If we
should subject our selves to him he would despise us. If he had risen to them
they were determined to subject them selves to him, as Beda there says, which
they never would have done if they had doubted his authority insufficient.

Secondly I prove it by reason grounded in scripture. Second reason in proof
of S. Austins mission.
The authority which Christ left in his Church to preach to all Nations he gave
to every Apostle, as appears by his words Matthew. 28. Docete omnes gentes,
Teach all Nations. And Protestants who teach, every Apostle to have been head
of the rest of the Church besides them selves, do not deny: Therefore this
authority must remain in some successor of one or other of those Apostles, and
must not be only in the whole Church, because it must descend to some such as
Christ gave it unto. Authority to send preachers to all nations must remain
in some one Bishop.
Besides if authority to send to all Nations were not in some one Bishop or
other, but in the whole Church only, when soever there were Preachers to be
sent to Infidells, there ought to be a general Council called, which were both
absurd, and was never practiced in Gods Church. But authority to preach or send
preachers to England was more likly to be in Saint Gregory, than any other
Bishop. For touching the Patriarchs or Bishops of the East, it is a thing
unheard of, that any of them should have jurisdiction over England. And as for
the Bishops of France, certain it is they never had any authority over England.
And the same I may say of Scotland, Ireland, Flanders, Spain, and all other
Contries. The doubt only may be of Britons, because they once had authority
over the Contry, No Bishop could se^d preachers to England but the Pope.
which the English possessed. But that could yeald them no spiritual authority
over the English in Saint Austins time, because nether was the English ever
subject to the Britons, nor was there in Saint Austins time any British Bishop
alive who had had any diocese within England: Therefore they could at that time
claim no more authority to send Preachers into England, than the Bishops of
Wales can now. Wherefore if this authority was then in any Bishop (as needs it
must be) it was in the Bishop of Rome, who ever since the primitive time of the
Church has used to send preachers hither as is before showed. And if any
require the Princes approbation for the lawfullnes of a Preachers mission, this
also S. Austin had as is evident by S. Beda l. 1. Protestants confess the Pope
to have been the cheef B. of Christendom. D. whitaker
c. 25. Besides Protestants confess the Pope to have been always the chief
Patriarch and Bishop of Christe^dom. Says D. Whitaker lib. 6. cont. Dur. p.
464. I will not deny that the Bishop of Rome was Primat of all Bishops. And p.
148. Rome the Seat of the first Patriarch. The Sea of Rome, says Calvin l. 4.
c. 7.. 26. Calvin.
was in times past the chief of all Iuell art. 4. diu. 16. Iuel.
Of the Patriarchs the Pope had the first place both in Council, and out of
Council. And. 26. Of the Patriarchs the Bishop of Rome was ever the first.
And.32. Victor says that Rome is the chief or head over all others, which of
our part for that time is not denied. Bishop Bilson page 60. Bilson.
says it is well known that the Pope was the chief of the Patriarchs. D.
Reinolds Confer. page 568. Among all the Apostolic Churches, Reinolds
the Roman for honor, and credit had the chiefty And 554. Chrysostom and
Basile gave the Pope a supreheminence of authority. page 368. Cyprian gives a
special title of honor and pre-eminence to the Church of Rome. The Fathers
apply the name of the Rock to the Bishop of Rome. Finally Fox in his Acts page
18. says, that in Lyrinensis, Pascasin, Justinian, Athanasius, Hierome,
Ambrose, Austin, Theodoret, and Chrysostom. S. Peter with his successors is
called Head of the Church, Chief of Bishops, Prince of the Apostles. And the
like confess all other Protestants. Therefore if authority of sending preachers
remain in any Bishop, it is most lykly to remain in the Pope.

Third reason for proof of S. Austins mission.
4. Thirdly, I argue thus. Who has authority to govern the whole Church of God,
has authority to send Preachers to all Nations: But Saint Gregory had
authority to govern the whole Church: Ergo he had authority to send Preachers
etc. The Mayor needs no proof. The Minor I prove thus. Saint Peter had
authority to govern the whole Church, even as it includes the rest of the
Apostles; But Saint Gregory succeeded (though not immediately) Saint Peter in
that authority: Protestant grant every Apostle to have been Head of the rest
of the church
Ergo, That Saint Peter had authority over the whole Church besides the
Apostles, the Protestants do grant. For they teach that Christ made every one
of them Head and Governor of all the Church besides them selves. D. Whitaker
lib. 5. page 365. cont. Dur. Quis Petrum, etc. Who confesses not that Peter
was the foundation of the Church, seeing that it is common to all the Apostles?
And lib. 9. page 745. Super Petrum, etc. Upon Peter is the Church founded, but
not upon him only, Et Petro totius, etc. And to Peter is the care of the whole
Church committed, but not to him only, Quia hoc commune, etc. Because this was
common with the rest of the Apostles, as the Scripture, and Fathers most
clearly testify. Declarat. of discipl. print at Geneua 154^.

Christ co^me^ded to Peter all his flock.


Behold how he confesses that both Scripture and Fathers testify, and that
most clearly, that the care of the whole Church was committed to Peter. D.
Reynolds Confer. page 32. As the name of foundation is given to the Apostles,
Apoc. 21. so the twelve foundations do prove them twelve heads. Ibid. All the
Apostles were heads. Item page 26. Christ promised to build his Church not upon
Peter's doctrine only, but upon his person in some sort. And page 28. Christ's
words to Peter import this sense: Upon thee I will build my Church. And Bilson
lib. of Obedience, page 87. grants, The same says Fulk Annotat. Mat. 16.
Joan. 1.
that the Rock on which the Church is promised to be built Matthew. 16. was
Peter's person, and that the Church was built upon him, but not upon him only,
but the rest of the Apostles too. And if passion did not blind their eyes, they
would see that the Scripture and Fathers do as plainly testify that Saint
Peter was Head of the whole Church, even as it includes the rest of the
Apostles, as they testify that every Apostle was Head of the rest of the
Church beside themselves. S. Peter as plainly over the Apostles as over the
rest of Christians
For the places of Scripture out of which they do or can prove that every
Apostle was head of all other Christians (as you may see in Whitaker loco cit.
page 147. and Reynolds loco cit.) is Matthew. 28. where every Apostle is bidden
to teach all Nations. and Ephesians. 2. where Christians are said to be founded
upon the Apostles. And Apoc. 21. where the twelve Apostles are called the
foundations of the Church, by which places they do prove (and well) that every
Apostle was made Head over every Christian, and the whole Church beside
themselves; because there is no exception made of any man, whom they are not
to feed, nor of any Christian in the Church, which they founded. And therefore
in the commission given by Christ to every Apostle in the word Nations, are
included all other beside them selves. And in the speech of the Apocalypse under
the word Church, are understood all other Christians whatsoever. And
consequently every Apostle is by the plain verdict of Scripture Preacher to all
Nations, and Founder of every Christian beside them selves. In which authority
because their Apostleship did consist, How some Fathers say that others were
equal in the Apostleship with S. Peter.
and therein all the Apostles were equal to S. Peter (for every one of them was
as well sent to all Nations with authority to found Churches every where, as he
was) some Fathers say, that other Apostles had parem potestate^ with S. Peter,
as Anaclet did. 21. c. Cu^ in nouo. Cypr. de unit. Eccl. Chrysostom. in 1. Gal. and
that the Church is equaly founded on all the Apostles, because over the rest of
the Church besides, the Apostles every one of them had equal authority with
Peter: and the Church, (not including the Apostles) was equaly founded on every
one of them.

5. But by the same manner, and in the same euidency that Protestants do prove
that every Apostle was Head over all the Church besides them selves, do we
prove that Saint Peter was head over all the Church even as it includes the
rest of the Apostles. For as in their commission, Teach all Nations, and the
other speech of them Foundations of the Church, Proved by Scripture that S.
Peter's commission includes the rest of the Apostles.
all are included beside them selves, because none are excepted, as they are by
reason of that relative opposition which is there found between Teachers, and
Taught, Founders, and Founded; and therefore every one of the Apostles being in
this speech called a teacher and foundation none of them in the same speech can
be meant to be taught, or founded him self. So in like sort in S. Peter's
Commission Joan 21. Feed my sheep, Luc. 22. Confirm thy brethren. and in
Christ's words of him Mat. 16. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build
my Church. No one Apostle or other besides him self, who alone is spoken to,
and is in them appointed Feeder and Confirmer and Foundation, is any more
excepted than any other Christian is excepted in the Commission of the Apostles
in general. And therefore are they as well and as clearly included in his
Commission under the name Sheep, Brethren, Church, as other Christians are
included in theirs under the name of Nations and Church. And therefore Saint
Bernard said de Consider. Nihil excipitur, vbi nihil distinguitur. There being
no distinction in these words of Christ, my Church, my Sheep, thy Brethren,
made from the rest of the Apostles, they are not excepted, but included in
them. Wherefore if Protestants will here admit their common rule of expounding
one place of Scripture by an other, they must confess that Scripture as
clearly makes S. Peter Head of the Apostles, as it makes them Head of all
other Christians. Secondly proved by confession of Protestants.
Secondly I prove by confession of Protestants, that Christ in his words My
Church, My Sheep, Thy Brethren, spoken to Saint Peter, included the rest of
the Apostles. For D. Reynolds Conferenc. p. 385. says, that Christ by, My
Church, Mat. 16. meant generally the Catholic Church, all the chosen. But the
Apostles were chosen, yea the chefest of them. And p. 386. It is the Church of
Gods elect, and chosen, which Christ does call in this place (Math 16.) my
Church, where he adds, that this is clear and out of all controversy. And
p. 368. Christ said of his whole Church that the gates of hell. etc. Therefore
the whole Church was founded on Peter. The same he repeateth Conclus. 1. p.
615. and Conclus. 2. p. 625. and generally all Protestants grant the same. For
out of this place they prove that the Elect can not fall from God, because
Christ here said that Hell gates should not prevail against his Church, That
is (say they) against his Elect. In like sort the said Reinolds Conf. p. 386.
says, that these words, My Sheep, John 10 (where it is said my sheep hear
my voice) included all the Elect. Therefore Joan. 21. the very same words
include all the Elect (beside Peter, who is excepted because he is appointed to
feed them) unless we will, not upon any different occasion ministered by
scripture, but upon our own preconceited opinion expound the same word, now one
way, now an other. Finally the said Reinolds Conf. page 103. confesses that
by, Thy Bethren Luc. 22. Christ meant all the faithful. Then surely he included
all the Apostles.

Thirdly by authority of Fathers
6. Thirdly, I prove that S. Peter was head of the whole Church by the
authority of holy Fathers, whom because Whitaker confesses (as you heard
before) to teach most clearly, that the Church i^ founded upon Peter, I will
omit their words and remit those that list read them to Bellarm. l. 1. de Pont.
c. 10. Only I will show that they teach that the Church (as it includes the
rest of the Apostles) is founded upon Peter only. Cyprian. epist. ad Julian.
Ecclesia quae vna est super vnum. The Church which is one is founded upon one,
who by the commandment of our Lord received the key thereof. In which words we
see, that as the Church is said to be one only, so it is said to be founded
upon one only. And lib. 1. epist. 8. Ecclesia vna and Cathedra vna. etc. One
Church and one Chair was by our Lords word founded upon Peter. And Saint
Hierom. in 2. Isaiae* after he had said that the Apostles were, Montes,
mountains, adds: Super vnum montium Christus fundat Ecclesiam, and loquens ad
eum: Tu es Petrus. etc. Upon one of the Montains Christ foundeth his Church,
and speaking to him thou art Peter. etc. S. Leo sermon. 2. de Anniuers. says,
Saint Peter was plus ceteris ordinatus. etc. ordained more than the rest,
whiles he is called a Rock, a Foundation, and appointed porter of the kingdom
of heaven. And for this cause the Fathers when they speak of Peter in respect
of the rest of the Apostles, they manifestly prefer him in authority before
them, ceteris praelatus discipulis. Preferred before the rest of the disciples
says S. Basil. homil. de Iudicio Eccles. And this is so evident as D. Reinolds
Confer. page 179. confesses that the Fathers call Peter the mouth, the Top,
the highest, the President, the head of the Apostles, and. page 562. The
Prince, the Top, the Cheifest of the Apostolic company, the Teacher of the
whole world, and a Father of the household. And grants also that some of
these Titles touch government, and signify a pre-eminence in government.
Reinolds deuiseth an authority in S. Peter to avoid his supremacy.
Whereupon he is enforced page 180. to acknowledge that Saint Peter was superior
among the Apostles, as a President of a Parliament in France, or as a Consul
among the Romans. But who well considers, shall easily perceive that this is
but an authority devised of purpose to delude the words of the Fathers, who
speaking of Saint Peter's authority over the Apostles, use the very words which
we do, to declare his supremacy. And therefore if they be understood by their own
words, and not as Reinolds pleases to expound them, they using the same words
as we do, must be understood as we are. But because this question is some what
beside my present purpose, I will urge it no farther. Only I would know of
Reinolds how Peter did come by his Consulship over the Apostles, which he
grants to him. Did the Apostles give it him? But where reads he that? Did
Christ bestow it on him? But where? if not Math. 16. and John. 21. In which
places if Christ gave him any authority over the Apostles he gave him as full
power over them as over other Christians. For there is no limitation of his
power toward some more than toward others, but they are as well to be founded
on him as others are, and he was to feed them, as well as others. Nether does
this his authority over the rest of the Church, and the Apostles too,
prejudice the supreme authority of Christ over all, any more than the like
authority which the Protestants grant every Apostle had over the rest of the
Church. Secondly, I would know of Reinolds why he does not grant this
Consulship over the whole Church to the Pope, or at least to some one Bishop or
other, but will make every Prince head of the Church in his Kingdom.

That S. Peter's authority remains in some Bishop of the Church.
7. Now that this authority of Saint Peter remains still in the Church, and
descended from him to some Bishop, I prove, because all the ends for which
either Christ declared, or the Fathers affirm, that Christ instituted this
authority, to remain as well after his death, as before. The first was, that
the gates of hell should Math. 16. Secondly, that what is loosed in earth, ibi.
Thirdly, that Luc. 22. Fourthly, that he might feed Christ's Io. 21. Fifthly,
that one being made lib. 1. cont. Iouinianum. Sixthly, that the origin of the
unity of the Church might appear. Cyprian. de simpl. Praelat. because, as he
says, lib. 1. epist. 3. Priestly unity rose from Peter's chair. And epist. ad
Fulcian. Our Lord began the origin of unity from Peter. This cause alleges
also Leo. epi. 84. and Anast. and Optat. l. 2. contra Parmen. But all these
ends remain after Saint Peter's death. Therefore the authority also remains.
Besides S. Austin says l. de Pastor. c. 1. Christiani sumus propter nos,
Praepositi non nisi propter vos. Therefore Saint Peter being made Chief of Gods
Church, for the good of it, left his authority in the Church. Whereupon S.
Austin tract. 50. in Ioannem, says, that when Peter received the keys,
Ecclesiam sanctam significauit, he represented the holy Church, because he
received them, as her Governor under Christ, and for her good. And therefore as
long as she remains, the authority which Saint Peter received for her good
must remain. Aarons authority remained in his Successors. Therefore Peter's.
Secondly, I prove it, because God in the old law instituted one high Priest,
who under him in spiritual matters should be head of the Sinagogue, as in
plain terms confess Calvin lib. 4. Instit. c. 6.. 2. Whitaker cont. Dur. p.
151. Reinolds Conferen. page 204. 205. And his authority descended to his
successors, so long as the Synagogue continued. Wherefore well said the
Archbishop of Canterbury, Survey cap. 8. We must not dream that when the
Apostles (S. Peter) died the authority which was given to them, ceased, no
more than we, may that the authority of Aaron, and his natural sons expired,
and ended with them. But the government of the Synagogue was but a figure of
the government of the Church. For as Saint Paul says: Omnia in figura
contingebant illis. Therefore, etc. Who will see more of this matter may read
Stapleton. contr. 3. q. 2.

That the Pope is Successor to S. Peter.
8. Only this remains, that we prove that the Bishop of Rome (and
consequently Saint Gregory) was successor to Saint Peter in this authority.
Which I prove, be more declared hereafter, yet he acknowledged him self under
the Pope, as Saint Gregory him self withal witnesses in these words, lib. 7.
epist. 63. De Constant. sede quis dubitet eam Sedi Apostolicae esse subiectam,
etc. Who doubted but the Sea of Constant. is subject to the Sea Apostolic (of
Rome) which both the most religious Lord the Emperor, and our (Eusebius)
religious brother, Bishop of the same City do daily profess. Where, by the
way I note, that Eusebius is not the name of the Patriarch of Constantinople,
at that time, but a surname given unto him for his great external acts of
religion, who also was for his abstinence named Ieiunator, that is, Faster.
Secondly, because the Bishops The Church of Rome says (Fox Act. lib. 1. page
1.) in all these ages above specified (from the Apostles) that challanged to it
self the title and ringleading of the whole Universal Church on earth, by
whose direction all other Churches have been governed. And page 18. What so
ever was done in other places, commonly the manner was to write to the Roman
Bishop for his approbation. The testimony of the Roman Bishop was sometimes
wont to be desired in those days (of Pope Julius) for admitting Bishops in
other Churches, whereof we have examples in Socrates lib. 4. c. 37. When
Bishops of any other Provinces were at any dissension, they appealled to the
Bishop of Rome. Doct. Reinolds Confer. page 457. Popes of the second 300.
years after Christ claimed some sovereignty over Bishops. page 383. Zozimus,
Boniface, Celestin did vsurp (says he) over the Churches of Africa, whiles
Austin was alive. page 544. They would have Bishops, and elders appealle to
Rome. And. page 550. Popes (namly Innocent, Leo, Gelas. Vigil. Greg.) taught
that the Fathers by the sentence of God decreed that whatsoever was done in
Provinces far of, should not be concluded before it came to the notice of the Sea of Rome. And this they say all Churches took their beginning from the
Roman, that all Bishops had their honor from Peter. And yet him self says
page 545. that Pope Innocent was learned and Catholic. And page 540. That S.
Austin alleges his authority against heretics. And that in those times
Popes were learned, and Catholics. page 552. 554. 555. and sued unto by S.
Basil, S. Chrisostom, and S. Augustine, and the African Bishops, sought unto
them for their advise and counsel, for their authority and credit. Of such
acount were those Popes that claymed the supremacy even amongst the chief
Doctors of the Church. Doct. Whitak. lib. 7. cont. Dur. page 480. says, that
Pope Victor practiced authority over externe Churches, who was not long after
S. Peter, and by the judgment of Protestants a godly martyr. Wicklif in Fox
page 445. confesses the Bishop of Rome to be Christ's Vicar on earth. And
Luther for some years after he began Protestancy confessed the same, as you
may see lib. de Captiu. Babyl. in initio, and in Fox page 774. Edit. 1596.

9. Thirdly, I prove it, Third reason that the Pope succeeded Peter in his
authority.
because the Pope is successor to Saint Peter in his Bishopric, therefore he is
more like to have his authority than any other. That the ancient Fathers say,
that Saint Peter was Bishop of Rome, Protestants nether do nor can deny. And
therefore I will for breuity omit their testimonies, and content my self with
these men's confessions. The learned and ancient Fathers (says Bilson lib. of
Obedience page 143.) call the Bishops of Rome Peter's successors. page 380.
Saint Peter founder of Saint Leo his Church. The Fathers say (writes Reinolds
page 218. 219). Peter was Bishop of Rome, and he names Hierom, Eusebius.
Irenaeus. Bishop Cooper in Chron. Linus first Bishop of Rome after Peter. But
says Reinol. they meant improperly. And why so? Because (says he) Peter being
Apostle could not be Bishop of one Cyttie. When the Fathers call Peter Bishop
of Rome they mean properly.
Secondly, because Irenaeus lib. 3. c. 3. names Linus first Bishop of Rome,
and Eusebius in Chron. calls Euodius first Bishop of Antioch, which could not
be if Peter had been a proper Bishop. But against these cauils I oppose the
propriety of the word Bishop, which no Father or ancient writer has signified
that he used improperly when he called S. Peter Bishop: And all words
(especially in histories) are to be taken properly, when the Authors declare
not the contrary, else we should never be sure how we should understand the
writer. Negare non potes (says. Optatus l. 2. writing against heretics) Thou
can not deny that thou know, that to Peter first was an Episcopal Chair
set in Rome in which first sat Peter, to whom succeeded Linus. Lo how certain
was it the^ that the very heretics could not deny, but they knew it to be so.
Wherefore I ask when the Fathers said Peter was first Bishop, how they used the
word Bishop? If improperly, then they meant so of Linus. If properly, the^ we
have l. 3. c. 3. Eusebius. Chron. Epiph. haer. 27. Hier. in Clemente, Optatus l.
2. Aug. ep. 165. But what should he do in the Catalogue of proper Bishops, if
he were none him self? Besides they reckon him first Bishop of Rome as they
reckon Mark first B. of Alexandria, chair of Peter, S. Cyprian lib. 1. Epist
3. lib. 4. epist. 2. S. Hierom in Pet. ep. ad Damasum Aug. lib. 2. cont. Petil,
cap. 51. Sozom. lib. 1. c. 14. Prosper lib. De ingratis Bernard epist. 237. And
in like sort they call it seeds Apostolica as Calvin confesses, and is evident
ex Council. Calcedon. Act. 16. And Rein. Confer. page 369. The Fathers in
speaking of the Church of Rome mention often the Chair, and seat of Peter.
Hierom honoreth the Bishop of that See with the name of Peter's Chair. Fifthly,
they ep. ad Damas. Council. Ephesians. 1. Tom. 2. S. Eulog. apud Greg. lib. 6. ep.
37. And that they mean of a proper successor, appears by that they attribute
that peculierly to the Pope. Sixthly, and lastly they Cathedra (says S. Austin
lib. 2. cont. Petil.) quid tibi fecit Romana in qua Petrus sedit, and in qua
nunc Anastasius sedet? What has the Chair of Rome done to thee in which Peter
sat, and in which now sits Anastasius? Therefore either Peter was a proper
Bishop, or Anastasius was none. To conclude, Reinolds says P. Damas. succeeded
Peter in his chair.
Reinolds him self though unawares confesses it page 376. where he says that
Damasus succeeded Peter as in Chair, so in doctrine.

10. As for the first of Reinolds cauils. It is no more against Peter's
Apostleship to be Bishop of one City, than it was to take a particular care of
the Jews, as he did, nor more than it is for the Bishop of Winster to be
Parson of Eastmean. And for the second, Irenaeus does not call Linus first
Bishop of Rome, but only says that Peter, and Paul gave him the Bishopric to
govern the Church, to wit under Peter, and in his absence. Eusebius. indeed
calls Euodius first Bishop of Antioch, but that he means of pure Bishops
which were not also Apostles. For before he had said Petrus Ecclesiam
Antiochenam fundauit, obique Cathedram adeptus, sedit. And Rein. loco cit.
confesses, and both he, and all grant that Linus was Peter's successor. And as
for Ruffin, his words prove no more, but that Peter instituted Linus to help
him, especially in his absence, as Valerius did institute S. Aug. in his life
time, who after his death succeeded him, and so did Linus to Peter. Thus have I
proved that S. Gregory was successor to S. Peter in his Episcopal See, and
that he succeeded him also in faith I need not prove, because protestants,
although they find some fault with Greg. doctrine, yet they confess (as is
showed before) that he taught as much as is needful to salvation, and
consequently he wanted no thing to true succession to S. Peter.

11. Fourthly I prove that the Pope was most likely, to succeed Saint Peter,
Proved out of Fathers that the P. succedeth peter in his authority.
by that which the Fathers attribute to him. Saint Hierom epist. ad Damasum de
nomine hypostasis. Ego nullum primum, nisi Christum sequens beatitudini tuae,
id est, Cathedrae Petri communione consocior, super illam Petram aedificatam
Ecclesiam scio. Quicunque extra hanc domum agnum comederit prophanus est. I
following none foremost but Christ, communicate with thy Holiness, that is with
the Chair of Peter. Upon that Rock do I know the Church was built, who soever
shall eat the lamb out of this house is profane. Note how he says, that he
follows first Christ, and next the Pope, and that the reason, which he gives
hereof after, was not why he followed Christ first, for that were needles to
prove amongst Christians; And if he would have given any, it would have been,
Hierom follovveth the P. next after christ because Christ made the P. the rock
of his Church.
because Christ is God; But the reason which he gives, was why he followed the
Pope next to Christ, to wit, because he knew him to be the Rock, on which the
Church was built. Whereby it is evident, that by the Rock, he meant not Christ,
as Bilson lib. de Obed. page 87. and others would, but Pope Damasus as Reinolds
confesses p. 370. 376. But yet he meant not (says Reinolds) the succession of
the Popes, because Hierom writes that Pope Liberius had before subscribed to
Arianisme. But if Hieroms words be well po^dered he will be found to have said,
both that Pope Damasus was the Rock, and that his succession to Saint Peter in
his Chair of Rome, was the cause why he was the Rock. For if a subject writing
to the King should say: Nullum primum nisi Deum sequens maiestati tuae, id est,
Throno Conquestoris (in temporalibus) consocior. Super illam petram aedificatum
Angliae Regnum scio. Quicumque extra hanc domum aliquid egerit, rebellis est.
He should confess that both the King were head of the Realm, and with all
tell how he came by that authority, to wit, by succession to the conqueror. So
Saint Hierome in the forsaid words both said that Pope Damasus person, which he
meant by Beatitudini tuae, was the Rock on which in his time, the Church was
built: and said with all that his person had that authoriry by his succession
to Saint Peter in his Roman Chair, and therefore added these words, id est,
Cathedrae Petri, as a further explication of the former. And consequently he
meant that the Church is built upon all Popes that lawfully succeed in the
Chair of Peter. Which is so evident as Doct. Field lib. 1. de Ecclesia* D.
Field.
cap. 41. confesses plainly that Saint Hierome loc cit. said, that Peter's
Chair is the Rock the Church is builded upon. As for Reinolds reasons, were it
truth that S. Hierome wrote (as Reinolds says) of Liberius, which yet diverse
deny, and Reinolds must deny, if he will speak agreably to him self. For page
570. he says, that the words of Austin (ep. cont. Donat. and Hierome ep. cit.)
do import a sincerity of faith in the Roman Bishops to their time, which would
not be true, if Liberius had fallen. But admit I say it were true, that
Liberius had denied his faith, that makes no more against his Rock ship, than
the like fault in S. Peter did against his. For as S. Peter though he denied
his faith, yet taught not infidelity as he was Apostle, and Pastor of the
Church, so nether Liberius though he committed a personal crime, yet taught he
no heresy, as successor to S. Peter, in which sort only he is the Rock of
the Church.

12. Secondly, S. Austin ep. contra Donat. says: S. Austin.
Numerate Sacerdotes vel ab ipsa Petri Sede. Ipsa est enim Petra quam non
vincunt superbae inferorum portae: Number the Priests even from the very Seat
of Peter; Succession of Popes by S. Austin the Rock of the Church.
It is the Rock which the proud gates of hell do not ouercom. Behold how the
very succession of Popes from Peter, is called the Rock of the Church, as the
Chair of Peter was before called of S. Hierome. To this Bilson page 88. First
says that the text is corrupted, and that it should be ipse and referred to
Peter's person. But this is a mere surmise refelled in all the copies in Europe.
Secondly he says, that though it be ipsa, and grammatically agree with the
substantive Petra, which follows, yet it may be meant of Peter's person. But
if Saint Austin had meant that Peter alone had been the Rock, and that his
successors partaked nothing with him in that, he would never have bid us number
his successors too, and then tell us that that was the Rock. Wherefore Reynolds
Confer. page 384. confesses that Saint Austin applied this text the gates of
hell, etc. to the Church of Rome. And Bilson himself as doubting of either of
the former answers says thirdly, that Saint Austin said not that Peter's Seat
is the Rock of the Church, but that hell gates prevail not against it. But to
our purpose all is one, that in Saint Austins judgment Peter's Seat (that is
Peter's successors in Seat) are either the Rock of the church, Theodoret.
or so surely founded thereon, as the gates of hell shall not prevail against
the^.

13. Thirdly, Theodoret an ancient and Grecian Doctor writing to Renatus, says
of the Roman See: Tenet enim sancta Seeds gubernacula regendarum cuncti orbis
Ecclesiarum. That holy seat has the government of all the Churches of the
world. Which words are so plain, as Iuell Art. 4. Diu. 21. finds no better
answer than (judging others by his own humor) to say, That man naturally
aduanceth his power at whose hands he seeks help. As if Theodoret were such a
man as would give an Antichristian title (for so Protestants acount the
government of the Churches in the world) or S. Leo accept it for flatery.
Finally the great Council of Galcedon ep. ad Leonem, calls Pope Leo their
head, and say that to him. Council. Galcedon.
Vineae custodia a Domino commissa est. The custody of the Vinyard (that is
the Church) was committed by our Lord. And thus I hope I have sufficiently
proved both by revelation from heaven, by the authority of the Church then
alive, and since, by the examples of Popes ever since S. Peter's time bv
confession of Protestants, and finally by reason taken out of scripture, that
S. Greg. had lawful authority to send S. Austin. Now let us come to S. Austins
orders.

CHAP. X. That S. Austin was rightly ordered to administer the Sacraments, and
preach the word of God.
1. THat S. Augustine was created Priest at Rome is evident by his saying Mass,
preaching, and Christening as soon as he came to Canterbury, as is before
rehearsed out of Beda lib. 1. cap. 26. And after he had converted King
Ethelbert he came (says Beda cap. 27.) to Arles, where of Etherius Archbishop
of that City he was consecrated Archbishop of the Nation of Englishmen;
according as S. Greg. the Pope had commanded. And the King (says the same S.
Beda cap. 26.) gave him place for his See in the City of Canterbury. Here by
the way I note, that whereas S. Greg. lib. 7. epist. 30. says, that S. Austin
was created Bishop a Germaniaru^ Episcopis, he does not gainsay S. Beda, who
says he was created by the Bishop of Arles, because France was of the writers
of that time called Germany, as appears by Venantius Fortunatus in Carmine
de Nuptijs Sigeberti and Brunechildae, which might be, partly because the
French at that time and long after governed a great part of Germany, partly
also because the Francks who then ruled in France were Germans come out of
Germany. But to our purpose. That S. Austin was rightly ordered.
That S. Austin was rightly created Priest appears, by that he was made by
the authority of S. Gregory, or his predecessors, whom protestants account to
have been true Bishops of Rome. And Doct. Reinolds Confer. page 362.
acknowledges protestants call S. Austin a Bishop, and number him first in the
Catalogue of the Archbishops of Canterbury. And if their Bishops and Ministers
will have any orders at all, they must confess that S. Austins orders were
good, and sufficient. For as Doct. Field says, lib. 3. of the Church cap. 39.
In England they which had been Bishops in the former corrupt state of the
Church (so he terms Catholic times) did ordain Bishops and Ministers. And
Sutclif. answer to exceptions page 88. says. Couerdal and Scory (who were
Bishops in King Edwards time) laid hands upon Bishop Parker. Bell in his
Funeral professes openly that he has not departed from the substance of his
Popish orders, but only from the ceremonies thereof. Besides, evident it is,
that what Bishop or Priest so ever had been made in King Henry's time, was
never consecrate a new in King Edwards days. Who had been made in Queen
Mary's days was acounted to have sufficient orders in Queen Elisabeths
Reign. And yet what Priest apostateth from his faith is, without more orders,
thought to have orders enough fore ministering the Sacraments and word of God,
or protestants have no order at all. And thus having showed that S. Austin was
the first Preacher of Christian faith to our English Nation, and that he had
both sufficient learning and virtue to discharge such a function, and withal
lawful commission and right orders to administer the Sacraments, and preach
the word of God; now let us see what kind of faith and religion it was, which
he preached; and first what kind in general, and afterward what it was in
particular.

CHAP. XI. That the Faith which Saint Austin preached to our English Ancestors,
was the universal Faith of Christendom at that time.
1. THis I prove first by the testimony of those that lived in that time, S.
Austins universal religion proved by S. Greg.
among whom the cheifest and principal is S. Gregory him self, who having
been long time the Popes Legate in Constantinople, and after being Pope and
receiving letters from all parts of Christendom, could not be ignorant what
was the universal faith of East, West, and of all Christendom at that time. He
I say writing to S. Austin. lib. 9. Epist. 58. has these words. f All the
aithful of S. Austins time ioyed at our Nations conversion by him.
Quis sufficiat, etc. Who can tell what joy arose in the hearts of all the
faithful that the English nation by the working of Almighty God his grace, and
the labor of thy brotherhood, having cast away the darkness of errors, is endued
with the light of the holy faith, that with sincere devotion it trampleth the
Idols to which before with mad fear it bowed unto, that with a pure heart it
is subject to Almighty God. Behold S. Greg. witnesses that all faithful of
that time acknowledged and rejoiced that Austin brought the faith to our
English Nation, and that they by his means served God with most sincere
devotion and pure hearts. But yet more plainly avouches he this truth, Moral.
27. cap. 6. Where glorying in God of the conversion of England he writes thus.
S. Austins doctrine the faith of Christendom from the East to the west.
Behold now the faith has entered the hearts almost of all Nations. Behold God
has joined the bounds of the East and west in one faith. Behold the tongue of
Britanie which knew nothing but to roar rudely, of late has begun in Gods
praises to sound out the hebrew Alleluia. O most comfortable speech to all
those that follow S. Gregory and S. Austins doctrine, Great comfort for
Catholics.
to hear avouched by irrefragable testimony that it was the faith of the
Church of God from the East to the west above a thousand years ago. For as
Tertullian says. Admit that God had neglected his Church, and permitted it to
run into errors, is it lykly that so many and so great Churches would conspire
wholly in error? No surely.

2. The next is S. Austin him self who in Beda lib. 2. cap* 2. says thus unto
the Britons. S. Austins. Doctrine proved to be universal by his own testimony
Although in many other points you do contrary to our custom, or rather
contrary to the custom of the universal Church of Christ. Behold how he
testifyeth his custom to be the custom of the universal Church of Christ in
his time. And lib. 1. cap. 27. in his questions proposed to S. Greg. he asks,
Where there is but one faith, why be there so many sundry customs of
Churches, and one custom of Masses observed at Rome, another in France? Here
he manefestly testifyeth that there was but one faith and one mass in
substance every where, and the difference only in ceremonies. S. Greg.
communicated with all parts of Christendom.
The same also may be proved by the communion which S. Gregory (whose faith was
undoubtedly the same with S. Austin) had with all Christendom. For lib. 6.
epist. 4. and 5. he communicates with Cyriacus the Patriarch of Constantinople
lib. 4. epist. 34. 36. lib. 7. epist. 30. he communicated with the Patriarch of
Alexandria, and gloried to him of the conversion of England. lib. 1. epist. 25.
lib. 4. epist. 37. lib. 6. epist. 24. lib. 7. epist. 3. 47. he communicated
with the Patriarch of Antioch; under which three Patriarchs was almost all the
Eastern Church. And touching the Western Church lib. 1. epist. 4. lib. 4.
epist. 46. He communicated with Leander Primat of Spain. lib. 4. epist. 51. He
communicated with Vigilius primate of France. lib. 9. epist. 61. he
communicated with all the Catholic Bishops of Ireland. lib. 2. epist. 28. he
communicated with all the Bishops of Italy. lib. 1. epist. 60. 61. he
communicated with Ianuarius of Sardinia. lib. 1. epist. 68. he communicated
with all the Bishops in Sicilie. lib. 1. epist. 76. with Leo Bishop of Corsica
lib. 1. epist. 75. with all the Bishops of Numidia. lib. 2. epist. 15. lib. 3.
epist. 16. with all the Bishops of Dalmatia. lib. 3. epist. 37. He communicated
with all the Bishop of Vizach, and epist. 30. With the Bishop of Istria. And
lib. 7. epist. 30. with the Bishops of Germany, and consequently with all
Catholic Churches in the East and west.

S. wilfrid avouches S. Austins doctrine to be universal.
3. Of those that lived after S. Austins time. First is S. Wilfrid Archbishop of
York, who was borne soon after S. Austins death. For as S. Beda says. lib. 5.
cap. 20. He went up to Rome in the time of Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury
who was one of S. Austins fellows, and he was as S. Beda there writes a
worthy Prelat and notable Bishop. This man therefore in Beda. lib. 3. cap. 25.
disputing with the Scotts for the Roman observation of Easter and shaven
Crowns, says thus, The Easter which we observe we have seen to have been in
like manner observed in Rome, in all Italy and France. This manner we know to be
observed in Africa. in Eegipt, in Asia, in Greece, and throughout all Nations
and tongues of the world where the Church of Christ takes place, besides these
few Scotts, and the Picts, and Britons, with whom these men do fondly contend
against the whole world. Behold how S. Wilfrid avouches his Religion even in
that point wherein the Scotts then dissented from us, to be the Religion of all
the Christian world. Nether did the Scotts, or could they deny it. S. Ceolfrid
The next is S. Ceolfrid Abbot, and Master to S. Beda, who lived in the same
time, who writing to Naitan King of the Picts in Beda. lib. 5. cap. 22. and
speaking of his time says: The whole Catholic Church agrees in one faith, in
one hope, and one charity toward God. The third is S. Beda him self who, lib.
2. cap. 2. says, S. Beda.
The Britons preferred their own Traditions before all other Churches, which
throughout the whole world agreed with Austin in Christ. What I pray can be
said or imagined against these so manifould or irrefragable testimonies. Were
S. Gregory, S. Austin, S. Wilfrid, S. Ceolfrid, S. Beda ignorant what was the
universal faith of Christendom at that time? or were they so impudent as they
would write, yea avouch to their adversaries face a known untruth? No surely.
And this truth Protestants also partly openly confess, partly tacitly grant
and acknowledge. For Napier upon the Revelation of S. John, See more infr. lib.
2. cap. 3.
says. Between the year of Christ 300. and 316. the Antichristian and
Papisticall Religion reigning universally without debatable contradiction 1260.
years. And Brocard also upon the Revelation page 110. writes that the Church
(of Protestants) was trodden down and oppressed by the Papacy even from
Siluesters time unto these times. Bale cent. 1. page 69. says. From this time
(of Boniface 3. who succeeded S. Greg. with in a year or two) the purity of
heavenly doctrine vanished in the Church. page 65. After Greg. time purity of
doctrine perished, And 73. From Phocas who lived in S. Greg. time who (says
he) begot the Papacy till the renewing of the Gospel (by Luther) the doctrine
of Christ was all the while among Idiots in holes. Now if the heavenly
doctrine of protestants perished straight after S. Greg. time, and ever since
has been only in Idiots, and lurking holes, how could it be the universal
faith of all Christendom in his time? Could the universal faith of
Christendom perish in one or two years? Would all learned men, and open
Churches forsake it in so short time, and only Idiots and holes keep it? See
more of this matter lib. 2. cap. 1. infra.

CHAP. XII. That the doctrine which Austin taught was the true way to
salvation. Proved by the open confession of his Adversaries, and other things
affirmed by them.
1. THe first adversaries which S. Austin had to his doctrine were the Britons
before mentioned. Of whom S. Beda l. 2. cap. 2. writes that S. Austin having
cured a blind man whom they could not, The people praised S. Austin as a true
preacher of all truth and verity; Britons approve S. Austins doctrine.
And the Britons confessed indeed that they understood that to be the true way
of righteousness, which Austin had preached, and showed to them. The same
writes Huntington lib. 3. Stow Chron. page 66. and others. And albeit his
preaching to them, then took not that effect, which he intended, yet if Fox
say true lib. 2. page 123. that in Ina his time began the right observing of
Easter day to be kept of the Picts and of the Britons, with in short time the
whole Nation not only approved, but also admitted S. Austins doctrine. Yea if
it be true that Godwin writes in vit. Theod. That to him all the British
Bishops, and generally all Britany yielded obedience, and under him conformed
them selves in all things to the rites and discipline of the Church of Rome,
they performed this long before, about 60. years after S. Austin.

Protestants account S. Austins doctrine sufficient to salvation.
2. The next open Adversaries of Saint Austins doctrine in England have been the
Protestants; Of whom, diverse have in their writings openly acknowledged as
much as the Britons did. For Iuel in his famous challeng, Iuel.
offered to recant if any of the holy Fathers who lived in the first 600.
years after Christ were found contrary to him in his Articles. In which
compass of years both S. Greg. and S. Austin lived. And cried out saying, O
Gregory, O Austin etc. If we be deceived you have deceived us. Fulk.
Fulk in 1. Cor. 15. Seeing Gregory and Austin, (says he) taught the truth in
all points necessary to salvation, our Contrie has not believed in vain, nor
all our fore Fathers are dead in their sins. Fox.
Fox in his Acts page 111. 120. 122. Calls the faith planted here by Austin
and his fellow-laborers the Christian faith. p. 115. 116. the faith and
doctrine of Christ. pap. 121. Christ's Religion, and that Church, the Church of
Christ. And page 112. The perfect faith of Christ. Cooper.
Bishop Cooper Chron. Anno. 636. calls it, the right belief. Stow Chron.
page 9. calls it the Christian faith. Stow.
And page 72. pure and incorupted Christianity. Cambden
Cambden in descript. Britan. page 519. The true Religion of Christ. Godvvin.
Apology for the oath of allegiance, The faith of Christ. Godwin in Paulin.
The Gospel; And in Mellit. The faith of Christ. Holinshed in Brit. Holinshead.
The Christian faith. The faith of Christ. The word of God. Bilson of Obed.
part. 1. page 57. calls it Religion to God. Bilson.
Sutclif Subuers. cap. 3. terms it Faith, Religion, Christian Religion,
Sutclif.
and says the people were converted to Christ, Finally Fox lib. 2. page 124.
after he had told in particular how every one of those seven Kingdoms which
then were in England, was converted, concludes thus; Fox.
And thus by process of time we have discoursed from time to time, how and by
what means the Idolatrous people were induced to the true faith of Christ. And
who considers with him self, that not only our Catholic English Ancestors
embraced the doctrine of S. Austin, but also the erroneous Britons, and
Protestants account it the true way of righteousness, the Gospel, the Faith of
Christ. The perfect faith of Christ, the right belief, the true Religion of
Christ, pure and incorrupt Christianity, and finally true faith of Christ,
need seek no more, but what S. Austins faith was, and follow it. To those
that grant that S. Austins faith was the true way to saluaiion, I might add
also the Protestants, who affirm the same of the present Roman faith, whose
testimonies you may see in the Apology of Protestants Tract. 1. Sec. 6. Only
I will content my self with his Majesty's words to the parliament 9. of
November An. 1605. put forth in print thus: We do justly confess that many
Papists especially our Forfathers laying their only trust upon Christ and his
meritts (as they them selves teach in Bellarm.) may be and often times are
saved, detestinge in that point and thinking the cruelty of Puritans worthy of
fire that will admit no salvation to any Papist.

3. Besides this open confefsion of diverse Protestants for the truth of S.
Austins Religion, it may be also convinced out of diverse other things which
them selves teach. For it being supposed out of Gods word heb. 11 that without
the right faith it is impossible to please God: and withal confessed of diverse
Protestants that S. Austin and his fellows were holy men, it necessarily
follows that his faith was the true faith of God. S. Austin and his
followers holy men by Protest.
Of S. Austins holiness, and the English people in general some thing has been
said before. Of others Fox lib. 2. page 123. says Cutbert Iaruman, S. Cutbert
Cedda and Wilfrid I judge (says he) to be of a holy conversation. page 125.
S. Aldelm.
Aldelm a worthy and learned Bishop, of notable praise for his learning and
virtue. Ibid. he calls S. John of Beuerly and S. Egwin Saints. page 127. S.
John Beuerly.
Touching the integrite and holiness of Bedas life. It is not to be doubted, S.
Beda.
with great comfort of his spirit he departed this life. page 128. He
intituleth S. Boniface a Martyr of God. S. Boniface.
And yet page 129. calls him a great setter up and vphoulder of Popery. page
112. calls king Edmond three times Saint. S. Edmond.
Item page 121. King Oswald a Saint (says he) had great virtues, and by prayer
overcame his enemies. S. Osvvald
Cooper Chron. an. 636. calls Birin Saint an. 643. Oswald a holy king. 869
holy king Edmond. Stow Chron. page 78. Cedda a holy man. Iaruman a Bishop of
great virtue. Ibid King Sebbi, very devout and godly. page 81. Kinesburg and
Kineswith for holy conversation excelling. page 99. Cutbert Saint. Bale cent.
1. cap. 76. says of S. Aidan, that he was a man of most innocent life and full
of the spirit of God, and yet was Oswald his scholar a manifest Papist,
praying before crosses and for the dead, even when him self was ready to dye.
ex Bed. lib. 3. cap. 2. and 12. The same Bale cent 1. cap. 83. says, that
Aldelm went happily to Christ, and yet withal confesses that he wrote for
shaven crowns after the Roman manner, feasts of Saints, single life, and such
things, and was long time familiar with P. Sergius. cent 1. cap. 93. He calls
Ceolfrid, Beda, S. Ceolfrid S. VVillebrord.
Willebrord, Boniface and the like most holy monks, And adds cent. 2. cap.
1. that Beda had a most happy end; And yet the same man says of Boniface page
79. that he brought the Germans to Papisme: and page 103. Was the next to the
Pope the great Antichrist, and signed a hundred thousand men in Bauaria with
the Popes mark. And cent. 2. cap. 5. writes that Willebrord preached
Papistrie. Of S. Beda he says cent. 2. cap. 1. That he can not be excused from
all superstitious doctrine. And in the same place says that Ceolfrid used the
new ordinations of the Roman superstition. And that he was a plain Papist
appears by his epistle in Beda lib. 5. cap. 22. where he teaches one
sacrifice of the body of Christ, round shauing of Monks, Calls Peter head
and Primat of the Apostles. Whereupon Fox lib. 2. page 126. terms him a
shaueling, condemns him for calling Peter a Mediator, and terms it a
Monkish epistle, And in like sort Bale speaks of diverse others. S. Hilda.
For cent 1. cap. 94. he says: S. Hilda Abbess was a most holy woman, Ibid.
John of Beuerly a man very learned and pious, accounted it most sweet to preach
Christ's Gospel out of the Pulpit, and ended his life in great constancy of
Euangelical spirit. And cent. 2. cap. 1. Calls him a most holy prelat.
Cambden also Descrip: Britan. page 518. Calls S. Werburg Saint. S. VVerburg.
S. Milburg. S. Botulph
page 526. S. Milburg a most holy virgin. p. 612. King Oswald Saint and page
150. That that age was most fruitful of Saints. page 473. Botulph most holy.
And page 472. Guthlac lead his life in great holiness. This by the confession of
Protestants was the fruit of S. Austins religion. And if it be true, (as most
true it is which our Savior said) that we can not gather grapes of thorns nor
figs of brambles: And if it be true that virtue springs not out of the
Devils seed, nor Saints out of his Religion; Sure it is also, that S. Austins
Religion came not from the Devil but from God. Can any man of sense think that
so great sanctity can stand with ignorance of the true way to salvation? With
ignorance of the true worship of God? That men become Saints and attain to
heaven by Religion of Devils? Are Devils so bountiful to men, as they will
teach them the way to heaven? Or have they such skill as they can invent new
ways to heaven besides the way that Christ taught? And this for the virtue of
S. Austins followers; Now let us see what account Protestants make of the
learning of some of them.

4. That we may be assured that it was not ignorance which made our Ancestors
embrace S. Austins doctrine, That our Ancestors follovved not S. Austin upon
ignorance
S. Aldelm, Bale says cent. 1. cap. 83. Did so study both Divine, and Human
learning, that be far passed all the Deuines of his time, most learned in
Greek, and Latin, S. Aldelm.
in Verse, and Prose, and clear in wit and speech. Fox Acts 125. says, he
was a learned Bishop of worthy praise for his learning. Cambd. Descript. Brit.
210. says, he was surely worthy that his memory should remain for ever. For
he was the first Englishman that wrote in Latin, and first that taught
Englishmen to make Latin Verses. Godwin in Vit. Aldelm. He became Very learned,
in Poetry excellent, and writ much in Greek and Latin, Prose and Verse, but
his chief study was Deuinitie, in the which no man of his time was comparable
unto him. And yet to assure us also of his Religion lib. cit. affirms, that
he wrote at the commandment of Monks for shauing and anointing of Priests, for
feasts of Saints, and single life, and other, (says he) new rites, and that he
had great familiarity with Pope Sergius. And cent. 14. cap. 26. says, that
Maidulph master of S. Aldelm was sullied with Papistical blemish, and was a
most eager defender of the Roman constitutions. And yet the same Maidulph,
(says Cambden Brit. page 210,) was of great learning and singular piety. S.
Beda.
Of S. Beda Bale cent. 2. cap. 1. gives this testimony. He was so practiced
in Profane writers that he scarce had his match in that age, he learnt
Physic, and Metaphisick out of the purest fountains. He knew the mysteries of
the Christian faith so soundly, (note) that for his exact knowledge both of
Greek and Latin many preferred him before Gregory the Great. There is scarce
any thing worth reading to be found in all Antiquity which in due places is
not read in Beda (...) if he had lived in the times of Austin, Hierom,
Chrisostom; I doubt not but he might have contended for equality with them. He
put forth many books full of all kind of learning. Thus Bale of S. Beda: and in
like sort Fox Acts. page 127. says, he was a man of worthy and memorable
memory and famous learning, The whole Latin Church at that time gave him the
maistry in judgment, and knowledge of the holy scripture. Stow Chron. page 93.
Beda a famous learned man. Cooper Chron. An. 729. Beda for his learning and
godly life was renowned in all the world. Bell in his Downfall Beda for virtue
and learning renowned in all the world. Cambden. Brit. page 670. Bid the
singular glory of England, by piety and erudition obtained the name of
venerable, wrote many volumes, most learnedly. And yet how plain a Papist S.
Beda was shall be showed both by his own doctrine, and by open confession of
Protestants cap. 17.

5. The third whereof I will speak is Alcuin scholar to S. Beda, Alcuin.
but master to Charles the great. Of whom. Bale cent. 2 c. 17. VVriteth thus.
He was thought by far the most learned Divine of his age, yea of all English
men from the beginning after Aldelm and Beda, in so much that he was master to
Charles the great, and the first beginner of the University of Paris, skilful
in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. Cambd. in Brit: page 629. Calls him the only
glory of York. And yet who reads this Alcuins book de Diuinis Officijs
shall clearly see that he, and our Contry then was as perfect Papists as any
now are. For there he shall find all our Ceremonies at Baptism of exsufflation,
exorcising, of salt, Chrisme, and the like. Our Ancestors. used all our present
Cath. Ceremonies in baptism.
Our three Masses on christmasse day, Our Candlels on Candlemasse day, Our
Ceremonies in the holy week of keeping the Sepulcher, hallowing the font,
putting out all the candels but one. There he shall see our seven orders, our
attire of Bishops at mass, our Transubstantiation, our Extreme Unction, and
that acounted a Sacrament, our Confession of all our sins, our singing Mass,
and praying for the dead. These, to omit innumerable more, confessed in like
manner by Protestants to have been great scholars, and profound Divines, show
that it was not ignorance or want of knowledge which made our Forfathers to
follow S. Austins doctrine, nor that the Protestants learned men have by their
learning discovered in it errors, as they call them. For whom have they had
comparable to any of these in learning, and industry whom of their own have
they so much commended as they have done these? Comparaison of Protest: learned
men with ours
Let any Protestant desirous of truth take Tindal, Latimer, Ridley (whom they
term the Apostles of England) and consider whither in learning, or virtue they
be comparable to these three. And then judge with indifferency on whose side
truth is most lykely to stand. For all reason teaches that they are most
lykely to find truth, who abounded with most learning to search it, and were
endued with most virtue to have it from God. What reasonable man then is there
that forsaking the Doctrine of S. Aldelm, S. Beda, and Alcuin, whom not only
we, but very Protestants confess to have been most industrious to find
truth, most skilful to discern it, and most virtuous to deserve to have it
taught of God, will follow Tindal, Latimer, Ridley, whose learning by the
judgment of Catholics was very mean, and their life very vicious; and by the
judgment of their own men are but meanly commended either for good life, or
good learning.

CHAP. XIII. That the Doctrine which S. Austin preached he sealed and confirmed
by true miracles.
How many kinds of proofs for S. Austins miracles.
1. THat Saint Austin confirmed his doctrine by miracles, I will prove. First by
the testimony of those who lived in his time, secondly by the testimony of
those that lived soon after, and lastly by the plain confession of
Protestants. VVitnesses then living.
Of those that lived in his time, first is S. Gregory who writing to Eulogius
Patriarch of Alexandria lib. 7. epist. 30. says. S. Gregory.
Both he (Austin) and they, who were sent with him shine with so great
miracles in that (English) Nation, that they may seem to imitat the virtues of
the Apostles by the miracles, which they work. And lib. 9. epist. 56.
writing to the Queen of France says. What and how great miracles our
Redeemer has wrought in the conversion of the forsaid (English) Nation, The
Q. of France knevv that our nation was converted by great miracles.
yt is already known unto your Excellency. And can any man thinck that this
great Doctor would write to a Queen of France that she knew what miracles were
done in England, if they were not manifest, and out of all doubt? And lib. 9.
epist. 58. writing to S. Austin him self he says. Rejoice that English men's
souls are by outvvard miracles drawn to inward grace. Ib. Diligently
discuss thy self, who thou art, and how great the grace is in that Nation,
for whose conversion thou have received the gift of miracles. And lib. 27.
Moral.. cap. 6. VVheras by good precepts, and heavenly words, yea with manifest
miracles too, the grace and knowledge of God is powered into it (English hearts)
etc. By which words (says S. Beda lib. 2. cap. 1.) this holy Father does
declare that Austin and his company brought the English men to the knowledge of
truth, not only by preaching to them in word but also by showing them heavenly
signs and miracles.

2. The second testimony is the public Epitaph which the English men set upon
S. Austins Tomb after his death in these words. S. Austins Epitaph.
Here rests the body of S. Austin first Bishop of Dorobernia, that was sent
into this Land by S. Gregory Bishop of the City of Rome, approved of God by
the vvorking of miracles, and brought Ethelbert and his people from the
worshipping of Idols unto the Faith of Christ. The third testimony of those
that lived in S. Austins time, are the Britons, The Britons.
who by the miraculous cure of a blind man, wrought by S. Austin in their sight
were compelled to confess (as S. Beda says, lib. 2. cap. 2.) that to be the
true way of righteousness, which S. Austin preached. And this testimony is
much to be regarded, Why the testimony of the Britons for S. Austins miracles
is much to be regarded.
for it is the testimony of many, of enemies, of eye witnesses, and of those
among whom (says S. Beda lib. 2. cap. 2.) were plures viri doctissimi. So
they can be no way suspected either of partiality, being enemies, or of
insufficiency being many and present, and through their learning most able to
judge. Cambden also cites a piece of a History, An unnamed Author of S.
Austins time.
written (as he says) in that time, which records that S. Austin having
blessed the River Swale, and appointed that of ten thousand men (besides weomen
and children) twoe and twoe should go in, Great miracles.
and Christen each other, besides that none perished in so deep a water, this
miracle also happened, that all sickness and deformity was cured by that
Christening.

3. After S. Austins time lived S. Beda who lib. 1. cap. 26. writes.
VVitnesses of S. Austins miracles after his time.
The King being much delighted with the purity of their life (S. Austin and
his fellows) and the example of their godly conversation, as also with their
svveet promises, which they proved to be true by the vvorking of miracles, S.
Beda.
did believe and was baptized. And lib. 2. cap. 2. he reports the Prophecy
of S. Austin of the destruction of the Britons for their obstinacy, and the
event answered thereto after his death. Which is so sure a token of divine
revelation as the Prophet Esaias. cap. 41. says, Tell us what things are to come
herafter, and we shall know that you are Gods. The like prophetical knowledge
of things past is attributed to S. Paulin, one of S. Austins fellows, by him
lib. 2. cap. 12. and Godwin in vita Paulini, Fox Acts page 121, Holinshed page
108. and others. Likewise lib. 2. cap. 6. He recounteth the miraculous scourging
of S. Laurence successor to S. Austin by S. Peter for intending to abandon our
Contrie, upon the revolt thereof to Paganism. Which miracle is contested also
by our cheifest historiographers Malmsbury lib. 1. Reg. and lib. 2. Pont.
Huntington lib. 3. Marian. an. 617. Westmon. an. 616. Florent. an. 616. and
confessed by some protestants, as Godwin in vit. Laurentij, and Holinshed page
158. In like manner lib. 2. cap. 33. Beda tells how Peter a companion of S.
Austin being drowned, Our Lord (says he) made that every night there appeared
a light from heaven upon the place where he lay buried. Ethelvverd.
After S. Beda lived Ethelwerd who lib. 2. cap. 1. writes. That by the prayers
of S. Austin Bishop our Savior Jesus Christ shows innumerable miracles to
his faithful, at whose Tomb unto this day no small miracles are wrought.
Malmesb. Huntingt. vvestmon. Capgraue.
To these witnesses we may ad Malmsb. lib. 1. Pont. Hunting l. 3. westmo^. an.
603. and Capgraue also, who in the life of S. Austin writes. That there were
none or few in S. Austins company who had not the gift of curing, that they
lightened the darkness of the heathens no less by miracles, than by preaching.
And he adds that S. Austin cured all the weak and sick that were brought unto
him, or visited of him.

Protestants confess S. Austins miracles.
4. Thirdly amongst protestants Fox lib. 2. page 116. writes that when the King
had well considered the honest conversation of their (Austin and his fellows)
life, Fox.
and moved by the miracles wrought through Gods hand by them, and in the
margent puts this note, (Miracles wrought by God for the conversion of this
land) he heard than more gladly. page 118. he mentions S. Gregory's letter
testifying Saint Austins miracles, and page 119. he says that Beda,
Cestrensis, Huntington, Iornalensis, and Fabia testify the forsaid miracle of
the blind man. Godvvin.
Godwin in the life of S. David, I doubt not but God affoarded many miracles to
the first infancy of our Church. Nether therefore would I be to peremptory in
derogating to much from such reports as we see no reason why they may not be
true. And in the life of S. Austin. Austin wrought a miracle by healing a blind
man for confirmation of his doctrine. Holinshed in Descript. Brit. King
Ethelbert was persuaded by the good example of S. Austin and his company, and
for many miracles shevved, to be baptized. And page 602. Austin to prove his
opinion good, wrought a miracle by restoring to sight one of the Saxon Nation
that was blind. And the same miracle acknowledges Stow Chron. page 66. and
of foreign Protestants Hemingius in exposit. psalm. 84. part 1. cap. 6. Stow.
Hemingius.


5. Concerning the witnesses which I have produced to testify that S. Austin
wrought these things which we call miracles, The qualities of the said
vvitnesses for S. Austins miracles.
I would have the Reader to consider, first that some of them were then living,
as S. Greg. the Britons, and Authors of the Epitaph. Others lived after And
what greater variety of testimonies, or better qualified witnesses, would we
ask to believe a thing than these be?

6. This great weight and variety of witnesses we have to believe that S.
Austin did these things which are accounted miracles, No author before our
Days nor reason against S. Austins miracles.
wether they be true or false, which we shall see anon. And to the contrary
there is no Author, foreign or Domestical; eye witness or other; friend or foe;
Catholic or Protestant, before our days: nor any reason at all besides that
which Fulk Anotat. in Io. 14. gives against S. Austins miracles, Se more of
this in the preface to the Reader sup.
and Fox lib. 2. page 122. against other miracles. vz. That they are not in
scripture: therefore they are not bound to believe them. As if God were bound to
write all the miracles, which he works, or we not bound to believe with human
faith (of which alone we speak in this matter) that which is avouched by so
sufficient human authority, we bound to belevve with humane faith what is
deleuered with sufficient authority.
as we can take no just exception against it, either for skill to know the
truth, or for will to speak it. If not, then farwell all human belief, which
can require no more than so fufficient human authority, Inconveniences of not
belevving humane authority.
farwell all human authority, which can affoard no greater certainty; farwell
all human conversation, which cannot stand without the belief of such
authority, and let us believe nothing but what God has written or our selves
have seen. Let us not believe any Records or Histories of times past, See S.
Aust. lib. de vtil cred. cap. 12.
no that ever there was such a man as S. Austin. And for times present, let us
believe no Jury, nothing done in far Contries, nothing done out of our
presence, no not that such were our parents, because none of these are written
in Gods word, but are delivered to us by human authority, to which (as they
say) we are not bound to give credit. Thus you see to what inconveniences this
kind of sensles reason would lead us, if we should follow it in other like
matters. But besides, it is fond in it self, for it is taken from negative
authority: which kind of argument (says Iuel Art. 2. Diu. 13.) Unless it be in
consideration of some other circumstance is so simple as that a very child may
soon answer it. And justly, Negative authority no authority.
for negative authority is no authority, and silence no witness. Whereupon
the law says. Qui mutum exhibet nihil exhibet; especially when the silence is
of such which had no cause to speak of the matter, as the scripture had none
to fortel S. Austins miracles. And therefore to argue from such negative
authority is to argue from noe authority and to seem to use reason, when
indeed there is none. For who would suffer a Malefactor, against whom many
honest men have deposed, to clear him self because diverse standers by say no
thing against him? Would their silence, which in any man's judgment makes no
more for him than against him, be preferred before the depositions of diverse
witnesses omni exceptione maiores? And so, besides that the scripture was
written many hunderd years before S. Austin was borne and therefore could not
speak of his miracles but by prophecy, the silence thereof in his miracles
makes no more against them than for them. For as it affirms them not, so
nether does it deny them. And therefore as Fulk argues; The scripture affirms
not S. Austins miracles; therefore they were not. An other might with as good
reason say. The scripture denies them not, therefore they were. But leaves them
to the authority and credit of those that report them. Which (as has been
showed) is as great as can be required to human belief: and therefore binds us
to give human credit unto them. S. Austin.
For as S. Austin said well lib. de vtil. cred. cap. 16. It is miserable to be
deceived by authority, but most miserable not to be moved by it. A part of
beasts not to be moved with authority.
Because to be deceived either by probable reason, or sufficient authority is a
thing incident to man. But not to be moved with conuincent reason, or such
sufficient authority, as no just exception can be taken against it, having no
reason or authority to the contrary, is the part of a beast incapable of
reason, or authority.

7. For this cause, perhaps some will grant that S. Austin did these things,
That S. Austins miracles were true miracles.
which are reported of him, but yet will say, that they are not true miracles,
but false, such as may be done by nature, art, or the Devils help. But
against these I oppose. First See Alan. Copus Dial. 5. cap. 18.
Secondly they say it without any reason taken from the miracles lib. 2. cap.
2. By prayer to the Father of our lord Jesus Christ, beseeching that he would
restore light to the blind person that by corporal illumination, and lightning
of one man his spiritual grace might kindle many. Which mean of prayer to God,
is quite opposite to the working of false miracles, which is by calling upon the
Devil. Fourthly I oppose the end for which most of S. Austins miracles were
done, which was to draw Pagans from Infidelity to Christianity, and from vice
to virtue, as the effect did show. But the Devil would do nothing (and much
less a miracle) to draw men from Infidelity, and vice to which he enticeth
them all he can; or to Christianity and virtue, from which he drives them by
all means that in him lies. Therefore S. Austins miracles came not from the
Devil. And this trial of miracles by the end of them protestants allow as the
true touchstone to try them by. As Fox Acts page 351. where he crediteth the
miracle wrought in the king of Tartaria his child, which when it was born was
ugly and deformed, and being Christened became fair and bewtifull. Because
(says he) it served to the conversion to the Christian faith, to which use
properly all true miracles do apertain. And yet that faith to which that King
was brought, and for which that miracle was wrought was Papistical as Bale
grants cent. 4. page 303.

which Austin and those virtuous men did. Sixthly I oppose the judgment of
plures viri doctissimi, and who all were opposite to S. Austin, and therefore they
wanted nether skill, nor will to discover the falsitie of his miracles, if any
had been. Lastly I oppose the confession wrought (as Fox speaks) through the
hand of God.

9. For this, perchance, some may be persuaded to confess that both S. Austin
wrought these wondrous things which are recorded of him, That a miracle can
not be wrought to confirm an untruth.
and also that they be true miracles, and yet may say as Fulk does Annot. in
Marc. 9. That Heretics may work miracles to confirm their erroneous opinions.
That is direct blasphemy against God. For a miracle can not be wrought but by
God his divine power, who uses it as a seal to confirm his Doctrine with.
Whereupon S. Paul. 1. cor. 12. called miracles signs of his Apostleship, And
marc. 16. they are called confirmations from God, and our Savior Io. 5.
calls them a greater testimony than S. John Baptist. And bids the Jews
if they will not believe him, believe his miraculous works. And S. Austin lib.
de vtil. cred. cap. 14. says, that Christ by miracles got authority, by
authority deserved credit, by credit gathered multitudes, by multitude got
antiquity, by antiquity strengthened Religion. Certain it is therefore, that as
God can not contest, or confirm a lie, so he can not with heretics cooperat
to a miracle to confirm their erroneous opinion. Wherefore as our Savior said
to the Jews. If I cast out Devils in the finger of God suerly the Kingdom of
God is come amongst you. So might S. Austin say, if I by the finger of God work
miracles, surely the Kingdom of God is come amongst you. That S. Austin
wrought miracles for confirmation of that which protestants deny.


10. The last evasion which any Protestant can find why he should not believe
the doctrine of S. Austin confirmed of him by true miracles, is that which Fulk
also gives 2. cor. 12. To wit: that we are not certain whither his miracles
were to confirm any of that corruption which he brought in. To which I reply,
that this is but a guess of a distrustful mind. For who told him lib. 2. cap.
2. that they should conform them selves to the holy Roman Church, namely in
administering of baptism. But the manner of administering of baptism which S.
Austin exhorted the Britons to, was undoubtedly the same which his master S.
Gregor. lib. de Sacrament. and our ancient Contreyman Alcuin lib. de diuinis
offic. describe, which Catholics now use, and Protestants reject, to wit,
besides baptising with water, to exorcize the child, and to breath in his face,
to make the sign of the Cross in the child's forhead, and breast, to put salt
into his mouth, and to touch his nostrels and ears with spitle, and to anoint
him between the shoulders. Surly these things considered, me think^ S. Austin
may say to us as Saint Paul did to the Thessalonians. My Gospel was not to you
in speech only, but in verity and in the holy Ghost, and in much plenty. And
that our Ancestors and we may say with the great Doctor Richard de S. Victore.
The things which we believe were confirmed with so many, so great, so wonderful
miracles, that it may seem a kind of madness any way to doubt of them. I would
the Jews (Protestants) would mark. I would the Pagans (Puritans) would
consider, with what security of conscience we may appear before God touching
this part. May we not with all confidence say to God, Lord if it be an error
we were deceuied by thee? For the things which we believe were confirmed amongst
us with so great signs and wonders, and with such, as could not be wrought
but by thee. Surely they were delivered unto us by men of great holiness, and
approved with great and authentical testimonies, thy self cooperating and
confirming their speech with signs following.

11. Finally if any men be found so Thomas-lyke, and hard of belief, that he
will not believe that S. Austin wrought any miracle, let them answer that which
S. Austin says lib. 22. de ciuit. cap. 5. against the Pagans, S. Austin*
who would not believe the miracles of the Apostles. If they believe not, that
miracles were wrought by the Apostles of Christ (by S. Austin and his fellows)
that they might be credited; this one miracle alone suffices, that all the
world should believe without miracles. That our English Ancestors should
without al miracles forsake their ancient, and easy Religion, and follow a new,
and difficult both for points of belief, as the mystery of the Trinity,
Incarnation, Eucharist, and more difficult to practice, as to refrain both act,
and thought.

12. If any ask why are not miracles now done for confirmation of S. Austins
doctrine as well as then, Why miracles are not now.
I answer with S. Gregory homil. 29. in Euangel. S. Austin^
The multitude of the faithful was to be nourished S. Greg.
And with S. Austin lib. 22. de ciuit. cap. 8. I might say that miracles were
necessary before the world (of Britanie) did believe. Who so ever now
requires wonders to believe, he is a great wonder that believes not when the
world believes. Was it sufficient for the Jews to believe the doctrine of
Moises, that their Forfathers saw it confirmed of him by many wonders? And
shall it not suffice us that our Forfathers testify that they saw S. Austins
doctrine confirmed in like sort? Were not our Forfathers to be credited as well
as those Jews? Or are we more incredulous than their posterity?

And hitherto Gentle Reader we have showed that Saint Austin had all things
requisite to a sufficient and lawful Preacher of Gods word, what has been
hitherto proved.
to wit great learning, famous virtue, lawful vocation and right orders: we
have also showed that the Doctrine which he preached was the universal faith
and religion of all Christendom at that time, is confessed by the greatest
Adversaries thereof to have been sufficient to bring men to heaven and was
aproued and contested by God by many miracles to be his divine and infallible
faith; what now remains but to seek out what S. Austins Religion was in
particular, that finding it we may be sure to have found a Religion taught unto
our Ancestors above 1000. years ago by a great Divine, by a famous Saint and a
lawful Preacher rightly sent and ordered, which so long since was the Religion
of all Christendom, was approved by God him self by true miracles, and is
confessed of the adversaries to have been sufficient to salvation. Than the
which I know not what more amy reasonable man can desire.

CHAP. XIIII. That S. Austin was a Roman Catholic, proved by his Master S.
Gregory.
1. HOw careful S. Austin was to follow the doctrine and Religion of his Master
S. Gregory apeareth by what was said before out of S. Beda. lib. 1. cap. 27.
of the questions, S. Austins Romans religion proved by S. Gregory.
which S. Austin sent unto him so far as from England concerning small matters.
And therefore his Religion may be evidently gathered by that of S. Greg. But
because it would be tedious to prove that Saint Greg. was a Roman Catholic in
all substantial points of Religion, I will for proof hereof make choice of two
especial points: To wit. The Popes Supremacy, and the Sacrifice of mass.
Because in the first of these points Do: Reinolds in his Confer: page 568.
affirms the very being, and essence of a Papist to consist. And D. Whitaker
cont. Dur. page 503. says: It is the head of popish Religion of which almost
all the rest depend. And in the mass (says D. Sutclif in his Answer to
Exceptions page 11) The very soul of Popery does consist. And D. Whitak. loc.
cit. page 426. affirms that, Nothing is more holy and divine in our conceit.
And lastly I will prove it be the open confession of diverse Protestants.

S. Greg. believed the Popes supremacy.
2. As for the first point of the Supremacy S. Greg. lib. 4. Epist. 32. faith
of Saint Peter (who as Bil on says lib. 1. of Obed. page 380. was Founder of
the Roman Church) It is manifest to all that know the Gospel, that by our Lords
voice the care of the wholle Church was committed to S. Peter Prince of all the
Apostles. And lib. 1. epist. 24. Peter houlding the Princedome of the Church
accounted him self the chief in the Church. And lib. 11. epist. 44. he calls
the Roman Church Caput fidei, the head of the faith. His words are these:
Admonemus vt Apostolicae sedis reuerentia nullius praesumptione turbetur. Tunc
enim status membrorum integer manet, si caput fidei nulla pulsetur iniuria.
Likewise lib. 7. epist. 49. he says, The care enjoined to us of all Churches
does bind us. lib. 7. epist. 6. Who doubts but that she (Church of
Constant.) is subject to the Sea Apostolic. And epist. 64. If any falt be
found in Bishops I know not what Bishop is not subject to her (Church of
Rome) Which last words do so plainly avouch S. Greg. opinion of the supremacy,
as Doct. Reynolds Confer. page 547. finds no better shift than impudently to
say that either Greg. vvrote not so, or he vvrote an untruth to cheer up his
subjects. Calvin lib. 4. cap. 7.. 12. says that, There is no word in all
Greg. vvritings wherein he more proudly boasts of the largenes of his
Primacie than this. Furthermore S. Greg. lib. 7. epist. 69. Without the
authority and consent of the Sea Apostolic what so ever is done (in
Counsels) has no force. And contrariwise lib. 7. epist. 115. That reverence
is carried of the faithful tovvarde the Sea Apostolic, that what is appointed
by her decree shall not after be disturbed. And the Archbishop of Rauema
writing to him lib. 10. epist. 36. says. The Sea of Rome sends her laws to
the Universal Church. And him self lib. 12. cap. vlt. The Sea of Rome does
look over the whole world, and sends nevve constitutions unto all. And
lib. 11. epist. 56. writes that the cause of a Bishop who had no Patriarch or
Metrapolitan over him, was to be judged (immediately) of the Sea Apostolic,
which (says he) is omnium Ecclesiarum caput, head of all Churches. Which
proof shows that he means not head ship in excellency of gifts as Reinolds
would Confer. page 548. but in government. In like sort in psalm. 4. poenit. he
calls Rome the head of all Churches and Lady of Nations, which Title of the
head of all Churches because Pope Boniface 3. who succeeded S. Greg. within one
year or two procured the Emperor Phocas to declare to appertain to the
Bishops of Rome, he is accounted of all Protestants generally to be the first
true Pope and Antichrist of Rome. But if S. Greg. authority were not so great
in the Church as Ministers are ashamed to account him an Antichrist, they would
as soon call him Pope and Antichrist, as they do Pope Boniface, because he
avouches the same Title which Boniface did.

3. Nether did S. Greg. only claim this Supremacy but also practiced it
often times. S. Greg. practizeth the supremacy.
For. lib. 2. Epist. 14. He excommunicated the Archbishop of Salona in
Dalmatia. lib. 4. Epist. 50. He deposed Anastasius Archb. of Corinth in Greece.
And Epist. 15. made the Bishop of Prima Iustiniana his Legate, and likewise the
Bishop of Arles in France. Epist. 51. And. lib. 5. Epist. 24. When there arose
a controversy between a Priest of Calcedon, and the Patriarch of
Constantinople according to the Canons (says he) it fell to the Sea Apostolic
and was ended by our judgment. And lib. 10. Epist. 30. He makes a Bishop
swear that he will In all things abide in the Communion of the Bishop of Rome.
And in Bed. lib. 1. cap. 27. Takes upon him to commit all the Bishops and
Priests of Britany to S. Austins charge, and without asking the Prince his
leave, appointed him to erect two Archbishoppriks, and 24. Bishoprics. Finally
he took upon him to depose kings, and princes. For lib. 11. Epist. 10. He
says Siquis etc. If any king Priest Judge or seculer person knowing this
constitution of ours shall attempt to break it, Let him want al Dignity of his
power, and honor. And lib. 12. cap. vlt. If any king Prelat Judge or seculer
person of what Degree or highness soever (do violat the priuiledgee of S.
Medards Monastery, Let him be deposed. And (as Baron: An. 600 writes out of
the Chronicles of Millan) gave the Bishop of that City authority to choose
what king he would after the race of Lomburdian kings was ended. Protestants
opinion of S. Gregory about the supremacy.
For these speeches and acts of Greg. Doct. Reinolds Confer page 549 says of
him and of all the Popes for 300. years before him that they avouch more of
their See than is true and right. But now the question is not about right,
Reinolds*
but about S. Greg^ opinion of Supremacy. And page, 545. says that S. Greg. is
somewhat large that way. page 550. The primacie which Greg Leo and others give
to the Sea of Rome does so exceed the truth that etc. And page 17. he says that
Leo the great (who was Pope 130. years before Greg.) cherished the egg of the
Popes Supremacy. And page 16. says, Leo made Peter a fellow, head, a party,
Rock, and half foundation with Christ. Which says he page 10. Leo did that he
might rise up with S. Peter. And Doct. Whitak, Whitaker Fulke.
lib. de consil. page 37. Leo was a great builder of the Sea of Antichrist.
Fulkin 2. Thessal. 2. Leo and Greg. were great workers and futherers of the Sea
of Antichrist, and of the mystery of iniquity. And ibid. he doubts not to say
that the mystery of iniquity did work in the Sea of Rome in Peter's time,
and did show it self in Anicetus, Victor, Cornelius, Sozimus, Bonifacius,
Cel^stinus. By which confes^ion of Protestant^ a man of mean eyesight will
easily see, what S. Greg. and his Predecessors thought of the supremacy. For
if they were not of greater authority for their learning holiness and
antiquity, they would have been as well accounted Popes and Antichrists as their
successors are.

In what sense S. Gregory impugned the Title of universal Bishop.
4. If any object that S. Greg. vehemently impugneth the Title of the universal
Bishop, which the Patriarch of Constantinople in his time usurped, calling it
proud, sacrilegious, and such like, which he would never have done if he had
thought him self to have been head of all the Churches in the world; I answer,
that S. Greg. could not doubt, but that the Title of universal Bishop might in
some sense agree to the Pope. Because the Council of Calcedon which lib. 1.
Epist. 24. he professes to reverence as one of the four Ghospells, offered it
to his Predecessors as him self testifies lib. 4. Epist. 32. Whereunto he
adds Epist. 37. That his adduersarie the Patriarch of Constant. knew well that
per Calcedonense Concilium huius Apostolica Sedis Antistites Vniversals oblato
honor vo^ati sunt. And lib. 4. epist. 36. says that the Patriarch of
Alexandria knew it also to be so. Which he would never have said, unless it had
been both certain and evident, so as his Adversaries could not deny it. Whereto
lib. 7. epist. 30. he adds, that it was given to his Predecessors by Fathers
after the Council. And in the said Council, Which (as Reinolds says Confer.
page 563.) was a Company of 630. Bishops sound in Religion and zealous of the
glory of God. (although it has been falsified by the Gr^cians as witnesses
S. Greg. lib. 5. epist 14.) yet thrice is Pope Leo called Universal Patriarch
without the gain saying of any one. Which so many and so zealous would never
have permitted, if it had been altogether unlawful. And the same Reinolds
confer. page 562. professes that the said Council named Pope Leo their head.
And page 561. That he was President of the Council. S. Beda calls S. Gregory
over the whole world.
And of Bed. lib. 2. cap. 1. S. Greg. is called high Bishop over the whole
world. Besides that, Popes were before that time called Bishops of the
Universal Church, as it is to be seen in Pope Leo Epist. 54. 62. 65. Sixtus 1.
epist. 2. Victor epist. 1. Pontianus and Stephanus epist. 2. Which in sense is
all one with Universal Bishop, if this Title be taken in the proper sense. why
the Patriarch of Constant vnlavvfully took the title of universal Bishop.
But S. Greg. condemned it in the Patriarch of Constant. both because it could
no way pertain to him in the proper sense, for that he was not head of all the
Church, and also because he claimed it in such a lib. 4. epist. 34. 36 38. lib.
5. epist. 60. lib. 6. epist. 31. 37. and lib. 7. epist. 29. and 30. He would be
called Universal Bishop in such sort as his brethren being despised, he alone
might be called Bishop, or that he might seem to have denied his brethren to
be Bishops. That is, so as if him self alone were the only true and proper
Bishop, and others but his Deputies or Vicegerents, and not so formal nor true
Bishops as he. In which sense that Title is truly sacrilegious; as robbing all
other Bishops of their Episcopal Dignity. S. Gregory for Mass.


5. And for the second point of Mass; S. Greg. him self says, lib. 7. epist.
29. thus: We do the solemnity of the Mass every day in honor of them
(Martyrs). Sutclif in his Answer to the Catholic supplication denies these
words to be in the place cited. Which who will seek shall take a taste of his
impudency. Doct. Reinolds in his Confer. page 532. Iuel art. 1. diui. 31. And
art. 3. diuis. 21. and others say, that S. Greg. Mass was a Communion,
because in the Canon thereof are these words, who so ever shall receive of this
participation of the Altar the holy body and blood of thy son. But so they
might prove that our Mass were no true Mass, because the said words are in
the Canon thereof. And they prove no more, than that the Church prays for all
such as shall communicate at mass, and there shall receive (not bare bread and
wine) but the body and blood of Christ. That S. Greg: mass was no Protestant
Communion.
For to say that S. Greg. mass was a Protestantish Communion of very material
bread and wine, as Iuel speaks Art. 8. Diui. 2. were great impudency. First,
because in S. Greg. Massse is the Cano^ of our Mass, in which the substance of
our Mass consists. made to say our Mass, vz: Take power to Secondly Saint
Greg. Mass was a true sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, as appears
by these his words lib. 4. Dialag: (which book Bale cent. 1. cap. 68.
confess^th to be his) cap. 58. We must sacrifice the daily hosts of his
(Christ's) flesh and blood; The host sacrificed at Mass saves the soul
according to S. Greg.
for this wholesome sacrificie does save the soul from everlasting death, which
mystically represents to us that death of the only son, who albeit rising
from death now dies not, and death has now no more power over him, yet he
living in him self immortally and incorruptibly is sacrificed for us in this
mystery of the holy Oblation. Christ sacrificed at mass without dying.
For his body is there received, his flesh is divided for the salvation of his
people. His blood is not powered now into the hands of the Infidells but into
the mouth of the faithful. Christ's blood povvred into the mouths of the
faithful.
Lo how he professes that we daily sacrifice Christ's body and blood, and
that this daily sacrifice saves the soul from eternal death, and that though
Christ be not killed thereby, yet is he sacrificed; and his flesh and blood
distributed to the people when they communicate at Mass. which is the very
doctrine which we teach. S. Greg. believed Transubsta^tiation.
Again, in S. Gregory's Mass Transubstantiation was believed, as appears by
these words of Doct. Humfrey Jesuit. part. 2. rat. 5. page 626. 627. Gregory
and Austin brought in Oblation of the holy host, Transubstantiation etc. How
then could his Mass be a Protestant Communion? Morouer in the Mass which his
scholar S. Austin taught our Forfathers, The mystery of the flesh and precious
blood (says Beda lib. 5. cap. 22.) of the immaculat lamb is offered to God the
Father in hope of redemption? And S. Greg. lib. de Sacram. ante Canonem calls
the host of his mass the wholesome host of the whole world, the vital host, The
host of Mass a vital host expelling sins.
which expels all sins and causes warines to avoid them for ever. Is this
likly to be very material bread? And again l. cit. Dial. cap. 57. he tells us
that while one was captive amongst enemies, Mass louseth the bonds of a
captive.
his wife got sacrifice certain days to be offered for him, who long time
after returning to his wife told her what days his bonds were loosed, which
she knew to be the days, when she got sacrifice offered for him. Mass saves
from drowning as many faithful vvitnesses testify.
Ibid. When a Bishop (says S. Greg.) offered the Sacrifice of the wholesome
host for the soul of him whom he thought was drowned, he was saved from
drowning, as many (says he) faithful, and religious men have witnessed to me
and do witness. S. Greg. appointed 30 Masses to be said for one dead.
And cap. 55. he tells of two delivered out of the pains of Purgatory by
his Mass. whereof 30. Masses were said for one of them by his own apointment.
Thirdly S. Greg. Mass was showed, and offered for the dead as is evident; and
Reinolds loc. cit. confesses, cent. 1. cap. 68. says that Greg. ordered the
ceremonies of the Mass and made up the Canon thereof. And Ibib. tells what
parts he added to the Mass. Again Kemnit. in Examen. page 826. 827. confesses
Mass as it is now, to have been finished in S. Greg. time. But now it is far
different from Protestants communion. And it is evident that nothing since his
time is added to the Canon, which includes the page 130. says that about the
year 780. Pope Adrian ratified and confirmed the order of S. Greg. Mass, At
what time (says he) this usual Mass of the Papists began to be universal,
and uniform and generally received in all Churches Lo he confesses that our
usual Mass came from S. Greg. and tells the time when it began generally to
be received in all Churches, To wit about 900. years ago.

Protestants confess S. Greg. to have been a Papist.
6. Lastly I will prove S. Greg. to have been a Roman Catholic by the open
confession of our Adversaries, Fulk. in Apoc. 6. says, Greg. was superstitious
in relics And 2. Thessal. 2. Greg. was a great worker and furtherer of the Sea of Antichrist, Fulk.
and of the mystery of iniquity. Io. 21. Gregory gathered some thing for
Peter's Primacie. Ib. We go not about to clear Gregory from all usurpation of
Jurisdiction more than to his See appertained. He thought to highly of his See
And Math. 4. Gregory allowed of Images Hebr. 11. Allowed Images to be in
Churches Acts. 17. Greg. allowed Images to be lay men's books Math. 16. and 1,
Cor. 3. Gregory grants Purgatory. Sutclif.
Sutclif Subuers. cap. 4. Greg. used litanies, allowed Purgatory, esteemed
much relics of Saints. Whitak. cont Dur. page 480. Greg. Purgatorium vt
certum dogma tradidit. Whitaker.
Fulk 1. Timoth. 4. Gregory indeed wills holy water to be made and to he
sprinkled in the Idols Temples, Altars to be built, and relics to be laid up.
Gregory indeed did send many superstitious tokens, as a littel Key from of S.
Peter for his blessing. Math. 16. Greg. favors the supremacy of S. Peter.
Bale Cent. 1. cap. 68. Greg. burdened the Church and Religion of God more then
all, Bale.
with more than Jewish Ceremonies. He ordered the rites of Mass, commanded
Masses to be said over the Dead bodies of the Apostles, S. Greg. described to
have been a professed Papist.
devised Letanies, and Procession, permitted the Image of the blessed Virgin to
be carried about, confirmed Pilgrimage to Images by Indulgences for the peoples
devotion; he was a Maintainer of Pardons, S. Greg. granted indulgences.
granted Indulgences to those that visit Churches on certain days, made four
books of Dialogues for strengthening Purgatory. Admitted adoration of the
Cross, and Masses for the dead, Called the English men to Romish rites by
Austin the Monk. And much more there. And cap. 70. Gregory brought in
Ceremonies, Procession, Suffrages, adoration, Masses, trust of men's works.
Item. After Greg. time purity of doctrine decreased and the Invocation of dead
Saints together with sale of Masses increased, and the Mystery of the
Eucharist began to be offered for the dead. Bishops also from the doctrine of
faith, fled to trust to men's works, and human satisfactions, which (says he)
is manifest of Gregory. Item. Greg. sent Austin to the English men that he
might bring in not Christ, but the Roman Religion stuffed with the
commandments, and traditions of men. And finally cap. 71. he says in plain
terms that Greg. brought Papistrie into England. Also Doct. Humfrey Iesuitismi
part. 2. rat. 5. page 626. 627. Greg. and Austin brought into the Church a
burden of Ceremonies, Humfrey.
The Bishops Pal to use only at Mass, Purgatory, Oblation of the holsom
host, prayers for the dead, Relics, Transubstantiation, Transubsta^tiation.
new halowing of Churches. Of all which what other proceeded but that
Indulgences, Monkerie, Popery, and the rest of the Mass of Popish
superstition should be builded thereupon. Answer to the Examinat. printed at
Geneua 1566. page 45.
And all these things did Austin a great Monk being taught of Gregory a monk,
bring into England. Who will see more of S. Greg. confessed Papisme by
Protestants may read Osiander cent. 6. page 288. But what we have cited out of
English Protestants will suffice I hope to persuade any in different man that
S. Greg. was a Papist. Who will see more out of S. Greg. himself may read lib.
7. epist. 53. and 109. lib. 9. epist. 71. lib. 12. cap. vlt. lib. 1. epist. 25.
33. lib. 8. epist. 22.

CHAP. XV. That Saint Austin and his fellows were Roman Catholics, proved by
their own deeds and Doctrine.
1. FIrst Saint Austin was a Benedictin Monk, Ansvv. to D. Bish. page 197.
or (as Doctor Abbots calls him of the color of his habit) a black Monk,
cent. 13. cap. 4. accounts one of the horns of the beast, so he terms the
Pope; And cent. 1. cap. 100. says they filled all with superstition, and
Idolatry. And Fox lib. 3. page 153. condemns these kind of Monks as
superstitious, tied to a prescript form of diet, apparel, and other things,
and forbidden to marry. Secondly he was a Romish and Romish Archbishop as Doct.
Abbots calls him page 198. And Romish Legate as Bilson terms him lib. de
Obed. page 114. And what mass or service of God, a Romish Priest uses every
one knows. Thirdly, when he and his fellows came into England, they came as
S. Beda lib. 1. cap. 25. and all other writers agree carrying before them in
place of a banner a Cross of silver, and the Image of our Savior painted in a
table, and singing the Letanies. Which Letanies (says Bale Cent 1 page 62.)
were supersticious. Fox lib. 2. page 116. says they went in Procession. Beda
lib. 2. cap. 26. In Canterbury they resorted to an ancient Church built in the
honor of S. Martin, made while the Romans yet dwelled in England, and began
there first to say service, say Mass, pray, preach and Christen. cap. 27.
Saint Austin was made Archbishop by the authority of Pope Greg. (or as S. Beda
speaks of,) at the commandment of S. Gregory. He enquireth of Gregory how
offerings at the Altar should be distributed, what Ceremonies he should use at
Mass, and the like cap. 29. He received from Gregory all such things as were
necessary for the furniture, and ministry of the Church. As holy vessels,
Altar clothes, Ornaments for Churches, apparel for Priests, and Clergy, and a
Pal to were only when he said Mass and authority to institute 12. Bishops
under him and 12. under a Bishop of York, and superiority over all the Priests
of Britanie cap. 30. S. Austin is appointed by Gregory not to pull down the
Temples of Idols, Holy water.
but to make holy water, and sprinkle about the same Temples, to build Altars,
and place relics in them. cap. 33. Saint Austin builded a Monastery in which
King Ethelbert through his advise built a new Church in the honor of S. Peter
and Paul lib. 2. cap. 2. Saint Austin exacted of the Britons to celebrat
Easter, and administer baptism after the manner of the holy Roman Church. And
cap. 35. Beda speaking of the Church of the Austins in Canterbury says, This
Church has almost in the midst of it an Altar dedicated in the honor of S.
Greg. Pope, on the which Altar every Saturday their memories are solemly
celebrated by the Priest of that place. cap. 4. S. Paulin used an Altar of
stone. And cap. 20. a great goulden Cross and a goulden Chalice consecrated
for the ministry of the Altar.

2. Besides Pope Boniface 3. was by the Emperor Phocas declared to be the true
S. Austin alive when the Pope (as Protest: say) became Antichrist.
or head of the Church as all writers Protestants and Catholics do agree which
was done in the year 605. as some say, or 606. as Baron. And this Pope
Boniface thereby (as generally all Protestants affirm) became the first Pope
and Archbishop of Rome. Whitak. cont Dur. page 501. I affiirme (says he) that
in the time of Boniface 3. Antichrist openly placed his Throne in the Church of
Rome. Fulk Answer to a Counter Cath. page 72. The Popes from Boniface 3. were
all blasphemous Heretics and Antichrists. And in 1. Joan. 2. Boniface 3. went
manifestly out of the Church and became Antichrist. Fox lib. 2. page 120. Rome
ever since Boniface 3. has houlden maintamed and defended his Supremacy. The
same has Cooper Chron. An. 611. The like has Bale Cent. 1. page 69. 70.
Downham of Antichrist, and generally all Protestants. But S. Austin was both in
this Popes time, for he subscribed to the Charter of king Ethelbert made An.
605. and after. For as Bale says Cent. 13. cap. 1. He dyed. 608. or as Malmsb.
in fastis says 613. and yet is he not found but to have obeyed this Pope
Boniface as he did obey Gregory. Which he would never have done if he had
thought it Antichristian for the Pope to be head of the Church. S. Mellits
communion with a Pope whom Protestants account the second Antichrist.
Yea S. Mellit one of his fellows and Successors went to Rome about the year
610. to commune says Beda lib. 2. cap. 4. and counsel with the Apostolic Pope
Boniface 4. the immediate successor of Boniface 3. for necessary causes of the
English Church, sat in a Council with him, subscribed to what was decreed of
that Council, and brought the Precepts to be observed of the English Church.
And cap. 7. S. Beda writes, Also S. Iustus.
that this S. Mellit and S. Iustus (an other of S. Austins companions and
successors) received eftsons exhorting Epistles from this Boniface. And cap. 8.
he says that Iustus received also authority to ordain Bishops from the high
Bishop Boniface and a Pal. And cap. 17. and 18. that S. Paulinus and S.
Honorius received also their Pals from Pope Honorius. And S. Paulin, and S.
Honorius.
Which Pal was given by Popes to Metropolitans as a token of agreement in
faith. And therefore Pope Pelagius Predecessor to S. Greg. decreed D. 100. That
what Metropolitan so ever after three months of his Consecration shall not
send to Rome to declare his faith and receive his Pal shall leese his Dignity.
This we see how S. Austin and his fellows by their life and deeds professed
their agreement and faith even with those Popes, whom Protestants account the
first Antichrists. But besides this, we have also the testimony of the Popes of
that time, and of S. Austins own fellows. Popes whom Protest. account
Antichrists approved S. Austins doctrine.
For Pope Boniface 5. writing to S. Iustus aforsaid in Bed. lib. 2. cap. 8.
says thus. After we had read the letters of our dear son King Edbald we
understood with what great learning and instruction of holy scripture you
have brought him to the belief of the undoubted faith. Lo this Pope aproued
the doctrine and faith of S. Iustus, which he could never have done unless S.
Iustus had allowed the Supremacy. And S. Laurence, Mellit and Iustus writing
to the Scottish Bishops in Beda lib. 2. cap. 4. profess, that it was the
customable manner of the Sea of Rome even in their time to send preachers into
all places of the world. Which custom they could never have accounted lawful,
unless they had thought that See to have Jurisdiction, and government in the
whole world. S. Austin calls the Pope Father of all Christendom.
Yea S. Austin in his speech to King Ethelbert in Capgraue calls S. Greg.
totius Christianitatis Patrem, the Father of all Christendom. And thus much of
S. Austin and his fellows deeds, and doctrine out of Chatholick writers. S.
Austins acts of Papistrie out of Protestants.
Now let us come to Protestants. 3. Bilson and Abbots a^ is aforsaid call S.
Austin a Romish Monk, a Romish Priest, a Romish Legate. Which names show of what
Religion they account him. Abbots.
Godwin in vit. Aug. says, S. Greg. being made Pope sent Austin hither,
Godvvin.
unto whom he appointed 40. other that should aid him in this holy work. Ib.
he testifies that S. Greg. sent him a pal, and Church ornaments. That he
dedicated a Monastery to S. Peter and Paul, that he claimed authority over
all this Island Entered the place of Counsel with his Banner and his Cross, and
with singing Procession. Fox.
Fox Acts. page 116. They went with Procession to Canterbury singing Alleluyae
with the Letanie. Sutclif.
Sutclif Subversion, cap. 5. Austin brought in an Image of Christ, and a silver
Cross, and began (says he) to chant Letanies. Now whither these be signs of
Protestancie or Papistrie I leave to every one to judge. Holinshead.
Also Holinshed descript. Brit. testifies (as before we heard out of Saint
Beda) that S. Austin came with a silver Cross and Image of our Lord and
Savior painted in a table, singing Litanies. And that in Canterbury they
accustomed to pray, say Mass, preach and baptize in S. Martins Church. And
that S. Greg. sent to Austin a Pal, which (says he) was the ornament of an
Archbishop. And that Mass and Letanie was at that time in France. Again that
Lawrence with his fellow Bishops wrote letters to the Britons to conform them
in the Unity of the Roman faith. Item Mellitus solemnizing Mass distributed
etc. Now what Mass it was that Romish Priests, Romish Monks, Romish Legates as
Bilson and Abbots call them, said, I leave to every one to judge. And if any
body should doubt, Fulk.
Fulk in Hebr. 10. may put him out of doubt. For there he writes S. Beda said
that, English men in his time understood the wholesome sacrifice (of Mass)
auailed to redemption both of body and soul. Which Fulk calls superstitious,
and undoubtedly means the Mass. And thus much of S. Austins Papistry by his
own deeds both out of Chatholick and Protestant writers.

CHAP. XVI. That Saint Austin was a Roman Catholic, proved by the confession
of learned Protestants.
D. Abbots
1. DOctor Abbots in his late answer to Doct. Bishop page 197. calls S.
Austin a black Monk. page 20. The Italian Monk, brought new observations from
Rome, and the English received the same. page 198. A Romish Priest, required
the British Bishops to be subject to his Romish authority. A Romish Archbishop
brought in novelties and superstitions, and did contaminat the faith of Christ,
Mellitus, Laurentius, Iuel.
Iustus, all of Austins company and condition Iuel Art. 3. Diu. 21. It is
thought of many that Austin corrupted the Religion that he found here with
much filth of superstition. D. Fulk.
Fulk 1. Cor. 4. Austin did not beget the Nation of the English men to Christ
by the pure Gospel, but with the mixture of Traditions. And that Christian
Religion which he found in the Britons he labored to corrupt with Romish
inventions. 1. Cor. 15. Austin did not in all points teach the true faith to
the Saxons. 2. Cor. 12. Aust. brought in corruption. Sir Francis Hastings in
his Wast word once or twice says, that Austin brought in the Romish Religion.
Osandes.
Osiander Epit. Hist. cent. 6. Aust. thrust Roman rites and customs upon the
English. To wit Altars, Vestements, Masses, Chalices, Crosses, Candlesticks,
Censars, Banners, holy Vessels, holy water, and books of Roman customs. B.
Bale.
See Magdeburgenses cent. 6. Bale cent. 1. page 19. After Austins Apostleship
(says he) under the English Saxons there followed an other kind of Monks
which corrupted all with most filthy superstitions and Idolatries. And cent. 1.
cap. 70. Austin entered not with the Gospel (of Luther) of Christian peace, but
with the banner of his Apostleship, with a silver Cross, Letanies, Procession,
Images, painted Pictures, Relics, and ritual books. And cap. 72. Aust. made
Elbald drinck of the cup of the whore, cap. 73. King Ethelbert first of all
English men received of Greg. 1. Bishop of Rome by Austin the opinions of the
Roman Religion with all (says he) the imposture or deceit, and dyed the one
and twentieth year of his received Papisme. And page 73. he calls our
primitive church a carnal Synagogue. And yet further cent. 8. cap. 85. Austin
(says he) brought in Popish Monkerie, and besides the Popes traditions (o
filthy and blasphemous mouth) brought no thing but man's dung. Cent. 13. c. 1.
Austin the Roman brought hither Romish rites without sound doctrine. The King
received Romanisme with the anexed Idolatries. He brought in Monks, Altars,
Vestements, Images, Masses, Chalices, Crosses, Candlesticks Banners, holy (as
they call them) Vessels, holy water, and books of Roman customs. Their
cheeffest studies were about the oblations of Masses. And finally Cent. 14. cap
31. he says, Austin disposed all things in England to the form of the
Sinagogue of Rome, and made English men honorers of the Pope. Thus plainly is
S. Austins Roman Religion confessed by Bale who was both as earnest a
Protestant and as skilful in antiquities as ever ^nglish Protestant was.
Holinshead.
Holinshead also Descript. Brit. cap. 27. says The Inhabitants of Britanie
received the Doctrine of Rome brought in by Austin and his Monks. Ib. Austin
indeed converted the Saxons from Paganism but imbued them with no less
hurtful superstition than they did know before. For besides the name of Christ
and external contempt of their pristinat Idolatry, he taught them nothing at
all, but rather made an exchange from gross to subtle treachery, from open to
secret Idolatry, and from the name of Pagans to the bare Title of Christians.
So far were these men from thincking S. Austin to have been a Protestant, or to
have agreed with them as Fulk would 2. Cor. 12. in the chief and most
essential points of faith.

CHAP. XVII. That S. Austin was a Roman Catholic, proved by the Doctrine and
faith of the Engilsh Church which he founded.
1. IN this Chapter I will first set down what Catholics have written of the
faith of our Primitive Church, and after Mass in honor of Saints.
and that in honor of Saints. Beda lib. 4. cap. 14. Let them say Masses and
give thanks that their prayer is heard, and also for the memory of King
Oswald. Likewise they said Mass for the dead, and consequently believed it to be
propitiatory for sins. Mass for the dead.
Ibid. cap. 22. Tuna a Priest and Abbot did often times cause Mass to be said
for his (brothers) soul Item lib. 5. cap. 13. and lib. 3. cap. cit. They
erected Monasteries that daily prayer might be made for Offered to god the
precious body and blood of Christ.
Secondly they did believe that they offered to God the precious body and blood
of Christ as we believe we do at Mass. Beda lib. 5. cap. 22. All Christian
Churches throughout the world should prepare bread and wine for the mystery of
the flesh and precious blood of the immaculat lamb, and when all lessons,
prayers, rites, and ceremonies used in the solemn feast of Easter were done,
should offer the same to God the Father, in hope of their redemption to come.
lib. 4. cap. 28. S. Cutbert offered the host of the wholesome Sacrifice to God.
Confession of sins and penance for them.
they confessed their sins to Priests, and they enioined penance. lib. 4.
cap. 25. Adaman in his youth had committed a certain greiuous sin, resorting
therefore to a Priest confessed his sin to him. The Priest when he had heard
his sin, said, a great wound requires a great cure and medecin, therefore give
thy self to fasting, and prayer as much as thou art able. And lib. 4. cap. 27.
He tells how Saint Cutbert heard men's confessions, and enioined them
penance. Miracle for confession.
And lib. 5. cap. 14. He tells a dreadful punishment inflicted by God on one,
because in time of sickness he would not confess his sins. Priests could not
marry.
their Clergy after holy orders taken could not marry. S. Greg. in Beda. lib.
1. cap. 27. If there by any in the Clergy out of holy orders that can not live
chaste, they shall take wives. The same has S. Beda l. 5. c. 22. Fifthly, Dirige
and Mass for the dead.
lib. 3. cap. 2. The religious men of Hagstalden have of long time been
accustomed to come every year the eve and the day that S. Oswald was slain to
keep Dirges there for his soul and in the morning solemnly to offer for him
the sacrifice of the holy Oblation. Sixthly they used holy Holy water,
candels. Crosses, holy oil and.
Beda lib. 5. cap. 4. The Bishop (S. John) sent the sick Lady some of the holy
water which he had hallowed in the Dedication of the Church, and also candles
lighted, Crosses, and holy oil as we do now as is evident by Malmsb; lib. 2.
Pont. page 235. and Ealred in vit. Edwardi. Seventhly, they blessed them selves
with Blessing with the sign of the Cross.
Beda lib. 4. cap. 14. Cednam blessing him self with the sign of the holy
Cross laid down his head on the Boulster, and so falling a little in a slumber
ended his life in quiet. And lib. 5. cap. 22. Every congregation of faithful
men accustometh to bear the sign of the Cross on their forheads, that by the
Divine power of the same they may be defended from all assaults of the Devil.
Eighthly, their Priests and Priests have shaven crowns.
Beda lib. 5. cap. 22. It behooves them which being either made by vow Monks
or by profession of the Clergy to bind them selves more strictly with the
bridle of continency for Christ's sak, to bear in their head by clipping, the
form of a crown. Ibid. All Priests and Religious men had their heads shaven
round after the true shape of a crown. But as Bale says Cent. 14. page 194.
Tonsura est Romanae Bestiae character. Ninthly they erected many Altars in one
Church with Martyrs relics, Many altar Sinono Church.
used lights and other ornaments as Catholics do Beda lib. 5. cap. 21. Acca
employed his diligence to gather together out of all places the holy Apostles
and Martyrs relics to the end he might in honor of them build certain Altars
aparte by them selves in little Chappells made for the same purpose, within the
precinct and walls of the same Church. Morouer he prepared holy vessels lights
and other necessaries to the better adorning of the Church of God. And lib. 3.
cap. 6. They worshipped Tenthly to omit many more certain Marks of Roman
Religion. S. Peter's supremacy believed.
They accounted S. Peter Primat and head of the Apostles Beda lib. 5. c. 22. I
desire with all my heart to follow the stepps of Blessed S. Peter head of the
Apostles. Ibid. They were reduced to the order of S. Peter Primat and head of
the Apostles, and committed as it were to his Patronage and protection. The
Pope high B. over the whole world.
They accounted the Pope high Bishop over the whole world. So in plain terms
S. Beda calls S. Greg. Pope l. 2. c. 1. Accounted the Church of Rome the
Catholic and Apostolic Church. lib. 3. c. 25. And l. 4. cap. 23. Going to
Rome, counted a thing of great virtue and devotion. And l. 3. c. 25. Held
without all controversy that these words (upon this Rock I will build my
Church) were principally spoken unto Peter, and that unto him the keys of the
Kingdom of heaven were given. And the Bishops being deprived of their
Bishoprics both by the King and by other Bishops appealed to Rome: Beda lib.
5. cap. 20. Appeal^ from the Bishop^ and king to the Pope.
Wilfrid the virtuous Bishop of York appealing to the Sea Apostolic for his
cause and by that full authority absolved etc. Item. Five years after he was
accused of King Alfrid and many other Bishops and deprived of his Bishopric
wherein upon repairing again to Rome and obtaining license to plead his own
defense before his accusers, Pope John and many Bishops sitting in Iugdment, It
was by their Definitive Sentence concluded, that in some part his accusers had
falsely forged surmises, The Pope wrote to the Kings of England requiring them
to see him restored. Protestants confess the Romans faith of our primitive
Church. Fox.
And thus much out of Catholic writers: now let us see what Protestants write
of the faith of our Primitive church. 2. Fox in his protestation before his
Acts. After the coming of Austin and his fellows from Rome Christian faith
began to enter and spring among the Saxons after a certain Romish sort. Acts.
page 154. Good works done for clensing from sin.
The causes why solenm Monasteries were first founded in England by Kings
Queens and Kings daughters and rich Consuls are these, pro remedio animae meae
etc. For remedy of my soul, for remission of my sins, Foundation of
Protestancie unknown to our primitive Church.
for the safty of my Kingdoms and people which are under my government, In
honor of the most glorious Virgin. Whereupon afterward page 170. he concludes
that the doctrine of Justification by only faith, (which page 840. he calls
the foundation of their Church) was then unknown. Bale.
Bale Cent. 1. cap. 72. says. English men after Austin did dedicat their
Churches to dead Saints. Our first Christian K. a perfect Papist.
And cap. 73. King Ethelbert received the Roman Rites and doctrine with all the
imposture. and Cent. 14. cap. 54. says that the two Hewalds (who were the
first English martyrs) passi sunt pro Papismo, papistici Martyrs. Our first
Martyrs suffer for Papistrie. Bilson.
Papistical Martyrs suffered for Papistrie. Bilson of Obed page 321. The Saxons
were soon entreated to receive the Bishop of Rome for their Patriarch. Stow.
Stow page 77. cites this Charter of King Ethelbert. King Ethelbert by
inspiration of God gave to Bishop Mellit for remedy of his soul, the Land
which is called Tillingham for the Monastery of S. Paul, which kind of giving
goods is quite opposite to Protestancie, Honor of S. Peter counted sign of
Christianity. Reinolds.
as you may see more hereafter. And page 78. says: King Sebert to show him
self a Christian built a Church in honor of S. Peter. Reinolds Confer. page
12. This imagination of the key and Porter and opinion of power to shut and
open committed to Peter only (over all the Church as it includes also the
Apostles) King Oswie conceived, Keys given only to Peter.
and all his Clergy did agree unto it. And of S. Beda the principal Doctor of
our Primitive Church, Osiander.
Osiander Epit. Cent. 7. page 331. says thus. He was wrapped in all the Popish
errors and articles in which we disagree this day from the Pope. S. Beda a
perfect Papist.
Whereby we may see how perfect a Papist S. Austin was. Fulk in Hebr. 10. Fulk.
Beda lived in a superstitious time (yet lived he 80. years after S. Austin)
long after Antichrist did show him self. Beda said that men understood that the
helthful sacrifice (of mass) auailed to the redemption of the body and soul
everlasting. And in 1. Pet. 3. Beda was carried away with the errors and
corruptions of his time. And thus I hope I have sufficiently proved the Roman
Catholic faith of our first Apostle S. Austin by the faith of his master S.
Greg. by his own deeds and doctrine, by Confession of Protestants, and
finally by the doctrine of our Primitive Church which he founded, and how it
was that Christian Religion which was first founded in our Nation, and our
English Ancestors embraced when they forsook Paganism. Now it remains to
show that the same Religion has continewed also constantly unto this late
lamentable revolt to Protestancy in all our Nation both in the Clergy and
Laity, which I will declare in all the Archbishops of Canterbury who were the
chief of the one order, and in the Kings who were heads of the other. And by
the way I will name in every Kings time some of the notable men who
successively have confirmed it by their holy life and miracles.

CHAP. XVIII. That all the Archbishops of Canterbury from S. Austin to our
time were Roman Catholics, proved by general reasons.
No record that any Archb: was Protest: before this time.
in any writer domestical or foreign, no record or monument of antiquity that
til Cranmer any of the Archbishops varied from the faith of his Predecessors.
Therefore to affirm the contrary, is either to profess to know things past by
revelation, or to affirm that which lib. 1. Pontif. page 200. And Fox lib. 3.
page 151. where he says. All the Archb. of Cant. Monks til S. Odo.
This Odo was the first from the coming of the Saxons til his time which was
Archbishop of Canterbury being no Monk, all the other before his time were of
the profession of monks. And therefore he could not be persuaded to accept the
Archbishopric until he had professed him self a Monk. In a manner all monks
til An. 1184.
And after that unto Archbishop Baldwin an. 1184. in a manner all the
Archbishops were Monks, as Godwin a Protestant yet living (which shall suffice
to advertise the Reader of now because herafter I shall often allegd him)
testifies in the life of Archbishop Hubert. And what kind of Monks these were
and what undoubted Catholics, has Archb: were chosen by Monks.
they were elected by the Monks of Christ-church in Canterbury where were
Monks (says Malmsburie lib. 1. Pont. p. 203) ever since the time of S.
Laurence successor to S. Austin as is evident by the epistle of Pope Boniface
to King Ethelbert Ibid. page 208. and appears both by their lives in Godwin,
and by the judgment of Pope Innocent 3. in Paris page 287. Who, when the
Bishops of England challenged right in the election of the Archbishop, the Pope
hearing both parties gave sentence that Monachi legittime probauerunt etc. That
the Monks had lawfully proved, that the ^^or and Covent of the Church of
Canterbury have for long times past elected Bishops in their Chapter without
the Bishops even unto this time, and have obtained their election to be
confirmed of the Sea Apostolic. And Fox Acts page 232. writes that the
practice of the Monks was first to keep the election in their own hands as
much as they could, and secondly either to give the election to some Prior or
Monk of their own house, or to some Abbot or Bishop which some time had been
of their company. And Ibid. he adds that the Archbishop of Canterbury was
commonly set up by the Pope, especially since the Conquest. And page 349. that
it has been always the practice of the Church of Rome ever to have the
Archbishops of their own setting up, or such a one as they might be sure of on
their side. And this election of Archbishops by Monks continewed till Cranmers
time. For (as Godwin writes) Archbishop Deane who was the last but one before
him, was elected by them. And the same he intimates of Bishop Warham who was
the very last before Cranmer. Now of what religion they were whom Monks did
All the Archb. confirmed by the Pope.
Fourthly they were all confirmed by the Pope: this is manifest by Godwin in
their lives. And no marvel, for before S. Austins time Pope Pelagius
Predecessor to S. Greg. made a law, Vt quisquis Metropolitanus vltra tres
Menses consecrationis suae ad fidem suam exponendam, and Pallium suscipiendum
ad Apostolicam sedem non miserit, commissa sibi careat dignitate. Whereupon
Reinolds Confer. 458. says that Pelagius lest he should rashly give consent to
the allowing of any Metropolitan that were not sound in faith, required them to
make profession of their faith and so to send for the Pal, that is to say to
send for his consent whereof the Pall was a token. Yea page 543. speaking
generally of the Popes of the last 200. years after Christ, says they
required the confirmation of the Metropolitans by their consent. And besides
this profession of faith, it was after decreed by Pope Alexander 3. says Fox
page 229. An. 1179. in the Council of Lateran, that no Archbishop should
receive the Pal unless he did swear this oath I. N. Bishop of N. from this
hour forward will be faithful and obedient to blessed S. Peter, the holy
Apostolic Roman Church and my Lord Pope N. and his successors Canonically
entering. The oath of Bishops to the Pope.
I will never by Counsel consent or deed be in cause that they loose life
member or be wrongfully imprisoned. And what so ever they shall commit to me
either by them selves or their messengers I will never wittingly reveal to
their prejudice to any person. With due respect to my vocation I will aid
them in the houlding and defense of the Roman Papacy and S. Peter's regalities
against all men. I will give honorable entertainment to the Legate of the Sea
Apostolic in his going and return and assist him in his need. Being called to
a Synod I will come unless I be stayed by some Canonical let. I will yearly
visit the Court of Rome if it be on this side the Alps, or every second year
when it is beyond the mounts unless I be dispensed withal by the Sea Apostolic.
I will nether sell give nor pawn nor farm out a new nor any way alien the Lands
and livings belonging to my Bishoply maintenance without the priuitie of the
Pope of Rome. So God me help. etc. And the like Oath did S. Boniface the
Apostle of Germany in his Consecration swear to Pope Gregory in the year
723. and the Pal was delivered to him with these words. Speech at the
delivery of the Pall.
To the honor of Almighty God the blessed Virgin Mary and the blessed Apostles
S. Peter and S. Paul and my Lord Pope N. and the holy Church of Rome, as also
the holy Church of N. committed to you: We deliver a Pal taken from the body
of blessed S. Peter, that is the fulness of Pontifical function, to the intent
you use the same on certain days expressed in the Privileges granted to it by
the Sea Apostolic etc. Now that our Archbishops did receive their Pal from the
Pope is manifest and confessed by Godwin almost in every one of their lives,
and shall be more plainly showed hereafter, and is acknowledged by Fox lib. 3.
page 152. and lib. 4. page 172. Our Archb. were the Popes legates.
Fifthly, our Archbishops were ever the Popes Legates in England. The Archbishops
of Canterbury were (says Camb. Brit. page 296.) Legates of the Bishop of Rome,
and as Urban 2. said, as it were Popes of an other world. And Pope John 12. in
his letter to S. Dunstan: We fully confirm thy Primacie in which thou ought
according to the custom of thy Predecessors to be Legate of the Sea Apostolic
as it is known that Austin and his Successors Bishops were. And can we think
that the Pops Legates were not Papists. Finally diverse of them have been
canonized by the Pope, How many Archb: of Canterb: canonized
and their memories in the Roman Martyrologe. To wit. S. Austin, S. Laurence,
S. Mellit, S. Iustus, S. Honorius, S. Theodor, S. Dunstan, S. Anselm, S.
Thomas, S. Edmund, S. Elpheg, to whom Godwin adds S. Eadsin, which would
never have been done if they had not been known Roman Catholics.

CHAP. XIX. That every one of the Archbishops of Canterbury from S. Austin, to
the time of the Conquest of England were Roman Catholics, proved in particular.
S. LAVRENCE II.
1. THe first Successor of S. Austin and second Archb. of Canterb. was S.
Laurence, of whom S. Austin him self made choice, and consecrated him whiles
he lived, but in what year he entered is not certain, but he died in the year
619. as may be gathered out of Beda. The learning and virtue of S. Laurence.
He was says Godwin in his life a very Godly and well learned man and took
great pains not only with his own charge but also to reduce the Britons
Scotts and Irish men to one consent in matters of religion. Bale Cent. 13. cap.
2. writes that he was very skilful in Logic and other Philosophy. Beda lib.
2. cap. 3. says he endeavored to lift up the building of the English Church to
the perfect highness, both by often words of holy exhortation and also by
continual example of devout and godly works, and therein also tells how he
labored to reduce the Britons and Irish as a true Pastor and Prelat. And thus
much for the worthiness of this our holy Prelat. But as for his Roman Religion
although that be evident by what has been said before of S. Austin, yet will I
add what Bale says of him Cent. 13. cap. 2. He was sent of Greg. to instruct
the English Saxons in Roman Religion, he taught the, people the Papistical
faith almost in all the Dominion of the English men.

S. Mellit Archbishop. III.
2. THe third Archbishop was S. Mellit who succeeded An. 619. For as S. Beda
says lib. 2.. cap. 7. he dyed An. 624. after he had been Archbishop five
years. Of whom and his successor S. Iustus Beda lib. 2. cap. 7. writes. That
they governed the English Church with great labor and diligence, The virtues of
S. Mellit.
that he was noble by birth, but much more noble for the excellency of his
mind, often trobled with sickness, yet ever free and sound of mind, did
always fervently burn with the fire of inward charity and was wont with his
holy prayers and holy exhortations to drive from him self and others all
ghostly tentations And. Miracles.
Ibid. recites how that by prayer he quenched a great fire that burnt
Canterbury. Godwin in vita eius says: he was a man of noble birth, but of
greater mind, exceeding careful of his charge, despising the world and never
caring but for heaven and heavenly things. His Romans Religion.
His Roman Religion is manifestest because as Godwin confesses he was an Abbot
of Rome, sent hither by Greg. and went after to Rome to confer with Pope
Boniface sat in Council, and was by him honorably entertained.

S. Iustus Archbishop. IIII.
3. The fourth Archbishop was Saint Iustus who inmediatly succeeded S. The
virtue and learning of Saint Iustus.
Mellit An. 624. and dyed (as it seems by Beda lib. 2. cap. 18.) An. 633. He
governed (says S. Beda lib. 2. cap. 7.) the English Church with great labor
and diligence. And as Pope Boniface testifies (in Beda lib. ^. cap. 8.) of him
so greatly and earnestly labored for the Gospel, as he could show whole
Contries plentifully multiplied by him, and brought up king Edbald with great
learning and instruction of holy scriptures. Godwin in his life says he
travailed painfully 12. His Cathol. Religion.
years. His Roman Catholic Religion is manifest by his Pall received from
Pope Boniface, Beda lib. 2. cap. 8. And by what Bale writes of of him Cent.
13. cap. 3. Where he calls him, Pedagog of the Roman faith, And adds that
he brought king Edbald to the Roman faith.

S. Honorius Archbishop. V.
4. The fifth Archbishop was S. Honorius, who succeeded (as appears by Beda
lib. 2 cap. 18. and Baron. affirms An. 633) and died as Beda writes lib. 3.
cap. 20. An. 653. having sat 20. years. S. Honorius his great learning and
virtue.
He was (says Beda lib. 5. cap. 20.) one of S. Greg. scholars, and profoundly
learned in holy scriptures. Pope Honorius writing unto him (in Malmsb. 1. Pont.
page 208.) says, He governed his flock with much toil, much labor and troble,
evils increasing. And the same says Godwin. As for his Roman Religion that is
manifest by his Pal. which Bed. lib. 2. cap. 18. His Cathol. Religion.
says. He received with a letter from Pope Honorius, which also Godwin
confesses. And Bale adds, that he first divided England into Parishes after
the Papistical manner. Which thing also testifies Camb. in Brit. page 131. and
Stow An. 640. And all these Archb. were Italians, and fellow Laborers of S.
Austin.

Deusdedit Archbishop VI.
5. The sixth Archbishop was Deusdedit an English man, who succeeded (says Beda
lib. 3. cap. 20) after a year and a half, to wit An. 655, and governed the Sea 9. years four Months. He was (says Godwin) famous for his learning and
other virtues and attended carefully his charge. The learning and virtue of
Archb. Deusdedit.
Capgraue in his life says of him: He was a man worthy of God, famous for his
life and learning, watchful in prayer and of most unspotted purity. But his
Roman Religion is manifest by what has been said of his Masters and
Predecessors. His Romans Religion.
After him (says Beda lib. 3. cap. 20.) Damian was consecrated. But because he
says no more of him, and Godwin reckons him not amongst the Archbishops, but
amongst the Bishops of Rochester, I will also let him pass.

S. Theodore Archbishop. VII.
6. The next Archbishop chosen (says S. Beda lib. 3. cap. 29. by the Clergy
of England) was VVighard a Priest of great virtue and worthy to be a Bishop,
whom the kings of England sent to Rome to be consecrated: but he dying there
before his consecration Pope Vitalian made choice of S. Theodore a Grecian
borne, whom he consecrated (says Beda lib. 4. cap. 1.) An: 668. (and not 666.
as Bale fableth to make the time agree with the number of the Beast in the
Apocalips) and continued Archb. 22. The admirable learning of Saint Theodor.
years three months. He (says Beda lib. 4. cap. 2.) and Adrian his fellow
were exceeding well learned both in profane and holy litterature and
gathering a company of scholars unto them, powered into their bosoms wholesome
knowledge and besides their expounding of scriptures they instructed their
scholars with music Astronomy and Algorisme, Beda.
and so brought them up in the tongues as some of them yet living can speak
Latin and Greek as well as English. Nether was there since English men came
to Britanie any time more happy than that. For England had most valiant and
Christian Princes the people were wholy bent to the joyful tidings of
heaven, and there vvanted no cunning and expert Masters to instruct them in
the scriptures. Thus S. Beda of Saint Theodore his great learning. Pope Agatho
who than lived so highly esteemed his wonderful learning that he deferred the
calling of the sixth general Council for his coming. In ep: apud Malmsb: lib.
1. Pont: Malmesb.
page 196. and lib. 1. Reg. page 11. says of him and S. Adrian that they had
learnt thoroughly all good learning and made this Island a dwelling place of
Philosophy. Godvvin.
Godwin says: He was well seen in all good learning, that England never had so
happy days nor so many learned men as under him. England never so learned or
so happy as in Saint Theodors time.
And a little after. Amongst a great number of others there were of his breeding
Beda* John of Beuerley, Albinus, and Tobias, all excellent and very famous men.
He founded (says he) a school or university at Greclaed. And as Caius adds
lib. 1. antique Cantab: an other in Canterbury. Bale.
B^le Cent. 13. cap. 6. gives this testimony of his excellent learning. He was
accounted inferior to no Romish Monk of his time for either divine or human
learning, either Latin or Greck tongue. He brought hither all arts of
calculating, Counting, Versifying singing, arguing. etc. He taught Latin and
Greek. Saint Theodor his great virtue. Beda.
Thus both Catholics and Protestants admire this great Archbishops learning.
S. Beda lib. 5. cap. 8. thus witnesses that he was worthy of perpetual
remembrance for his singular virtues. And adds this of him and his
Precessors. Of whom with the rest of his Predecessors equal both in dignity
and degree, it may be truly verified that their names shall live in glory from
generation to generation time out of mind. For the Church of England for the
time he was Archbishop received so much comfort and increase in spiritual
matters as they could never before nor after. Florent.
Florent. Chron: An: 690, cal^eth him Archbishop of blessed memory. Capgraue.
Capgraue in his life says In his time England shined with great abundance of
Saints like most bright stars. S. Theodor his Cathol. faith.


7. But as for his Roman Religion that is so manifest as all Protestants
confess it. Bale Cent. 13. cap. 6. says. It is manifest that he came with the
Character of the great Beast, Bale.
(so Bale commonly terms the Pope) He gave the veil to Votaries in diverse
places for service of Popish Religion, and finished many things which served to
further the kingdom of Antichrist. And Cent. 1. cap. 80. In the year 666. the
Papists Mass began to be made Latin. Item Pope Vitalian (who sent Saint
Theodor) made all things to be done in Latin in the Christian Churches, as in
hours, in stations, in Masses and Prayers. And page 71. Vitalian sent the
Monks Theodore and Adrian into England, that they might confirm in the popish
faith those that wauered, Perfect Papistrie of England in S. Thedor his time.
and that they might sign his believers with the Character of Antichrist (So
this heretic terms Christ's Vicar.) He appointed Latin hours, Latin songs,
Masses, Ceremonies, Masses Idolatries and Prosession in Churches in Latin,
appointed shauings, commanded annoyntings etc. And Cent. 13. cap. 7. Theodore
appointed many things in a Council for setting up of Purgatory. Fulke Apoc: 13.
Fulk:
Composition of the latin service by Pope Vitalian to be observed in all
regions subject to the Romish Tyrany. Fox. lib. 2. page 124. Fox.
Theodore was sent him diverse other Monks to set up here in England Latin
service, Masses, Ceremonies, Letanies, with such other Romish VVare. page
Saint Theodor a confessed Papist and all follovved him.
125. He adds that Theodore was present at the sixth general Council under
Agatho, where marriage was forbidden to the Latin Priests. Who well remenbreth
this, and marketh also that S. Beda lib. 4. cap. 2. writes, Priests forbidden
marriage.
that Theodore visited all the Contry over whersoeuer any English people
dvvelled, for all men did receive him gladly and hear him. He did teach the
right way and path of good living. Unto him all the whole Church of the
English Nation did consent to subject themselves. All Engl. gladly received S.
Theodor.
Whereto Godwin adds that all the Britishe Bishops and generally all Britanie
yielded him obedience, Godvvin.
and under him conformed themselves in all things unto the rule and discipline
of the Church of Rome. Note.
Who (I say) marketh this, will never doubt but all England was at that time
perfect Roman Catholics. Besides that as S. Beda records lib. 4. cap. 18.
Pope Agatho sent hither a Nuntio to examine the faith of the English Church.
English faith approved of the Pope.
Whereupon Theodore called a Council and sending a Copy of their faith to Rome,
it was received most gladly of the Pope. So that S. Theodore and our English
Church in his time, were all of one faith with the Pope.

Brithwald Archbishop. VIII.
8. THe eighth Archb. of Canterbury was Brithwald, who was elected (says Beda
lib. 5. cap. 9.) An. 692. and consecrated the next year by Godwin Archbishop
of France. He sat (says Beda lib. 5. cap. vlt.) 37. years 6 months, and dyed
An. 731. Beda cap. 9 cit. says. He was a man doubtless well travailed in the
knowledge of holy scripture, The learning of Archb: Brithvvald.
and very skilful in Ecclesiastical and Monastical orders, censures, and
discipline. The same says Florent. Chron. An. 692. and Marian Ibid. Godwin in
his life says: He was very well learned in Divinity and other wise. Pope
Sergius (who gave his Pal) testifies in his epist. in malmsb. lib. 1. Pont.
page 210. His virtue.
that Brithwald got not his Bishopric fastu aut tumore, sed mente subnixa and
humili. Bale Cent. 1. cap. 99. says he was a fine young man borne to great
matters and got great fame of virtue and learning. etc, His Roman Religion
appears both by that Bale Godwin and others say he was an Abbot. His Romans
Religion.
And as Bale writes. l. cit. Images honored in England An. 71^.
lived an Ermit from his youth. And held a Council in London An. 712. in which
according to the decree of Pope Constantine he appointed Images of dead Saints
to be honored, and Masses to be said before them. Item. How much (says Bale)
this man profited Papistrie Geruasius declares in his Catalog. And cap. 94.
About the year 714. under Archbishop Brithwald there was a Synod at London for
confirmation of Latin mass, Priests forbidden to marie.
and for putting away Priests wives, so he term h Concubins. And cap. 91. That
he held a Synod An. 710. Cuius Synodi vigore introductae sunt Imagines in omnes
Anglorum Ecclesias. Besides he was nexu spiritualli adunatus to Boniface that
notorious Papist, as Boniface testifies ep. apud Baron. An. 734. Capgraue in
S. Egwins life has Pope Constantins Epist. to this Archbishop, in which the
Pope writes that Brithwald sent Saint Egwin twice to Rome, Two Engl. Kings
request the P. to confirm their Charters. 900. years ago.
and that two English kings requested him to confirm their Charters of gifts
that they had given to S. Egwins Monastery.

Tacwin Archbishop. IX.
9. THe 9. Archbishop was Tacwin consecrated in the year 731. sat three
years, The learning and virtue of Archb. Tacvvin.
Died An 734. He was a man (says Beda lib. 5. cap. vlt) certes notable for his
godliness and wisdom, and well conversant in holy scriptures. Pope Greg. 3. in
his letter to the Bishops of England in Malmsb. lib. 1. Pont. page 210. says
that he knew him a religious man and of great virtue. Florent. An 731.
Huntington lib. 3. page 339. accord with S. Beda. Godwin in his life says, he
was a man very religious and no less learned. Bale Cent. 2. cap. 3. says, he
was notable for Religion and wisdom, excellently learned in scripture, and
spent his youth in best studies. His Romans religion.
His Roman Religion appears by that as Bale says, He wholly dedicated him
self to the Benedictin Rules. And as Godwin says, and Pope Gregory l. cit.
testifies, travailed to Rome in person and there received his Pal. Which also
contest Beda in Epit. Houeden part 1. and others.

Nothelm Archbishop X.
10. THe tenth Archbishop was Nothelm, The learning and virtue of Archb.
Nothelm.
chosen an. 734. sat five years, died an, 739. Bale Cent 2. cap. 8. says. He
was a learned and grave young man, of tried honesty and known to the whole
Island for his memorable deeds. Beda in the Preface of his History says he
was much helped by him. His Romans religion.
His Roman Religion is clear by his going twice to Rome, where he received his
Pal, as write Godwin in his life, Hunting lib. 4. page 340. Houeden 1. part
Anal. Westmon an. 736. Besides that S. Boniface that notorious Papist asked his
advise in matters of religion Ex Ep. Bonif. in Baron. an. 734.

Cutbert Archbishop XI.
11. THe 11. Archbishops was Cutbert chosen an 742. and died an 758. or (as
Bale says) 760. He was (as Bale Cent. The rare learning nd virtue of Archb.
Cutbert.
2. cap. 14. has) borne of noble race, a man of great renown for his rare
learning and civil behauior. Godwin adds to his praises that he was a good
Pastor. His Roman Religion appears both by his great familiarity with Saint
Boniface the Apostle of Germany, His Romans religion.
whom Fox lib. 2. page 128. confesses to have been a Papist, and Bale Cent.
2. cap. 13. says was next to the great Antichrist, at whose advise he called
a Council in England, In which among other things, S. Austins day made holy
day.
he appointed that our S. Austins day should be kept holy day. And also because
he had a Pal from the Pope, Ex Westmon. ad 740. Besides he sent most freindly
letters and presents to the forsaid S. Boniface Ex Epist. in Baron, an. 740.

Bregwin Archbishop XII.
12. THe 12. was Bregwin, chosen an. The great learning and virtue of Archb.
Bregvvin.
759. and sat three years, born (says Godwin) of noble parentage, chosen in
regard of his modesty, integrity, and great learning. Westmon. an. 760. says
he was a wise man and learned. His Cathol. religion.
His Roman Religion is known, both because he was a Monk, as Capgraue says in
his life, and because he made earnest suit to the Pope that the Archbishops
might be buried in Christ-church in Canterb. and not in the Austins as before:
as Godwin in vit. Lamberti writes.

Lambert Archbishop XIII.
13. THe 13. is Lambert, Romans religion of Archb. Lambert.
chosen as Malmsberie has in Fastis an. 762. sat 27. years. His Roman
Religion is out of doubt, by that as Godwin says in his life and Malmsb. lib.
1. Pont. page 198. he had been Abbot of the Austins; and as Florent. says
Chron. an. 764. received his Pal of Pope Paul.

Ethelard Archbishop XIIII.
14. THe 14. Archbishop was Ethelard, created an. 793. or as Malmsb. in Fastis
says 791. and that he sat 13. years, but Godwin says he sat but 8. or 9.
years. But he is manifestly ouerseene. For he puts his entrance an. 793.
and his death an. 806. which time includes about 13. years. The worthiness of
Archb. Ethelard.
He was says Malmsb. 1. Reg. cap. 4. a stout man and worthy of God. And lib 1.
Pont. page 199. very industrious and gracious with the Peers of the Realm. He
carried the Letters of King Kenulph and of the Bishops of England to Pope Leo
for restitution of the Dio^esse of Canterbury and was entertained benign^y.
And P. Leo in his epist. to King Kenulph calls him most holy most dear and
most skilful. Which words (says Malmsb.) that high and holy Pope would not
have iterated unless he knew them to be true Ibid. A man after the first Doctors
to be compared with the cheifest Bishops. And I had almost said (says Malmsb.)
to be preferred before them. His Cathol. religion.
As for his Roman Religion that is manifest by his forsaid going and sending to
the Pope. Which also Fox lib. 2. page 134. and Godwin confess. And by that as
Godwin says in his life he was a Monk and (in B. of Winchester) he was an
Abbot, Our ancient Kings hope to buy heaven by god works.
which also testify Malmsb. 1. Reg. cap. 4. Hunting lib. 4. Houeden page 403.
In Ingulph he subscribeth to a Charter in which King Offa professes. Per bona
opera mercari praemia sempiterna.

VVulfred Archbishop XV.
15. THe 15. was Wulfred who succeeded (as Godwin says) an. 807. Romans religion
of Archb: vvulfred.
but Malmsb: says 804. with whom also agrees Florent. Chron. an. 804. he
sat 25. years. And his Roman Religion is clear, See the Charter to which he
subscribed in Indulph page 855.
because (as Godwin writes) he was made Archbishop at Rome by Leo 3. And again
the 9. year after his consecration went to Rome. Florent. an. 804. and Westmon
an. 806. say he had a Pal of Pope Leo.

Theologild Archbishop. XVI.
16. T Theologild was the 16. Who (as Godwin says) succeeded an. 832, but
Malmsb. in Fastis says 829 and dyed the same year. Of him little is written.
But as Godwin says, Romans religion of Archb. Theologild.
he was Abbot of Canterbury which puts his Roman Religion out of question.

Celnoth Archbishop. XVII.
17. THe 17. place occupied Celnoth an. 830. as Malmsb. in Fastis, Or an. 831.
as Florent. in Chron. Oran. 832. as Godwin in his life, and sat an. 41. as
Malmsb. and Florent agree; Godwin says an. Rom religion of Archb. Celnoth.
38. His Roman Religion is manifest by his Pal which (as Florent an. 831. and
Westmon. an. 832. write) he received of Pope Gregory. And by his subscription
to a Charter in Ingulph, Wherein King Withlaf offers a Chalice and Cross of
gould to the Aultare in Croiland, King of England gives his princely robe to
make a Chisible.
and clamidem coccineam ad Casulam saciendam his scarlet robe to make a
Chisible. And page 862. publicly professed him self to be cured of a disease
by the merits of S. Guthlac.

Athelard Archbishop. XVIII.
The worthiness of Archb. Athelard and his 3. Predecessors.
18. THe 18. Archbishop was Athelard An. 893. says Godwin, but Malmsb. in
Fastis an. 871. he sat 18. years and as Malmsb. lib. 1. Pont. page 199. says
of him and his three Predecessors they did many worthy things both toward God
and the world, but for want of writers all is obscure. Godwin says he was a
great divine, and some times Monk of Christ-church in Canterbury by which his
Roman religion is out of doubt. His Romans religion.


Plegmund Archbishop XIX.
19. THe 19. was Plegmund, Entered (says Godwin and Malmsb. in Fast) an. 889.
sat an. 26. as both agree. But in lib. 1. Pont. Malmsb. attributes to him 33.
years. He was (says Godwin) the most excellent learned man of his time. Most
excellent learning of Archb. Plegmund
And as Fox says lib. 3. page 170. Schoolemaister to King Alfred Hunting. lib.
5. page 351. says, He was chosen of God and all the people. And Florent. an
872. adds that he was Venerabilis vir sapientia praeditus, and an. 889.
Literis insigniter eruditus. His Cathol. faith.
His Roman religion is out of question, because as Godwin writes, In his youth
he was an Hermit. And being chosen Archbishop travailed to Rome in person, and
was there consecrated. And was Legate to Pope Formosus, as he testifyeth epist.
2. in these words. We command Plegmund to be our Legate in all matters.

Althelin Archbishop XX.
20. AThelin succeeded in the 20. place an. Romans Religion of Archb. Athelin.
915. as Godwin has, and Malm^b. in Fast. and sat 9. years who (says Godwin)
had before been Abbot of Glastenbury. And therefore no question can be made of
his Religion.

VVolfhelm Archbishop. XXI.
21. THe 21. Archbishop Wolfhelm entering an. The famous learning and virtue of
Archb. vvolfhelm
924. as Godwin and Malmsb. in Fast. agree, dyed also 934. Who was (says
Godwin in the Bishops of Wells out of Polidor) famous as well for virtue as
learning.

S. Odo Archbishop XXII.
22. THe 22. Archbishop was S. Odo an. 934. as Godwin and Malmsb. in Fast.
accord, and sat an. 24. in great favor and authority under diverse Princes.
His parents (says Godwin) were Danes of great wealth and nobility, who
disinherited him for Christian religion. King Edward senior perceauing his
great excellency of wit set him to schole where he profited exceedingly. S. Odo
his rare learning both in greek and latin.
Bale Cent. 2. cap. 30. says, He was so skilful both in Greek and Latin that
suddenly he could utter either in prose or any kind of verse what so ever he
would. Godwin says he preached painfully. Florent. an. 958. and Westmon Ibid.
say: Odo a man famous for wit, His great holiness.
laudable for virtue and endued with the spirit of Prophecy. In Malmsb. lib.
1. Pont. page 200. He professes that he would spend all the riches in the
world if he had them, and him self for his flock. His miracles.
And Malmsb. there says that he wrought miracles. Fox lib. 3 page 151. says, A
zealous care of the Churches of the Lord reigned in him and other Archbishops
then. And thus much of his learning and virtue. His Romans religion.
His Roman religion is out of all doubt. For Godwin says being elected he
would not be Archbishop before he was made Monk as all his Predec^ssors (said
he) had been. And as Bale says l. cit. He received a Pal from Pope Agapit 2.
Priests marriages forbidden
Decreed that marriages of the Ministers of the Church are to be accounted
Heretical, and exalted Popish monkerie. Thus Bale. But it spiteth Fox most that
Osbern in vit. Some denied Transubsta^tiation.
Odonis writes that in his time certain Clercks seduced by wicked error
endeavored to avouch that the bread and wine which are set on the Altar after
consecration remain in their former substance and are only a sign of the body
and blood of Christ. And for their conversion. Odo did (as Osbern Malmsb. and
an other Author who as Fox says wrote in the time of Alfricus the 4. Arch.
after Odo, A great miracle to confirm Transubstantiation.
write) by his prayers obtain of God that the Sacrament should appear in
form of true flesh and blood, and again return to their pristinat shape.
This history Fox page 1139. dislyketh. First because Osbern says but quidam.
But so also writes his brother Bale loc. cit. Capgraue in Odone and others.
Secondly that Osbern says this miracle was done to convert the Clerks, and
the other Author says it was done to testify Odo his holiness. As if it could
not be done for both ends. But it suffices us, 1. that Odo and England then
believed Transubstantion, so odious a thing now to Protestants. 2. that S. Odo
confirmed it by such a miracle as some Priests who then began to deny it,
believed to be a true miracle and were converted thereby. Fox denies a miracle
which diverse that savv it confess and were converted by it.
Now whether they, who were then present and saw it, or Fox who lived above
600. years after, were more like to know the truth of that miracle let every
one judge. But here I would wish the careful Reader to note, first that the
denial of Transubstantiation and the real presence of Christ in the sacrament
began in England above 300. years after the land was converted to
Christianity, to wit, Transubstantiation the ancient faith of England.
circa An. 950. as Bale says, which shows that the ancient English
Christians believed Transubstantiation. Secondly that Transubst. was denied but
of a few, and consequently the general faith of England believed it. Thirdly,
that this heresy was soon extinct, and the Authors confuted of S. Odo Primat
of this Land both by miracle and by writing, Denial of Tra^subst. confuted of
S. Odo by miracle and vvtiting.
which writing (says Bale l. cit. he entitled) Defensio Eucharistiae. And for
this Fox. lib. 3. cap. 151. says that Odo might seem to be the worst that
occupied that place. So he terms light darkness, and darkness light. S Greg.
sent hither the belief of Transubstant.
But for Transubstantiation you heard before confessed by Doct. Humfrey that
Saint Austin brought it into England. And before S. Odo, S. Odo. Alcuin.
that great English Divine Alcuin professes it clearly in these words. Bread
of it self has not reason, Lib. de dluin offic. c. de missa.
but the Priest prays that it be made reasonable of Almighty God by passing
into the body of his son. Item. After Consecration it is one thing and
seems an other. Transubstant. plainly professed.
For it seems bread and wine, but it is in truth Christ's body and blood.
VVherfor God providing for our weakness who use not to eat raw flesh nor duink
blood makes that these two gifts do abide in their ancient form and yet it is
in truth Christ's body and blood. And S. Beda cited by Walden. S. Bid. Tom. 2.
cap. 82.
There it seen the shape of bread where the substance of bread is not: nether
is it any other bread then that which came from heaven.

S. Dunstan Archbishop. XXIII.
23. IN the year 959. succeeded S. Dustan, and died in the year 988. as all
agree. The great learning and rare virtue of S. Dunsta^.
He was (says Godw.) borne of good parentage and for the most part brought up
in the Abbay of Glastenburie, where besides other good learning he was taught
to sing, to play upon Instruments, to paint and carue, In all which he proved
very excellent. For his manifould good parts made much of the Kings, most
gracious unto King Edward and King Elbred under whom he ruled all things at
his pleasure, His miracles.
and for the most part admired for a most holy and virtuous man, and after
canonized for a Saint. The like has Bale Cent. 2. cap. 38. Malmsb lib. 1.
Pont: page 202. says, Surius Tom. 3. written by Osborn in the time of the
Conquest.
He adorned the stepps of his promotion with unwearied virtues, Those times
were happy which had such a Prelat as did nothing less than he said. And much
there of his virtue and miracles. But who reads his life in Surius will
admire him. But his Roman religion is confessed of Protestants. His Romans
Keligion.
For Godwin says. Godvvin.
He was a Monk, and bewitched (so he speaks) the forsaid Kings with love of
Monkerie, Married Priests persecuted Fox.
and applied all his endeavors to the raising of Monks and Monasteries, and
persecuted married Priests. Fox. Acts. lib. 3. page 136. says he was drowned
in all superstition. And page 158. An ennemy to Priests vviues. Bale. Cent. 2.
cap. 38. He received a Pal of Pope John. 13. at Rome, of whom he obtained a
Breue by which he might condemn the marriages (the Concubins in deed) of the
Ministers of the Church and compel them to keep the voue of single life,
Priests compelled to keep their now of single life.
and that he did annihilat (says Bale) the word of God (as Luther
understands it) for the Popes traditions. And cap. 40. That he had a Vision
at mass though Bale call it a dream. And there is extant the Ep. of pope
John. 12. to S. Dunstan, wherein he makes him his Legate and gives him a Pal to
use at Mass.

Ethelgar Archbishop. XXIIII.
24. AFter Saint Dunstan succeeded Ethelgar in the year 988, and sat two
years. His Romans Romans Religion of Archb. Ethelgar.
religion appears by that (as Godwin says) he had before been Abbot of
Winchester which Malmsh. lib. 1. Pont. page 203. says he was made by Saint
Ethelwald who was a notorious Papist.

Syricius Archbishop. XXV.
Romans religion of Archb. Syricius.
25. THe 25. Archbishop who succeeded An, 990. as Malmsb: has in Fast: and sat
as he says five years, was Siricius, Whose Roman religion can not be doubted
of. For (as Godwin says) he was a Monk of Glastenburie, and by Saint Dunstan
made Abbot of S. Austins in Canterbury, and by him also preferred to the
Bishopric of Wilton.

Alfricus Archbishop. XXVI.
26. GOdwin and Malmsb. in Fast do-put this Alfricus after Syricius, although
Malmsburie. 1. Pont. page 203. put him before Syricius. He entered as is said in
fastis An. 995, and died An. 1006. as all agree. Of these three Bishops little
is written, because the Danes rage was in their time most furious. Romans
religion of Archb. Africus.
But his Roman religion is out of question. For as Godwin testifies he was
brought up in Glastenburie, disciple (as Bale says Cent. 2. cap. 41.) of S.
Ethelwald, Alfricus counted a crafty Papist.
and Abbot of Abingdon, and for his craft (says he) in promoting Papistrie
made Archbishop of Canterbury. To this man Fox would gladly attribute a sermon
in the Saxon tongue published by Protestants of the Eucharist. But him self is
doubtful page 1040. Edit. 1596, And the Protestants that published the sermon
deny it in their Preface before it. And if he were the Author of that sermon,
it would not be a point of Protestancie as you may see by what Bale has said.

S. Elpheg Archbishop. XXVII.
27. NExt followed S. Elpheg an. 1006. and sat 7. years. vvo^derful virtue of
S. Elpheg.
He was (says Godwin) of great parentage and vvonderfull abstinence, never
eating, drinking, nor sleeping more than necessity compelled him, spending his
time altogether in piety, study or other necessaire business. So that what
with preaching and example of holy life he converted many unto Christ. And in
the Bish. of Winchester he adds that he was a learned man. Malmsb. His
learning and miracles.
lib. 1. Pont. page 203. says His life was full of virtues and miracles, being
at Rome he manifestly told unto his company the death of Kenulph who had
succeeded him in Winchester, was slain of the Danes rather (says Florent.
An. 1012.) than he would pil his floock to ransom him with 3000. pounds. His
body (says Malmsb. His body. in corrupt
) retaining marks of fresh blood remains to this day uncorrupted. His
Cathol. faith.
The Roman religion of this blessed man is evident, both by his going to Rome
after he was chosen Archb. which undoubtedly was to fetch his Pal; and because
(as Godwin says and Florent: Malmsb. 1 Reg. cap. 11. says of Bathe.
and Vestmon An. 984). he was Abbot before he was Bishop, and finally
Canonized by the Papists.

Living Archbishop. XXVIII.
28. Living succeeded an. 1013. and sat 7. years. Of whom little is written,
but that he fled the Realm for fear of Danes. But his Roman religion is
certain by that which has been said of his Predeccessors.

Agelnoth Archbishop. XXIX.
The worthiness of Archb. Agelnoth.
29. THe 29. is Agelnoth surnamed the good (says Godwin and Florent. an. 1020)
and son to the Earl Agelmar. He entered an. 1020. and sat 18. years. He was
so dear (says Bale Cent. 2. cap. 46.) to King Canut that he used his wit and
help chiefly in dispatching matters. His Romans religion.
His Roman religion is manifest For as the same Bale writes he went to Rome as
the manner (says he) was that receiving his Pal he might swear Antichrists
(so he still terms the Pope) faith. The like says Godwin. And of his going to
Rome for his Pal testify Malmsb. lib. 4. Pont. page 289. Hunt. lib. 6. Florent.
an. 1021. Houeden 1022. Fox lib. 3. page 163. adds that King Canut following
much the superstition of Agelnoth went a Pilgrimage to Rome. And Bale l. cit
adds. That he persuaded King Canut to resign his crown to the Crucifix, and
calls him a Bishop of superstition.

Eadsin Archbishop XXX.
30. IN the year 1038. succeeded Eadsin, The virtue and religion of Archb.
Eadsin.
and died 1050. His Roman religion and virtue appears by that (as Godwin
says) after his death he was made a Saint. Malmsb. lib. Pont. page 204. and
Florent. an. 1043. write that he anointed King Edward Confess. who was a
notorious Papist.

Robert Archbishop. XXXI.
31. THe next was Robert who, succeeded an. 1050. and sat two, or (as Malmsb.
in Fastis says) 3. years. His Roman religion is manifest by that he was a
Monk, Romans religion of Archb. Robert.
brought up (as Godwin says) in the Monastery of Gemetica in Normandy: had a
Pal from Rome as he says in the life of Stigand. And being accused went (says
Malmsb. 1. Pont page 204.) to Rome, from whence he came with letters to clear
him, and to recover his See.

Stigand Archbishop XXXII.
32. THe last Archbishop before the Conquest was Stigand, who an. 1052. usurped
the seat whilst his Predecessor lived, and was deprived an. 1069. He was
(says Godwin) stout and wise enough. His Roman religion is manifest, by that
(as Godwin writes) he labored to procure a Pal of the Pope, Romans religion of
Archb. Stigand.
but could not because of his unlawful entrance. And therefore as Ingulph who
lived then, writes. page 898, Malmsb. lib. 1. Pont. page 204. Florent. An.
1058. he procured one of an Antipope which then was, The first and last Archb.
in the Saxons time said Mass and had a Pall.
and used it (says Florent. An. 1070,) in Missarum celebratione. Thus you see
all the Archbishops of Canterbury in the Saxons time for 466. years together
were Roman Catholics. And as S. Austin the first of them had a Pal from the
Pope and said Mass, so did the very last. Now let us show the same of all the
Archbishops from the Conquest unto our time.

CHAP. XX. That all the Archbishops of Canterb from the time of the Conquest
unto our time were Roman Catholics.
1. THe 33. Archbishop of Canterbury and first after the Conquest of England
was Lanfranck. He entered an. 1070. being Monk and Prior of Becco in regard
(says Godwin) of his singular wisdom and great knowledge of all good learning
that those times could affoard. The singular great learning and wisdom of
Arch: Lanfranck
Was first called by Duke William to be Abbot, and after having conquered
England for his wisdom and faithfulness he made choice of him for Archbishop of
Canterbury, Godvvin.
as one in all respects most fit and worthy, which being well known to all men,
the Covent of Canterb. at the Kings first nomination readily chose him. The
nobility and Laity willingly received him with great applause. Bale.
Bale Cent. 13. cap. 12. says he was the most perfect of his time in all kind
of Logic or subtilitie of Aristotle. He corrected and amended according to the
right faith all the books of the old and new Testament which had been
corrupted by fault of the writers and also the writings of the holy Fathers.
Fox.
Fox lib. 4. page 184. From his commendation and worthiness I list not to
detract any thing. Stow.
Stow Chron page 148. Lanfranck skilful in science prudent in Council and
government of things and for religion and life most holy. His holiness.
And page 171. reports that King William Conqueror being ready to die said
that he supposed that the praises of Lanfranck and Anselme his Successor sound
in the uttermost corners of the Earth. He was busy (says Godwin) in exhorting
King Rufus to virtue and godliness. Protestants forced most highly to commend
their learning and virtue who condemned their Doctrine.
And as long as Lanfranck lived (says Stow page 179.) Rufus seemed to abhor
all kind of vice in so much as he was counted the mirror of Kings. This high
praise for learning and virtue Protestants give to this Archbishop whom to
their confusion they confess (as you shall hear anon) to have been a most
notorious Papist and the greatest enemy of Berengarius, Archb. Lanfranc first
confuted the deniers of Transubsta^tiation.
whom they account their Patriarch for the denial of the real presence. If I
should alleadg the sayings of Catholic writers in his commendation, I should
never make an end, Only therefore I will cite two who lived in his time, and
quote some others. Malmsb. Malmesbur.
lib. 3. Hist. page 109. says he was a man comparable to the Fathers in
Religion and learning, on whom in earnest may be verified A third Cato came
from heaven. So heavenly savor had embued his breast and mouth So all the Latin
Church did by his learning stir it self up to the study of the liberal
sciences. So by his example or fear Monastical perfection did go for ward in
religion. And much more he has of Lanfranck 1. Pont. page 213. and sequ.
Ingulph also: Hist. Ingulph.
page 901. says, he was the most commended and clear Doctor of all liberal
sciences, and most expert in temporal affairs and most holy in life and
religion. Marian
The like also has Marian who lived at that time Chron. Florent. Huntingt.
an. 1070. Florent: and Westmon. Ibid. Huntington lib. 7. Neubrigen lib. 1.
cap. 1. Paris. Hist. page 8. Walsingham in ypodigmate. Capgraue and Trithem in
Lanfranco.

2. And no les notorious was the Roman religion of this worthy Archb. Rom
religion of Archb. Lanfranc.
than his learning and virtue was famous. Which for brevity sake I will only
prove by the confession of Protestants. Bale Cent. Bale. He an Heretik who in
faith differs from the Church of Rome.
13. cap. 12. says plainly. He did many things for the exaltation of
Papistrie. Defines him to be an Heretic who differs from the Church of Rome
in doctrine of faith. Which is as much as any Papist now can or will say. And
Cent. 2. cap. 62. Lanfranck and Anselm set up the moldy (so this wretch
blasphemeth) Idol of the Mass, Priests marriages condemned.
and condemned the holy marriages of Priests. Fox lib. 4. page 173. cites
this beginning of his letter to Pope Alexander. To the Lord Pope Alexander
high ouerseer of all Christian Religion, Fox.
Lanfranck due obedience with all subjection. Page 394. he calls him a stout
Champion of the Pope. Page 1147. cheifest trobler of Berengarius. And page
1148. cites this profession of Lanfranck, Lanfranck his, profession of
Transubstant.
I believe the earthly substances which upon the Lords table are diui^ely
sanctified by the ministration of the Priest to be converted into the essence
of the Lords body, the outward forms only of the things them selves and
qualities reserved. Bilson.
Bilson of Obed. page 681. Lanfranck and Anselm came in with their
Antichristian devises and inventions, and charge him to have first brought
Transubstantiation into England. Lanfranck altered nothing in our English faith.
But how false this is appears by that no one Author of that time charge
him with altering any point of the faith of the English, and also by that which
before we showed out of Protest. that S. Greg. sent in Transubstantiation into
England, and that S. Odo defended it both by writing and miracles. And who will
more of Lanfrancks earnestnes in Roman religion, may read his Epistle to Pope
Alexander 2. and Alexanders to him, and his book against Berengarius for the
real presence.

S. Anselm Archbishop. XXXIIII.
3. THe 34. Archbishop was S. Anselm an. 1093. and died an. 1109. A most
worthy man (says Godwin) of great learning. The admirable learning and
holiness of S. Anselm.
as his works yet extant testify, and for integrity of life and conversation
admirable. Undoubtedly he was a good and holy man and as worthy the honor of
Saint as any I thinck (says he) ever was canonized by the Pope since his time.
Thus the Protest. them selves commend this blessed man. Of whom who list to
know more, may read his life in Surius written by Edner his Chaplin. Malmsb.
who then lived lib. 4. Reg. says none was more obseruant of justice, none at
that time so soundly learned, none so wholly spiritual the Father of the
Contrie the mirror of the world. And much more lib. 1. Pont. page 216. and seq.
As for his religion that is manifest to be Roman. His Rom religion.
For he was a Monk and scholar to Lanfranck as Fox says page 185. had his Pal
from Rome, appeased from the King to the Pope, and page 186. he writes how he
told King Rufus to his face that it was un just to command Bishops not to
appeal to Rome. Unjust to forbid appeals to Rome.
page 195. He was superstitious in religion. Bale Cent. 13. cap. 16. and others
write that he procured that Kings should not inuest Bishops. Cent. 2. cap. 50.
He augmented the impudency of the Popes being their Counselor in Rome,
Priests forbidden to marry
and their Vicar in England. Finally they all agree that he forbad Priests
marriages, and as Godwin speaks persecuted married Priests extremely. page
163. Priests forbidden to marry. from the first infancy of our Church.
In so much as Fox page 191. Bale Cent. 2. cap. 59. make him the first that
forbad Priests in England to have wives, and Cambd. in Britan. says, wives
were not forbidden to Priests in England before the year 1102. Which how
untrue it is appears by S. Greg. words to S. Austin in Beda lib. 1. cap. 27.
where Saint Greg. apointeth that, if there be any among the Clergy out of holy
orders which can not live chaste they shall take wives. S. Gregory.
wherein he clearly excludes all in holy orders from wives. and in Council. Romans
If any Priest or Deacon mary a wife be he accursed. And about 100. years after
that, S. Beda.
Beda lib. 5. cap. 22. said plainly that English Priests professed to bind
them selves to chastity. And Prolog. in Samuel writes thus, We who have
purposed according to the custom of Ecclesiastical life to abstain from wives,
and to live single. And S. Bedas scholar Alcuin l. Aleuin.
de Virtutibus cap. 18. Chastity is necessary to all but chiefly to the
Ministers of the Altar of Christ. For he must have such Ministers as be not
corrupted by any contagion of the flesh, but rather shine with continency of
chastity. Bale.
Bale also Cent 1. cap. 64. writes thus. About the year 719. under Brithwald
Archbish. brithvvald
was a Synod held at London for prohibiting of Priests wives, as Nauclerus
(says he) and others affirm. And after that again. S. Odo Archb. S. Odo.
as the same Bale has Cent. 2. cap. 30. Decreed that the marriages of the
Ministers of the Church were Heretical. Yea Cambd. him self page 259. writes
that King Ethelwolph about the year 855. Ca^bden.
had a dispensation of the Pope to marry because he was sacris ordinibus
initiatus in holy orders. But what dispensation had that King needed, if it had
been lawful for Priests the^ to marry. And after this Kings time, S. Dunsta^.
Dunstan and his fellows (says Fox Acts page 156.) caused King Edgar to call a
Council of the Clergy, Fox.
where it was enacted and decreed that the Canons of diverse Cathedral Churches
Collegiats, Parsons, Vicars, Priests, and Deacons with their wives and children
should either give over that kind of life, or else give rome to Monks. And
Cambden in Brit. page 211. says this Council was held an. 977. how then could
he say that Priests wives were never forbidden before, an. 1102. After that
also Lanfranck (as Fulk Annotat. Lanfrank.
in Math. 8.) in a Synod at Winchester made a decree against the marriage of
Priests. Fulk.
And Fox Acts page 195. cites an Epistle of S. Anselm where he has these
words. Because so cursed a marriage (of Priests) was forbidden in a Council of
his Father (he means the Conqueror) and of the said Archbishop Lanfrancus
lately, I command that all Priests that keep women shall be deprived of their
Churches and Ecclesiastical Benefices. VViues forbidden to priests in England
both by Archb. and councels.
Whereby it is evident that Priests were not first forbidden to marry or have
wives by Anselme, but by many both Archbishops and Councels, ever since the
infancy of our English Church.

Rodolph Archbishop. XXXV.
4. THe 35. Archbishop was Rodolph, Entered an. 1114. and died an. 1122. He
behaved (says Godwin) him self well in the place, was very affable and
curteouse, and willing to please. Malmsb. 1 Pont. page 250. says, The
marverlous learning and piety of Archb: Rodolph.
he was meruaylously learned and eloquent And page 252. very religious. His
Roman religion is evident, for as Godwin testifies he was a Monk and scholar
to Lanfranck, His Romans religion.
received a Pal solemly from Rome, and after travailed in person to Rome.

William Corbel Archbishop XXXVI.
5. TO him succeeded William Corbel an. 1122. and departed 1136. He was (say
Marian. and Continuat. Florent. Piety and Romans Religion of Archb. Corbel.
) vir eximiae religionis. His Roman religion is undoubted, because as Godwin
says, he was a monk and the Popes Legate. Called a Synod wherein many Canons
were made against the marriage of Priests. And finally crowned King Stephen at
Mass. Continuat. Florent. who then lived says he went to Rome for his Pal,
and had it of Pope Calixtus, and again an other time; and was honorably
received of Pope honorius, who made him his Legate in England and Scotland.

Theobald Archbishop XXXVII.
6. THe 37. was Theobald chosen an. The worthiness of Archb. Theobald.
1138. and deceased an. 1160. He was (says Godwin) of so svveete and gentle
behavior, being very wise vvithal, as he was greatly esteemeed of high and
lovv, Kings, Nobles and Commons. His Religion is known, His Romans religion.
by that as Godwin witnesses, he was a Benedictin monk, and Abbot,
consecrated of the Popes Legate, received his Pal from Pope Innocent. 2. who
also endued him and his successors for ever with the Title of Legatus natus,
which they all kept til the later end of King Henry 8. Continuat. Florent.
adds that being called of the Pope he went to a Council held in Rome.

S. Thomas Archbishop. XXXVIII.
7. THe 38. Archbishop and first Englishman after the Conquest was S. Thomas,
Elect an. 1161. and martyred an. 1171. He was (says Neubrigen. who then lived
lib. 2. c. 16.) vir acris ingenij: The excellent parts and virtue of S. Thomas
Archb.
A man of a sharp wit and competent eloquence comely in favor and finely
handed, comparable to the best in the effectual dispach of any business, he had
so spetial a prerogative of honor and love in the Princes heart that he seemed
to be his fellow mate in the Crown. And Paris who lived soon after page 272.
says, a primis adolescentiae annis. From his very youth he was adorned with
manifould grace. And page 167. Carnem cilicijs attritam cum femoralibus
cilicinis edomuit. His flesh worn with haireclothe, His wonderful austeritie
of life.
he tamed with britches of the same. Houeden Part 2. Anal. says, Irreprehen
sibilis vita singulis diebus etc. Irreprehensible he received day by day three
or five disciplines at the Priests hand, his inner garment was of rugged
haircloth of Gotes hair wherewith his whole body was covered from the elbow
even to the knees he lay upon the bare ground before his bed, and never ceased
from prayer until for very wearines he laid down his head upon the stone be
there placed instead of a boulster. The same and much more is written in his
life by four writers of great credit who then lived. Fox Acts. page 206. says
of him thus. Threatenings and flatterings were to him both one, great helps of
nature were in him, In memory excellent good, full of devotion. Godwin says he
was most canonically elected and presently after his consecration became so
grave so austere so devout in all outvvard show as he seemed quite an other
man. And as Westmon an. 1162. writes a Courtiers life he changed into a most
saintly. Thus both Catholics and Protestants write of this blessed martyr. His
Romans religion.
His Roman religion is doubted of no man. Fox Acts page 206. says he was
without all true religion, supersticious to the obedience of the Pope, and page
779. says Lanfranck Anselm Beket brought the Popes Judicial authority from
Rome into this Land, both over Kings and subjects, which ever since has
continewed til these later years. Bale Cent. 2. cap. 100. says he was Legatus
a latere. The Popes Legate. and assiduus labor etc. and his continual labor was
to subject the Princes Majesty to Antichrist. How God revvarded the penance
of king Henry. 2.
What great penance King Henry 2. did of his own accord for being some cause
of this blessed man's death, and how God the same day rewarded him with a
miraculous victory over the Scott, you may read in the Chronicles. And how
great the devotion of our Forfathers was to this Saint appears by the
inestimable riches which they gave to his shrime, of which Erasmus writteth
vilissima pars etc. Devotion of England to Saint. Thomas.
The basest part was gold, all shined, glittered and cast forth lightening by
reason of the rare and mighty gemmes and precious stones yea the whole Church
in every part abounded more than with royal riches. Godwin in vit. Baldwin,
Every one thought him self happy that could do anything to his honor. (Of
these riches King Henry 8. had 24. waine Loades besides that which others
embezeled) And our Ancestors devotion toward him appears by the hard marble
stones which are to be seen worn round about the place where his shrine stood
with the knees of those that came to pray there. As Protestante with admiration
do show to those that come thither.

Richard Archbishop XXXIX.
8. IN the year 1173. succeeded Richard. The worthiness of Archb. Richard.
and departed this life an. 1183. A man (says Godwin) very liberal, gentle and
passing wise. His Roman religion is certain. His Romans Keligion.
For as the same Godwin and Fox page 394. confess, he was a Benedictin Monk
and consecrated of the Pope. Which also testifies Westmon. an. 1174. Houeden
1175. says he held a Council wherein he decreed Patrum (says he) regulis
inherentes insisting in the rules of ancient Fathers that Priests should have
no wives, and be shaven. Priests commanded to put away women and to be shaven.


Baldwin Archbishop XL.
9. THe 40. Archbishop Baldwin succeeded an. 1184. and deceased an. 1190.
a^very comely man (says Godwin) modest and sober, of such abstinence as fame
durst never stamp any sinister report upon him. The admirable virtue and
learning of Archb. Baldvvin.
Of few words slow to anger, and very studious from his childhood. Fox Acts.
page 230. adds, that it is said, that he never eat flesh in his life. He
went with King Richard into the holy land, where says Godwin by preaching,
counsel, liberal alms, and continual example of a most virtuous life he did
great good, and there dyed. Bale Cent. 3. cap. 27. says he was eloquent in
speech an exact Philosopher and was accounted in those days fit for all manner
of study. He was very diligent and careful in the discharge of his
Archiepiscopal function behauing him self as a worthy Pastor. His Romans
religion.
The Roman religion of this holy Prelat is manifest. For as Fox Godwin and Bale
L. cit. say he was a Cistertian Monk and at the commandment of the Pope razed
down to the ground a Church which him self had built.

Reginald Fiz Iocelin Archb. XLI.
10. THe next was Reginald fiz Iocelin, elected says Godwin by the Monks of
Canterbury an. 1191. but he at first withstood what he might, Rare humility
of Archb. Reginald.
and with tears unfeignedly besought them to make choice of some other, and
dyed within few days after. Yet his Roman religion is clear. His Romans
Religion.
For as Godwin says the Pope presently afforded him his Pal.

Hubert Walter Archb. XLII.
11. IN the year 1193. succeeded Hubert Walter and dyed an. Great worthiness of
Archb. Hubert.
1205. Who was (says Paris Hist. page 26.) vir profundi pectoris etc. A man
of a deep reach, and a singular pillar in the Realm, of incomparable
stabilitie and wisdom. (The same has Stow page 244.) and page 324. A
magnifical and faithful man, who as long as he lived kept King John from
mischief and misery. He was (says Godwin) an excellent and memorable man, a
bridle unto the King and an obstacle of tyrany, the peace and comfort of the
people, And lastly a notable refuge both of high and low against all manner of
injury and oppression, faithful and loyal to his Prince, loving and very
careful of his Contrie, in which he caused many excellent laws to be
established. King Richard ceur de Lion had experience of his great wisdom, and
other manifould virtues. Nether was there ever Clergy man either before or after
him of so great power, never any man used his authority more moderatly. His
Romans Religion.
And as for the religion of this worthy Prelat it is manifest. For as Godwin
testifies he founded a monastery for his own souls health, and for the
souls of his Father and mother, as him self speaks in the foundation, and an
other of Cistercian Monks. After his election professed him self a Monk, had
a Pal from the Pope, and was his Legate. Pope Celestin the third (in Houeden
page 763.) praises him exceedingly, and makes him his Legate at the request
(as he says) of King Richard and all his Suffragans, and testifies that of
Huberts deserts, virtue, wisdom, and learning, the universal Church rejoices.
And page 755. Houeden writes, that this Archbishop held a Council, wherein he
appointed diverse things concerning Mass, and Priests, espetially that they
should not keep women in their houses. Priests forbidden to keep women.


Stephen Langton Archbishop XLIII.
12. THe 43. Archbishop was Stephen Langton an. 1207. and died an. 1228. He was
(says Westmon an. 1207.) A man of deep judgment, Singular learning and
worthiness of Archb. Stephen.
of comely personage, fine behauior, fit and sufficient (as much at lies in a
man) to govern the whole Church. Paris in his Hist. page 297. adds that there
was none greater nor equal to him for manners and learning, in the Court of
Rome. Godwin says he was a man, in regard of many excellent gifts both of mind
and body very fit for the place, brought up in the University of Paris, and
greatly esteemed by the King and all the nobility of France, for his singular
and rare learning, made Chancellor of Paris, was admirablie learned, and writ
many notable books. He divided the Bible into Chapters in such sort as we now
account them, Who built the Archb. palace in Canterb.
and built in a manner all the Archbishops Palace at Canterbury. The like
commendations of learning yeldeth Bale unto him Cent. 3. cap. 87. As for His
Roman religion there can be no doubt. His Romans religion.
For he was both Cardinal of Rome and made Archbishop by the Popes absolute
authority as the said Authors and all Chronicles testify. He built also a
sumptuous shrine for the bones of S. Thomas of C^nterburie, and as Bale
speaketk after his manner, He largely poured out dreggs out of the goulden cup
of the harlot. Incomparable learning and virtue of Archb. Richard.


Richard Magnus. Archbishop. XLIIII.
13. THe 44. Archbishop was Richard Magnus, elected An. 1223. and continued
about two years. He was (says Paris who then lived Hist. page 494)
Incomparable for learning and virtue. Fox Acts. page 274, says that he was of
a comely personage and eloquent tongue. Godwin adds that he was a man very
well learned, wise grave well spoken, and of good report stout in defending
the rights and liberties of the Church and of a personage, all straight, and
well favored and that the Pope delighted much with the eloquence, gravity, and
excellent behavior of this Archbishop. His Romans Religion.
The Roman Religion of this notable Prelat is evident. For as Godwin says he
was elected by the Pope him self, and so great in favor with the Pope, as both
he and Fox l. cit. write, that he obtained of the Pope what so ever he asked.

S. Edmund Archbishop. XLV.
Famous learning and virtue of Saint Edmund.
14. THe 45. Archbishop was S. Edmund elected an. 1234. and deceased an. 1244. A
man (says Westmon. an. 1234.) mirae sanctitatis and mansuetudinis of admirable
sanctity and meeknes, desiring the peace and honor both of the King and
Realm. Paris (who then lived Hist. page 730. 743.) writes much of his
miracles, which Westmon an. 1244. says were so many. His Miracles.
Vt viderentur etc. that the Apostles times seemed to be returned again. And
Bale Cent. 3. cap. 96. confesses that cum aqua lustrali etc. With holy water
he wrought many miracles. That omni tum literarum etc. He exercised him self in
all manner of learning and virtue. Fox Acts. page 339. calls him a Saint.
Godwin says he was a man very well known, and indeed famous for his virtue
and great learning. His Romans Religion.
The Roman religion of this holy Archbishop is certain. For as Godwin writes
he was chosen by the procurement of the Pope, and had his Pal from him, as both
he and Fox page 279. do testify, and opposed him self against the marriage of
a noble woman, Marriage after vovv of chastity forbidden.
who upon the death of her first husband had wowed chastity; and was after his
death canonized for a Saint by Pope Innocent 4. Bale says he was chosen
Tanquam ad Romans Pont.. etc. As one more ready at the Popes beck. And that vt
Virginitatis assequeretur donum. Strange deed of S. Edmund to keep his
virginity.
To attain the gift of Virginity, he betrathed him self with a ring to a
wooden Image of the blessed Virgin wore hearcloth, preached the word of the
Cross for the Pope.

Boniface Archbishop. XLVI.
15. IN the year 1244. was chosen of the monks at the instance of king. Henry
3. Boniface son to the Earl of Sauoie, who deceassed An. 1270. He was (says
Godwin) of a comely person, and performed three notable things whorthie
memory. Notable deeds of Archb: Boniface.
He paid the debt of two and twenty thousand Marks that he found his See
indebted in, He built a goodly Hospital at Maidston And lastly fineshed the
stately Hall at Canterbury with the buildings adjoining. Of his Roman Religion
there can be no doubt. His Romans Religion.
For as Godw. writes he was consecrated with the Popes own hands, and
obtained of the Pope the Bishopric of Valentia, and diverse other spiritual
promotions.

Robert Kilwarby Archbishop. XLVII.
Famous learning and sanctity of Archb. Robert.
16. THe 47. Archb. was Robert Kilwarby, elected An. 1272, and continued about
six years. He was (says Paris, Author of that time, Hist: page 1348.) Non
solum vitae religiosae sanctitatis etc, accounted most famous not only for the
holiness of a religious life, but also for knowledge and learning. Godwin writes
that he was a great Clerk, and left many monuments of the same in writing
behind him. In both Universities disputed excellently, and showed him self in
diverse kinds of excercises. His Romans Religion.
Of his Roman religion can be no question. For as Godwin and Bale cent. 4 cap.
46. write, he was made Archb. by the Pope ex plenitudine potestatis, by his
absolute authority. And besides he was a Franciscan friar as Godwin rightly
says, and Bale wrongly makes him a Dominican, and Prouincial of their order
in England, and built the Gray Friars house in London, and finally was
Cardinal.

John Peckam Archbishop. XLVIII.
17. IN the year 1278. succeeded John Peckam, and departed this life An. Rare
learning and behavior (...) Archb. John.
1292. A man (says Westmon An. 1278.) Perfectissimus in doctrina most Perfect
in learning. Godwin says of rare learning used great lenity and gentleness
every where, and of an exceeding meek facil and liberal mind. His Roman
religion is undoubted. His Romans Religion.
For all write he was a Franciscan Friar, and their Prouincial as his
Predecessor had been, and made Archbishop as Westmon. And Godwin. l. cit. and
Fox Acts p. 349. and Bale Cent. 4. cap. 64. affirm by the mere authority of
the Pope. whereupon he is termed of Bale magnus and robustus Antichristi miles
a mighty and stout Champion of Antichrist.

Robert VVinchilsey Archb. XLIX.
18. THe 49. Archbishop was Robert VVinchelsey, elected an. 1294. and deceased
an. 1313. Walsingham ypodigmat. page 100. writes of him that. He ruled the
English Church notably in his days. Exceelent learning virtue and wisdom of
Archb. vvinchelsey.
Godwin says that being a child he was admired for his towardlines, and loved
for his modest, and gentle behauior, governed the University of Paris with
great commendation of integrity and wisdom, gave proof of excellent knowledge
of all good learning by preaching and disputing, and was chosen to be
Archbishop with the Kings good liking and applause of all men, and coming to
Rome the Pope a good and virtuous man (says Godwin) and Cardinals were amazed
at his rare learning joined with discretion and wisdom. He was a stout
Prelat and a severe punisher of sin. Such preferments as fell to his
disposition he ever bestovved on men of excellent learning, maintained many
poor scholars at the Universities, and to all kind of poor people was
exceeding bountiful. In so much as therein I thinck he excelled all the
Archbishops that ever were before or after him. Besides the daily fragments of
his house he gave every Friday and Sunday to every Beggar a loaf of bread.
Were not these admirably learned and virtuous men more liklie to know the
truth than Cranmer and such like.
And there were every such alms days four or five thousand people. Besides
this every great festiual day he sent 150. pence to such poor people as
could not fetch his Alms. Thus writes Godwin of this admirable Archbishop,
which joined to that which has been recited out of him self and others of the
rare learning and virtue of many Archbishops, before, and shall be of many others
hereafter, were enough to confound any Protestant, and condemn their religion.
As for his Roman religion it is apparent. His Romans religion.
For he was chosen by the Monks, went to Rome, admired of the Pope and
Cardinals, and answered thus to the King, Under God our universal lord we
have two other lords, a spiritual lord the Pope, and a temporal lord the
King, and though we be to obey botb, yet the spiritual rather than the
temporal* as Godwin testifies.

Walter Reinolds Archbishop L.
19. IN the year 1313. succeeded Walter Reinolds and died an. 1327. He was
(says Godwin) but meanly learned, The great wisdom of Archb. Reinolds.
but very wise and of good government, singulerly favored of King Edward, 2.
for his assureed fidelity and great wisdom. At the instance of the king
(says Godwin) he was thrust into the Sea by the Pope, received his Pal, and
procured diverse Bulls from the Pope, His Romans Religion.
which puts his Romans religion out of question.

Simon Mepham Archbishop LI. Great learning of Archb. Mepham.

20. THe 51. Archbishop was Simon Mepham, consecrated An. 1327. and died An.
His Romans Keligion.
1333. He was (says Godwin) very well learned, and Doctor of Divinity. his
Roman relegion is certain. For as Godwin writes He was elected by the Monks,
and afforded consecration by the Pope at Auinion.

John Stratford Archbishop. LII.
21. THe 52. Archbishop was John Stratford, elect An. 1333. and continued about
15. years. Famous learning of Archb. Stratford.
He was (writes Godwin) famous for his learning, and government of the
Archdeaconrie of Lincoln, a good Bishop, and both diligently and faithfully
served his king to the last hour, a very gentle and merciful man, and gave
alms thrice every day to 13. poor people. His Romans Rellgion.
His Roman religion is evident. For he was (as Godwin says first made Bishop
of Winchester by the Pope, and after preferred by him also to the
Archbishopric of Canterbury.

John Vfford Archbishop LIII.
Nobility and learning of Archb. Vfford.
22. IN the year 1348. succeeded John Vfford, and died the same year. He was
son of the Earl of Suflolke, and Doctor of law. And as for his Roman
Religion that is out of doubt, His Romans Religion.
because (as Godwin says, he was pronounced Archbishop by the Pope.

Thomas Bradwardin Archbishop. LIIII.
23. THe 54. was Thomas Bradwardin, elected an. 1349. and deceased the same
year. He was (says Godwin) a good Mathematician, a great Philosopher,
Eccellent learning nd holiness of Archb. Bradvvardin.
and an excellent Divine. But above all (says he) is to be commended his
sincerity of life and conversation. He was Confessor to King Edward 3. and in
that office he behaved him self so as he deserves eternal memory for the
same. He was wont to reprehend the King with great bouldnes for such things as
were amiss in him, and in that long war of France he would be never from him,
but admonished him often secreatly, and all his army in learned and most
eloquent sermons publicly, that they waxed not proud of their manifold
victories. And some there be that have not doubted to ascribe that notable
conquest rather to the virtue and holiness of that man than to any prowes and
wisdom of others. It it certain he was elected Archbishop without his seeking,
and hardly (says he) should you find any Archb. in any age to have obtained
his place in better sort. This high commendation gives Godwin unto this great
and worthy Prelat, and withal as great a discommendation to his Protestant
religion. His Romans Religion.
For (as Godwin him self says) he was consecrated at Auinion by a Cardinal in
the Friar minors Church which sufficiently enough testifies his Roman religion
in so much as Bale Cent. 15. cap. 87. calls him Papistam a Papist.

Simon Islip Archbishop. LV.
Learning and good deeds of Archb. Islip.
24. IN the year 1349. was elect Simon Islip, and died an. 1366. He was (says
Godwin) Doctor of Law, a very frugal man, and built the College of Canterb. in
Oxford. which is now a part of Christchurch. His Roman religion is undoubted.
His Romans Religion.
For as Godwin writes the Pope bestowed the Archbishopric upon him. And in
his Epitaph. S. Peter is professed Princeps Apostolorum, The prince of the
Apostles.

Simon Langhorn Archbishop LVI.
25. THe 56. Archbishop was Simon Langhorn, elect an. 1366. and continewed but
two years. He was (says Godwin) first a Monk, then Prior, lastly Abbot of
Westminster. Thence elected Bishop of London, then of Ely, and lastly of
Canterbury. Romans religion. of Archb. Langhorn
How Roman a Catholic he was, appears by Godwin, who writes that the Pope
removed him from Ely to Canterbury, sent his Pal, and lastly made him Cardinal
and Legate into England as appears by his Epitaph. In this Archbishops time
Wicklef began to be angry (says Godwin) with the Pope, Why vviclef revolted
from the Cathol. faith.
Archbishops and Monks, because this Archbishop displaced him out of Canterb.
College. And the better to wreak his anger upon them, went out of the Church
and began his heresies.

William VVitlesley Archbishop. LVII.
26. THe 57. Archbishop was William Wittlesley, Great learning of Archb.
vvitlesley.
elected an. 1368. and died an. 1374. He was (says Godwin) Doctor of Law, and
preached in Latin very learnedly. He was a Roman Catholic as the same Godwin
declares saying that he was advanced by the Popes only authority. His Romans
Religion.


Simon Sulburie Archbishop. LVIII.
Notable learning and qualities of Archb. Sudburie.
27. THe 58. was Simon Suldburie, elected an. 1375. and died an. 1381. He was
(says Godwin) a noble Prelat, very wise, learned, eloquent, liberal,
merciful, and preached in Latin very learnedlie. Stow Chron. page 458. says he
was eloquent man, and wise beyond all wise men of the Realm, and fulfilled
most worthy martirdom, being slain of the rebellious commons. His Romans
Religion.
His Roman religion is notorious. For (as the said Godw. writes) he was
household Chaplin to Pope Innocent, and one of the Judges of his Rota, who
bestowed upon him the Archbishopric, and sent him his Bulls.

William Courtney Archb. LIX.
Noblenes and great learning of Archb. Courtney.
28. IN the year 1381. succeeded William Courtney, and deceased an. 1396. He was
(writes Godwin) son to hugh Courtney Earl of Devonshire, and was a great
Lawyer. His Romans Religion.
As for his Roman religion there can be no doubt. For (as Godwin says) the Pope
bestowed the Archbishopric upon him, sent him his Pal, and (as Walsingham
writes) made him Cardinal. And Eox Acts page 505 says, He set King Richard 2.
Upon the poor Christians of VVicklefs side, condemned some, made diverse abjure
and do penance.

Thomas Arundel Archbishop. LX.
29. IN the year 1396. succeeded Thomas Arundel, Noblenes and worthiness of
Archb. Arundel.
and died 1413. He was (says Godwin) son to Robert Earl of Arundel and
Warren, was undoubtedly (says he) a worthy Prelat, wise and very stout. And
Walsinghan who them lived, Hist. page 432. says he was eminentissima turris
Ecclesiae. etc. A most eminent Tower, and invincible Champion of the Church of
England. His Romans Religion.
As for his Roman religion there can be no doubt thereof. For Godwin writes
that by the Popes provision he was made Archb: of Canterb; and received his
Pal. Fox Acts page 524. cites his Constitution wherein he professes S. Peter's
supremacy, and page 507. says He was a great enemy of English (Wicklefian)
books, and the Authors of them. Bale Cent. 7. cap. 50. says he imprisoned the
Wiclefists, and made them abjure their haeresie.

Henry Chichley Archbishop. LXI.
The learning and worthiness of Archb. Chichley.
30. THe 61. Archb: was Henry Chichley in the year 1414. and departed this
wordl. An. 1443. He was (as Godwin writes) Doctor of law, much employed in
Embassages of the King, wherein he ever behaved him self wisely, and to the
kings good liking. He always enjoyed his Princes favor, was wise in governing
his See, laudably bountiful in bestowing his goods to the good of the common
wealth, and lasly, stout and severe in administration of justice. In Hiham
Feris he built a goodly College, and also an hospital, and in Oxford two
Colleges, and called one Bernards College an other Al souls. His Romans
religion.
As for his Roman religion there can be no question of it. For as the said
Godwin writes the Pope bestowed the Archb. upon him, sent him his Pal, and
made him Cardinal, and his Legate in England. And Bale Cent. 7. cap. 50.
accounts him a persecuter of Wicklefists. And as is said in the Epitaph of
his Tomb was made Bishop by the Popes own hands.

John Stafford Archbishop LXII.
19. IN the year 1443. succeeded John Stafford, and died. Nobility and great
learning of Archb. Stafford. His Romans Keligion.
1452. He was (says Godwin in the Bishops of Bathe) a man very noble, and no
les learned, son unto the Earl of Stafford and Doctor of Law. As for his
Roman religion that is manifest, because as Godwin writes he was made Archb.
by the Popes absolute authority, and before obtained of Pope Martin the
Bishopric of Bathe.

John Kemp Archbishop. LXIII.
15. IN the year 1452. succeeded John Kemp and deceased An. 1453. He was says
Godwin Doctor of Law. And his Roman religion is certain for as Godwin
writes, The learning and religion of Archb. Kemp.
The Pope bestowed the Archb. upon him, sent him his Pal, and after made him
Cardinal which also testifies Bale Cent. 11. cap. 55.

Thomas Bourchier Archbishop. LXIIII.
Nobility and learning of Archb. Bourchier.
33. THe 64. Archb: was Thomas Bourchier elect An. 1454, and deceased An. 1486.
He was son to Henry Bourchier Earl of Essex, brought up in Oxford, of which
University he was Chancellor. Bale Cent. 11. cap. 75. says he was a man
honorable for his learning, virtue, and the blood of the Earls of Essex. His
Romans religion.
His Roman Religion is manifest by Godwin.

John Morton Archbishop. LXV.
34. THe 65. Archb: was John morton An, 1487. and dyed An. 1500. He was (says
Stow Chron. Eccellent learning and virtue of Archb. Morton.
page 789) of excellent wit learning and virtue. Godwin says, he was Doctor
of law, had manifould good parts, great learning in the law, wisdom,
discretion, and other virtues, notable loyalty, and faithfulness to his Prince.
Bale Cent. 11. cap. 85. Vir moribus etc. A famous man in that age for virtue
and learning, severe, and a lover of justice A man that in his time surpassed
all the Prelates of England in vvisdome and gravity. As for his Roman religion
that is manifest. His Romans religion.
For he was elected by the Monks, confirmed redily by the Pope, and made also
Cardinal, and procured Saint Anselm to be canonized.

Henry Dean Archbishop. LXVI.
35. THe 66. Archb. was Henry Dean An. 1501. and died An. Archb. Dean learned
and wise.
1502. He was (says Godwin in Bishops of Salsburie) Doctor of Divinity, a
wise and industrious man. His Romans Religion.
And of his Roman religion none can make doubt for he was an Abbot, chosen by
the Monks, had his Pal from the Pope, and took his oath of fidelity to the
Pope set down before c. as you may see in Godwin.

William Warham Archbishop LXVI.
36. THe 67. Archbishop. was William Warham an. The wisdom and learning of
Archb. warham.
1504. and deceassed an. 1532. He was as Godwin writes Doctor of law, and
greatly commended for his wisdom by King Henry 7. That he was a Roman
Catholic is manifest. His Romans religion.
For as Godwin writes, he said mass, and was chosen by Queen Catherin for
one of her Aduocats to defend her marriage with King Henry 8. which was
contracted by the Popes Dispensation. And undoubtedly when he received his Pal
he took the forsaid oath of fidelity to the Pope.

Thomas Cranmer Archbishop LXVIII.
37. THe 68. Archb. but first forsaker of S. Austin and his Predecessors faith
was Thomas Cranmer in the year 1533. and put to death 1556. He was not chosen
for any deserts, but being Chaplin to Anne Bullen, and known to desire her
preferment and to further King Henry's lusts, was by him first sent in Embassy
about the divorce, as you may see in Fox page 1689. and after nominated to this
dignity, VVh^ Cranmer was made Archb.
to the end that if the Pope refused to pronounce sentence of divorce between
him and Queen Catherin, Cranmer might do it. He was so carnal and so womanish,
His carnalitie.
as his own mother would often say, she ever thought women would be his
undoing. Wherein she was nothing deceived. For as Godwin confesses. He being
yet very young left his fellswship in Jesus College in Cambridg for love of a
woman whom he married. And after, being Archb. in his return from Rome, he
brought with him a Duchwoman, to whom (says Fox page 1037.) it is supposed he
was married, whom all King Henry's time he carried up and down with him in a
Trunck, and in King Edwards time married her. He was also treacherous to his
Prince. For abbeit he had receaned so great favors of King Henry 8. and was by
him, His treachery to his Prince.
appointed one of the Executors of his will, yet straight after his death he
agreed to the breaking of it. And after King Edwards death wrought all he could
to the advancing of Queen Jane and utter excluding from the crown of King
Henry's lawful daughter and his right Prince Queen Marie and first subscribed
to the disenheriting of Queen Marie, His rebellion.
and to that rebellious letter which he and his accomplices sent to Queen
Marie, Fox. page School.
And Fox to his everlasting confusion has set down in his Acts page 1299.
edit. 1596. and marvel it were if one who thus forsook God and his Prince,
should not also forsake his Predecessors faith? Cranmer forsook God and his
prince
If he who had thus lost, as Saint Paul speaks, a good conscience should not
also make ship wrack of his faith. How long a Romans Cathol.
For first he was a Roman Catholic, and so continewed from his childhood til
he was Archbishop, and a while after. At his first going to the Pope was by him
made his Penitentiarie as Fox has edit: 1596. page 1690. went to Rome for his
Pal and there took the usual oath of fidelity to the Pope. But in the next
year after, to wit in the year 1534. When king Henry by Parliament procured
him self to be termed head of the Church he also forsook the Pope in that
point yet in all other agreed with him as the king did, and both by words and
deeds persecuted the Protestants, Song Mass solemly in King Edward 6. time.
as you may see in Fox in Lamberts death and others. And after King Henry's
death under king Edward song Mass with great majesty for the king of France
his soul assisted with 8. Bishops as writes Stow Chron. Inconstant even in
heresy.
page 1547. yet after he fell to Lutheranism, and set out a Cathechisme wherein
with Luther he taught the real presence of Christ in the blessed Sacrament;
Sliedan lib. 26. An. 1555.
But staying not long there, from thence turned with the Duke of Somer. In his
recantation in fox page 1710. He takes god to witness he recanted of his own
mind and for conscience sake, and yet soon after recalled his retantation.
Cranmet condemned for rebellion and herefir. Sleidan l. 25. f. 429. The
miserable end of the Archb: that first forfooke S. Austins faith. The great
nobility rare learning and virtue of card. Pole.
to Zuinglianisme, and published an other Cathechisme which denied the real
presence. After all this under Queen Marie for hope of life recanted all his
heresies, and both by tongue and pen professed the Roman Catholic faith. But
perceauing that he should die, choosing rather to die in account of Protestants
a martyr, than in judgment of both them and us a malefactor, he finally ended
his life in Zuinglianisme, being both condemned for Heresy against God, and
for rebellion against his Prince as Fox confesses page School. Edit. 1596. And
so as his faith had been far different for a time from his Prededessors so was
his end ignominious and far from the glory of their happy departures.

Reginald Poole Archb. LXIX.
30. THe 69. and last Catholich Archb. hithertho, was Reginald Poole
consecrated an. 1555. and departed this life an. 1558. the same year and day
that Queen Marie died. He was son to Sir Richard Pool Cousin german to King
Henry 8. and of Margaret Countess of Salsburie Daughter of George Duke of
Clarence and brother of King Edward 4. He was a man (says Godwin) of manifold
and excellent parts, not only very learned, which is better known than it
need many words, but also of such modesty in behavior and integrity of
life and conversation, as he was of all men both loved and reverenced. And
beyond seas he was so famous, that without all seeking of his he was first made
Cardinal, after Legate to the Council of Trent and twice elected Pope; Card.
Poole might have been Pope. Ridley highly commended Card. Pool. His Romans
Religion.
to which supreme dignity wanted nothing but his own consent. He was by the
confession of Ridley in Fox Edit. 1596. page 1595. a man worthy of all
humilitye reverence and honor, and endued with manifould graces of learning and
virtue. As for his Roman religion it might seem needles to prove it if Doctor
Bukley and some other Ministers were not ashamed to challeng him for a
Protestant whose impudency I will refel with the testimony of their own
Authors. For Godwin says in King Henry's time he dealt by letters to his
friends to exhort them from all conformity to reformation and being accused in
the Conclaue of fauering protestants and of other matters, He cleared himself
(says Godwin) of all these suspicions absolutely so that the next day they
were more resolute to make him Pope than before. And infra he says Queen
Marie loved him for his learning and nobility but above all for his religion
and finally that he reconciled England to the Pope and received from him his
Pal. Bale Cent 8. cap. 100. says he was a Cardinal soldier of Antichrist, not
to be commended for any virtue by the servant of God, and says that in an
Oration to the Emperor he called the German Protestants new Turks, Sleidan
lib. 10. in fin.
and their Gospel Turcicum pestiferum and adulterinum semen Turkish pestiferous
and adulterous seed. An. 1607.
which Crashew was not a shamed in his sermon at Paul's Cross to affirm that
Poole said o the written word of God. Farther more Bale terms this worthy
Prelat and great ornament of our Nation horrible beast a rooter out of the
truth of the Gospel a most wicked Traitor to his Contrie, and prays God to
confound him. So undoubted it was while Cardinal Poole lived that he was no
Protestant but a most earnest Roman Catholic. See Andreas Dioditius in vit.
Poli.
Which who reads his book and considers his deeds may yet see more fully.
But by him may the judicious reader see with what truth or face our Ministers
challeng S. Austin and other holy and ancient Archbishops of Canterbury to be
of their religion.

Epilog. First and last Cath. Archb of Canterb. said Mass and have palls from
Rome. The number of our Archb. Their continuance, learning virtue and wisdom.

39. THus you see the first and the last of the Catholic Archbishops of
Canterbury, namely S. Austin and Cardinal Pole to have said Mass and had
their Palls from Rome, and all of them (except one) ever since the first
Christianity of our Nation unto our days, for number three score and nine for
continewance of nine hundred fisty and eight years, for learning many of them
most famous, for wisdom most excellent, and for virtue diverse of them most
admirable, as you have heard by the very confession of Protestants them selves.
Who vvil not advventure his soul rather with these than with Cranmer.
Thus many (I say) thus excellently qualified Primats and Pastors of al
England, thus long to have taught the Catholic faith, to have followed it them
selves, to have defended it with their great learning, maintained it by their
miracles, authorized it by their notable virtues, and finally to have lived in
it most religiously, and died most happily; What shall we thinck of them? That
so many, and great Clerks were so many hundred years ignorant of the truth?
That so many and so great Saints so long time missed of the way to heaven? That
all our Ancestors who so many years followed them were christened in vain,
believed in vain, and worshipped and served God in vain, and finally died in
their sins; and are damned and gone to hell? No way to heaven but by Christ
and his true faith.
As we must needs thinck unless we grant the Roman Catholic faith to be the
faith of Christ and right way to salvation. Shall, I say such an unchristian,
unnatural, and unreasonable thought enter into our hearts? And not rather follow
the advice of S. Paul saying Mementote Praepositorum vestrorum qui vobis locuti
sunt verbum Dei, quorum intuentes exitum conuersationis imitamini fidem,
Beholding the end of the conversation of your Prelates follovv their faith.
Let us behold the holy conversation and happy and virtuous end of those
holy and worthy Prelat: and primats of England, assuring our selves that virtue
can not follow the Devil, nor Gods Saints be condemned to Hell. Let us embrace
their faith which was the root of their virtue, and their chief guide in
their way to heaven, whither they are happily arrived and we shall assuredly
follow if we keep their faith and imitat their virtue. And thus having showed
that all our Archbishops of Canterbury, and consequently all our Clergy,
Bishops, Archdeacons, Deacons Canons, Pastors, Vicars, Monks, All Besides
VViclef and his small number.
and Friars were Roman Catholics even from the first Christianity of our
Nation to our age, Let us proc^ed an show the same of our Christian Kings and
Laity.

CHAP. XXI. That all our Christian English kings to king Henry 8. time were
Roman Catholics proved by general reasons.
1 No record that any of our old christian Kings was Protestant.
1. FIrst because (as I said of the Archbishops) there is no script, no scrole,
no record, no monument, to testify that our former Christian kings were of any
other religion than king Henry 8. was before he began the change. Therefore they
that affirm the contrary either know it by revelation, or speak without
book. Besides it is impossible that there should be an alteration in religion
which is the most markablest thing in a Commonwealth, and that there should be
no mention thereof; and altogether incredible in England, where we see the first
alteration from Paganism to Christianity, and now lately from Papistrie to
Protestancie recorded in all Histories. yea private mutations made by kings in
some Churches from Priests to monks or contrary wise. And can we thinck that a
mutation from Protestancie to Papistrie (if any such had been) would have been
omitted and forgotten. 2. All the Archbishops of Canterbury were Roman
Catholics as is before showed, 2 All their Archb. were Catholics.
and yet none of them trobled by the kings of former times for his religion*
yea most of them greatly honored by them, and diverse made Archbishops by their
kings procurment. 3 They suffered Archb. to be consecrat of the Pope. etc.
3. They suffered the said Archbishops to go to Rome (where diverse of them were
consecrated of the Pope) to receive their Pal, to be his legate, and take their
forsaid oath of fidelity to the Pope, which if they had been Protest. and not
perfect Roman Catholic they would never have permitted. yea some of the kings
procured Pals for their Archb: Kings procure palls from the P. for their Archb.
as King Edwin for S. Paulin in Beda lib. 2. cap. 17,. King Alfwald for
Archbishop Eanbald, Florent. An. 779. Huntington lib.. 3. king Rufus for S.
Anselm, Fox Acts. page 185. 4. Nine of the ancient kings left their Kingdoms
and became monks, 4 Many ancient Kings became Monks.
as Fox confesses Acts. page 133. whose names are these, king Kinegilfus, K.
Cedwalla, king Ina, king Ethelred, king Sigebert, king Coenred, king Offa, king
Edbert, Monks vowed chastie poverty and obedience.
to whom page 131. he adds king Kenred. Now monks in that time vowed
chastity as is evident in S. Beda lib. 5. cap. 22. lib. 4. cap. 25. lib. 3.
cap. 25. And Poverty lib. 1. cap. 25. And obedience. lib. 4. cap. 5. And how
Papistical this is, and contrary to Protestancie every one knows. Beside as
Fox says page 115. most like they did this for holiness sake, thincking in this
kind of life to serve or please God better, or to merit more which Kind of act
or end of theirs is plain Papistical, and quite opposite to Protestancie. And
therefore Fox says, that these Kings were far deceived. To these Kings we may
adioin 19. Queens and Kings daughters whom Fox also page 134. confesses to
have left their royal estate, Many ancient Queens and K. Daughters nuns.
and becommen Nuns. Yea page 137. he cites out of an ancient Chronicle, That
in the Primitive Church of England Kings, Devotion of English to monkish life.
Princes, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and Rulers of Churches incensed with a desire
of heaven, laboring and striving among them selves to enter into Monkerie into
voluntary exile and solitary life, forsook all and followed the Lord. The
same has Huntington. lib. 5. Houed. and others. Is this thinck we a proceeding
of Protestants or rather of earnest and devout Roman Catholics?

5 Out ancient Kings desire the P. to confirm their Charters.
2. Fifthly. They desired the Pope to confirm their Charters which they made.
This you may see of King Ethelbert the first Christian King, in Malmsb: lib. 1.
Pont. page 208. Of King Coenred and King Offa in Capgraue in vita Egwin. Of
King Egbert in Florent. Chron. An. 676. of King wulfer in Ingulf. page: 884. Of
an other King Offa in Paris An. 794. Of King Edgar in Malmsb. lib. 2. Reg. page
57. 6. They suffered appeals to Rome from them selves. 6 Kings suffer appeals
to Rome.
This is evident in King Egbert and King Alfred in Beda lib. 5. cap. 20. 7.
They believed S. Peter to be Prince of the Apostles as is to be seen in King
Offa his Charter in Cambden in Brit. 7 Our Kings believe S. Peter's supremacy.
page 613. and S. Peter to be higher in degree than S. Paul, as is to be seen
in King Ina his verses there page 193. and Peter only to have had the keys.
to wit of all the Church, as Reinolds confesses Confer. page 12, And finally
the Church of Rome in their time to be the Catholic and Apostolic Church, as
Beda testifies lib. 3. cap. 29, at what time the Protestants account the Roman
Church the who are of Babylon, and the Pope Antichrist. 8 Many of our Kings
canonized by the Pope.
8. Seven of these our English Kings are Canonized by the Roman Church in the
Martirologe, to wit, Ethelbert, Richard, Oswald, Sebbi, Edmund, Edward martyr,
Edward Confessor, 9 Our ancient Kings know not justification by only faith.
which would never have been done if they had not been Roman Catholics.

9. Our ancient English Kings could be no Protestants therefore they were Roman
Catholics. For no others challenge them for theirs. That they could be no
Protestants is most manifest. First because the opinion of justification by
only faith is accounted of Protestants the foundation, What is the foundation
and soul of Protetestancie Luther.
head, and cheifest point and soul of their Doctrine and Church, It is (says
Luther Prefat. in Ionam) the head of Christian Religion, the sum of the
scriptures. Prefat: ad Galath: If the article of Justification (by only faith)
be once lost, then is all true Christian doctrine lost. And as many as hold not
that doctrine are Jews Turks Papists or heretics. Item. By this only doctrine
the Church is built and in this it consists. And in cap. 1. Galath. If we
neglect the Article of Justification we leese all together. And in cap. 2. It
is the principal Article of all Christian doctrine all other Arcicles are
comprehended in it. Fox Acts. Fox.
page 840. says It is the foundation of all Christianity, Chark.
And page 770. the only principal origin of our saluatian. Chark in the Tower
disputation says. It is the soul of the Church. And the same say all other
Protetestants. But this foundation, this head, this soul of Protestancie, our
ancient Kings knew not, as Fox plainly confesses in these words page 170. The
Doctrine of Justification (by only faith) was then unknown. And page 133.
writes thus of our antientest Christian Kings. Our Kings knevv not the
Protestant Gospel.
They lackt the doctrine and knowledge in Christ's Gospel espetially (says he) in
the Article of free Justification by faith and therefore (says he) they ran the
wrong way. Lo he grants that they were ignorant espetially of that which
Protest: esteem the especiallest point of Protestancie. And Ibid. speaking of
our ancient Christian Kings has these words: How great the blindness and
ignorance of these men was who wanting no zeal wanted knowledge, seeking their
salvation by their meritorious deeds, which I write (says he) here to put us
in mind how much we at this present are bound to God for the true sincerity of
his truth hidden so long before to our fforancestors, and opened now to us. A
plain confession that none of our Anceitors were Protestants.
This only lamenting to see them have such works and want our faith, and us to
have right faith and want their works. Could he say more plainly that our
Ancient Princes and Christian Ancestors knew not so much as the foundation of
Protestancy, and wanted their faith? And with what face then can any man
challeng them for Protestants. And here I challeng Abbots or what minister so
ever, What must be shevved of ministers that say our Anceitors were
Protestants.
to show one ancient English man, Woman, or Child that held this forsaid
foundation, head, and soul of their religion; And if they can not (as indeed
they can not) let them confess, that there was never ancient English
Protestant, unless they will make Protest: without head or or soul.

3. Moreover to build or indow Religious houses (as Doc. Abbots says Answer to
D. page 100.
Bishop) for redemption of their sins and purchase of their souls health
proceeded of the want of the sight of the sun of righteousness. For what end
our Kings built and endevved monasteries.
And Fox. page 133. says it is contrary to the rule of Christ's Gospel. But the
same Fox Ibid. testifies that our first Christian kings built monasteries
seeking for merit with God, and remedy of their souls and remedy of their
sinnnes, and proves it by a Charter of King Ethelbald, which he might have
proved by as many Charters of those ancient kings as are extant. One of King
Ethelbald I will cite out of Ingulph. made to free monks from taxes the third
year of his Reign which was 718, some what more than a hunderd years after
S. Austin. Ego Ethelbald etc, I Ethelbald King of marchland for the love of the
celestical Contry, Good works done to free the soul from bond of sin.
and for the redemption of my soul have prouidently decreed to free it by good
work from all bond of sin. King Ethelbert also Pro animae suae remedio etc,
for the good of his soul gave to Mellit Bishop the land called Tillingham out
of Stow Chron. page 77. And so of the rest. Our first Christian K. gave land to
Churches for help. of his soul.
Again Fox page 154. The causes why solemn Monasteries were first founded by
Kings, Queens, Kings daughters, and rich Consuls, are these, Pro remedio
animae meae, pro remissione peccatorum meorum, pro redemptione peccatorum
meorum, and pro salute Regnorum meorum quique subiacent regimini populorum in
honorem gloriosae virginis. For the redemption of my soul for the redeeming of
my sins and for the saftie of my Kingdoms and people subject to my government
to the honor of the glorious Virgin. And therefore by D. Abbots his verdict, and
by evident inference our ancient Princes wanted the sun of Protestants
righteousness. 10
10. And lastly I prove it by the plain confession of Protest. For Fox Acts.
page 132. says our first Christian Kings were devout to Church men, espetially
to the Church of Rome. Which was, in the opinion of Protestants, Our Kings
devour to the P. when he was in opinion of Protestants. Antichrist
when the Pope was known Antichrist, That is, in Boniface. 3. time, and since.
Bale Cent. 1. cap, 73, says of king Ethelbert our first Christian king that He
received the doctrine of the Roman Religion with all the imposture thereof, and
died the 21. year of his received Papistrie, Could he speak more plainly? And
Cent. 13. cap. 5, Felix says he converted the East part of England to
Papistrie. A Plain confession of Protestants that our nation was first
converted to papistrie.
And Ibid cap. 4. he says that Birin under color of the Gospel taught the
West saxons Papisticam fidem Papistical faith. The same confess diverse other
Protestants, as has been showed before when we proved that S. Greg. and S.
Austin were by the confession of Protestants plain Romans Catholics.

4. To all these particular proofs I ad a general one vz the English names
which our ancient Kings and people gave to their service and their Pastors; See
in Ingulph. how ancient Knights were wont to go to confession before they
were knighted.
also their Churches Tombs and Epitaphes and finally all their ancient
Monuments do testify and proclaim their Catholic Roman religion. For their
service of God they called Mass, Nether can it be showed, that ever they
called it other wise, and of it have they termed the chief feasts of the
year, as Christmasse, Candlemasse, Michelmas, Name of Mass.
Martin mass. As likewise they have termed Shreuetide of their Shreiuing and
confessing them selves before they began their lent Fast, Palmesonday of the
Palms which they carried on that day, as Catholics at this day do; Ember
days of the Catholic fast of Quator te^pora corruptly pronouncing the last
word. of Priests.
Their chief Doers of their service they termed Priests. That is (as Protest.
confess) Sacrificers, and therefore their ministers abhor the name. Reinold
conf. page 466 467.
Their chief Churches they built in form of a Cross. The chief Altar therein
on high and toward the East, Form of Churches.
and diverse Altars in little Chappells about; erected therein a Roodloft with
the Roode or Cross of Christ upon it, adorned their Chappells even the very
glass windows with Pictures. In like sort they buried their dead with Crosses
as was seen on the tomb of King Arthur, Burial of dead.
and their Bishops with Chalices as in the Tomb of S. Birin, and usually on
the Epitaphs desire men to pray for the soul of the dead. Epitaphs.
And where I pray you was the Protestant Communion when our first Christian
Ancestors termed their chief service of God, Mass, and thereof named their
principal feasts in the year? where were their Ministers when they termed
their Pastors. Priests and sacrificers. Where were their Churches when all the
Cathedral Churches were built in form of a Cross, with one high Altar, and
diverse little Altars in the Church about; where were they them selves when our
Ancestors even dead did by Crosses where with they were buried, and the Epitaphs
of their Tombs profess the Roman Catholic religion.

CHAP. XXII. Certain objections of Ministers that our ancient Kings were not
Roman Catholics disproued.
1. ALbeit every one of judgment will easily see that what can be objected
against this so clear, D. Dove of Recusancie vvil have Bellarm: to be a
Protest: or no perfect Catholic.
and by the Adversaries confessed truth, is but cauils which want not against
almost the euidenst truth that is: yet for satisfaction of all sorts of people,
we will propose what D. Abbots in his Answer to D. Bishops epistle page 199.
lately has collected for proof that our ancient Kings were Protestants, or at
least not perfect Kings had the supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical. 2. Abbots
says that the kings founded Bishoprics and invested them at their lib. 1.
cap. 29. That S. Greg. at his own pleasure appointed two Archbishopricks, and
under each of them twelve Bishoprics to be erected in England. And lib. 2.
cap. 4. That S. Austin by his authority founded the Archbishopric of
Canterbury, and the Bishoprics of London and Rochester, Our ancient Kings
took not upon them to erect Bishopriks.
and that the King then did only build them Churches, indow the Bishoprics
with lands and give them (says Beda lib. 1. cap. 28.) Possessions necessary
for their maintenance. And above 800. years ago when King Offa would alter
the Bishoprik of Lichfeild in to an Archbishopric, K Ethelbert.
he took not upon him to do it by his own authority or of the Bishops of his
realm, K. Offa.
but procured Pope Adrian to send two legates for that purpose. Malmsb. lib. 1.
Reg. cap. 4. K Edward Sen.
And* 700. years ago mhen King Edward Senior erected five Bishoprics in the
West Contrie, it was done by the express commandment of Pope Formosus.
Malmsb. 2. Reg. cap. 5. K VVilli^ Conq.
And about 500. years ago, when King William Conqueror would have some
English Bishops deposed, and Bishoprics translated from little Tounes to
greater Cities, he procured Pope Alexander. 2. to send a Legate hither to do
it. Malmsb. 1. Pont. But yet we grant that a while before the Conquest, and
somewhat after, Kings took upon them to inuest Bishops and Abbots as appears
in Ingulp. page 806. But this fact of theirs done of some ignorantly as must be
thought of King Edred and others before the Conquest who were perfect
Catholics in faith (as shall appear herafter) and also virtuous in life; of
others perhaps presumptuously and couetously against the order of the Church,
proves no more that they were no Catholics, than worse facts of theirs
against the law of Christ proves them to have been no Christians. For if
Princes may by every fact of theirs be judged of what religion they are, they
would sometimes seem no Christians nor yet to have a God. As for S. Edward he
might well do what he did, for he was appointed by the Pope to be his Vicegerent
and as it were Legate as we shall show in his life. they made (says Abbots)
laws for the order and government of the Church, as is to be seen in the
laws of Edward, of Alfred, of Ethelstan, and Canutus in Fox Volum. 1. in fine,
and by many laws made since the Conquest against intrusions of the Pope, as is
to be seen in Sir Edward Cooks reports part 5. See stapleton.
Besides that, Christian Princes apoint thus some times things in
ecclesiastical matters not of authority, but upon zeal, and not to dispose
of faith and religion. As for the laws made since the Conquest which may seem
prejudicial to the Popes authority, the cheifest Authors of them, were Edward
3. and Richard 2. who (as shall appear hereafter) plainly professed the Popes
Supremacy. And therefore what laws they made, were no way to deny his
authority, but to restrain the execution thereof in some cases: because as the
Apostle says Omnia licent sed non omnia expediunt. All things are lawful but
all things are not expedient. So they thought that some execution of his
authority in some matters would be preiud^ciall to their temporal state, and
therefore thought it not expedient that in those cases it should be practiced. As
for Cooks reports they have been so answered as I thinck neither him self nor
any for him will Then were the scriptures in four several languages of so
many several Nations, besides the Latin tongue common to them all Beda lib. 1.
cap. 1. This is untrue, This Island at this present to the number of the 5.
books of Moises, does study and set forth the knowledge of one perfect truth,
that is with the language of the English, the Britons, the Scotts, the Picts,
and the Latin which by study of the scripture is made common to all the rest.
In which words he says, that the Inhabitants preached and published Christ's
truth in five several languages, but the scripture they studied only in Latin,
and thereby it, became common to all the Inhabitants. And before in the life of
Theodor, we showed by the confession of diverse Protestants, that mass was in
his time, (which was before S. Beda) in Latin only. But admit that the
scripture were then in Latin and in English too, how proves that, that English
men then were no Catholics. Have not English Catholics now the scripture in
English? Fiftlie, says Abbots, Then were they in Monasteries commanded to be
exercised in the reading of scriptures, and every one was required to learn the
Lords prayer and Creed in the English tongue. This is not worth the answering.

3. Sixthly, says Abbots, Then was the Communion lib. 2. cap. 5. Where Pagans
say to S. Mellit, Why do thou not give unto us of that white bread which
thou did give to our Father Seba, and do yet give to the people in Church?
But if S. Mellit had communicated people in both kinds, it is lykly they would
have demanded both. Besides that Beda expounds that place of Luke: (
Cognouerunt eum in fractione panis (where mention is of one only kind) of
sacramental communion: Therefore he (and consequently our English Church then)
allowed communion in one kind. But whether they communicated in both or one
kind, makes little to prove that they were not Catholick^, because til lay
people were forbidden, it was lawful for them to communicate

4. Seauenthlie the^ (says Abbots) was Transubstantiation unknown, and when
it began to be broached or not long after, Elfricus Archbishop of Canterbury
contradicted it. See before how Bale confesses Archb. Alfric to have been a
Papist, and of Transubstant. in. S. Odo Archb.
that the Author thereof was no Archbishop of Canterbury. More likly it is to be
true which Fox Acts. page 1148. says that it was Elfric surnamed Bata, an
Heretic, who (as S. Dunstan appearing to one in a vision said (as reports
Osbern) attempted to disherit his Church, but I have stopped him (says S.
Dunstan) and he could not prevail. Albeit indeed that sermon does more
approve Transubstantiation than disprooue it. For in that is said, that
Christ turned through invisible might the bread to his own body and wine to
his blood. And that holy howsel is by might of Gods word truly Christ's body and
his blood: And that after their halowing, bread and wine truly are Christ's
body and blood. And what other do Catholics now say, but what here is said?
Vz. That bread and wine are by invisible power turned into Christ's body and
blood, and become after consecration truly (not figuratiuly) his body and
blood. And though the Author of the sermon ad, that the sacrament after
consecration is not bodily but Ghostly Christ's body, yet the word ghostly is
not added to deny the word (Truly) which is absolutely affirmed, but only to
deny the word (Bodily) that is carnally and after a Capharnaitical manner which
is Catholic doctrine. For though the Eucharist be truly and really Christ's
body, yet is it not Christ's body after a carnal manner, but after a spiritual
and mystical manner. Now where he says (which Bilson lib. of Obed. page 681, and
Protestants urge) that holy howsel after bodily understanding, is a corruptible
and mutable creature, makes nothing against Transubstantiation. For his
meaning is, that the sacrament according to bodily understanding, that is,
according to the outward form which with bodily eyes we see and understand, is
a corruptible thing, which no Catholic denies. Again where he says, that
there is much between the body that Christ suffered in, and the body that is
hallowed to howsel. He neither said nor meant that there is much between Christ's
body wherein he suffered and the body of the howsel. (Albeit this also be true,
because Christ's body when he suffered was after the manner of visible bodies,
palpable, and part in one part of place, and part in an other: and here it
is invisible, and after the manner of spirits, all in every part of the
sacrament: For which difference and less S. Austin lib. de symbolo cap. 10.
said much mo^e, to wit, that in the resurrection shall be no flesh and blood. In
Resurrectione non iam caro erit and sanguis, because they shall be in far
different manner) But he said that there is much between the body of Christ and
the body that is hallowed to housel, which is most true, for this body is the
body of bread.

Then the, Bishops and Princes of this Land did condemn the second Nicen
Council for worshipping of Images, out of Houeden part. An. 792. To this I
answer, that it is no way likly that our English Bishops would then co^demn
such honoring of Images as Catholics use, because they knew that not only
their Christianity began by S. Austin with use of Images, but also that Archb.
Brithwald (as is before rehearsed out of Bale Cent. 1. cap. 99.) held a Council
in London An. 712. VVherin he commanded upon the Decree of Constantine Pope of
Rome that Images should be worshipped. But that which our English Clergy then
disproued was, as Houeden writes Imagines adorari debere, that is, adored or
worshipped as God. which Houed: well understood when he added. Quod Ecclesiae Dei
execratur, which the Church of God does detest. Which (he being a perfect Roman
Catholic as Abbots can not deny) could never say of such honor as Catholics
give to Images, but might most truly say of worshipping them as God. For this
the Church of God did allwaies and does accurse. Nether, though some Catholics
term that worship Latria which is given to the cross of Christ, did ever any
Catholic affirm that any Image or creatur whatsoever, was to be worshipped as
God, as I could easily show, if it were not besides my purpose. But in that our
English men were misinformed of the Council of Nice, as if it had commanded
Images to be worshipped as God, which it did not, as (to omit other testimonies)
testifies D. Field lib. 3. of the Church cap. 20. and 36. then were tithes
paid to married Priests, and so continued to Pope Hildebrand (who lived in King
William Conquerors time) and our most ancient Cathedral Churches were places
for married Priests, Malmsb. lib. 2 Reg. cap. 7. calls these Priests
irregulares and vagos. Answer.
not for Popish Votaries, as appreareth by the Records of the Church of
VVorceter. That there were married Priests or rather that Priests kept women as
their wives in Pope Hildebrands time, and before we deny not. But that there
were such ever since the first Christianity of English men till that time, or
that marriage of Priests was not always forbidden in England, is most untrue,
as has been sufficient clearly proved in the life of S. Anselm, and by the
testimony of Protestants. Likewise most untrue it is, that our most ancient
Cathedral Churches were places for married Priests. For the most ancient of
all is Christchurch in Canterbury, where King Ethelbert the first Christian
King of England placed monks (as Pope Boniface in his letter to him in Malmsb.
lib. 1. Pont. page 208. testifies. And Malmsb. Ibid. page 203. adds this: It
is manifest that there have been Monks at Christchurch in Canterbury ever since
the time of S. Laurence Archbishop who first succeeded S. Austin. As for the
Record of VVorceter if there be any such ancient thing, and not forged by some
Minister, it is like to have been devised by some married Priest, when in King
Edgar and King Edward martyrs time they pleaded for that Church against Monks,
(who were restored to diverse Cathedral Churches which had been possessed of
Preistes ever since the destruction of England by the Danes) by the judgment of
S. Dunstan S. Oswald King, Edgar, and two Councels or Parliaments as you may
read in Osbern (who lived in the time of the Conquest) in the life of S.
Dunstan. As for the first Cathedral Church of Worceter, it was, (as Godwin
says in the Bishops of Worceter) a monastery built by S. Egwin. I say the
first, For that which is now, was long after founded by S. Wulstan Bishop of
Worceter, as you may see in his life in Godwin. Or if the first were built of
Sex wolf (as Cambden says in Brit. page 512. It is nothing likly that he would
build it for married Priests, seeing (as Beda says lib. 4 cap 6) he was a
monk him self, and built that Monastery which now is called Peterborough.
But especially because nether then, nor long after there were any married
Priests in England, as is evident by these words of S. Beda lib. 5. cap. 22
written long after the foundation of Worster Church. It behooves them who being
either made by vow Monks, or by profession of the Clergy, do bind them selves
more strictly (then married men) with the bridle of continency. Behold how in
Bedas time Monks by vow, and the Clergy by profession, did (as they do now)
bind them selves more strictly to chastity then other men did. Which in other
words is to say, they did not marry. And thus much for the refelling of these
slender objections, which if they be compared with the former proofs wherewith
we showed that our ancient Kings were Roman Cathol. will (I suppose) seem to
any of indifferent judgment to deserve no answer.

CHAP. XXIII. That all the Christian Kings of England from their first
Christianity to the time of the Monarchy of England, were Roman Catholics,
proved in particular.
1. When S. Austin entered there were 7. English Kings in this Land. Whereof
four were converted by S. Austin and his companions. But partly because it
were to tedious to discourse of all these Kingdoms, partly also because what is
proved of one of them, will caselie be believed of the rest, I will discourse
only of the Kings of the West Contrie, who in time subdued the rest, and whose
royal blood yet inioyeth the crown in their rightful heir both by the
English and Scottish line, His majesty descended of the West Saxon Kings by
both the English and the Scottish line.
our Souerain Lord King James. If any asked me why God permitted the Western
Kings to conquer the rest? I will not take upon me to have been of Gods
counsel, yet have I noted diverse notable things peculier to them, which whither
they might move God to bless them with such temporal benediction or no, I
leave to the reader to judge. The first is, First Christian K. of west saxons
became a Monk.
that the first Christian King of that Contrie, namely Kinegilsus left his
Kingdom and became a Monk as testifies Fox Acts. page 110. 134. which we read
not of the first Christian Kings of the other Kingdoms. West saxon Kings first
went to Rome.
The second is that the kings of this Contrie, first left their Kingdoms and
went on Pilgrimage to Rome. This is manifest by S. Beda lib. 5. cap. 7. in the
valiant King Ceadwall. Who in the year 689. before all other kings went on
Pilgrimage to Rome. The third is, First made their kingdom tributary to the Sea
Apostol.
that these kings first of all other our Princes made this land tributaire to
Rome for the Peter pence. This all our Chronicles write of King Ina in the
year 726. These three notable things these Kings performed first, and therefore
perhaps their Kingdom continewed longest. But now to come to the Kings in
particular.

King Kynegilsus first Christian King of the west Saxons or west Country.
2. THe first Christian King of the West Saxons was Kinegilsus alias
Cynegilsus, Kinegilsus 1 Christian K. of the West Saxons.
who began his reign An. 611. as some write, or as others. 612. two or three
years before the death of S. Austin our Apostle, if he died not before 614. as
Malmsb. records; The valor of K. Kinegilsus
and reigned 31. years. He was converted to the Christian faith and Christened
by S. Birin in the year of our Lord 635. and was a valiant Prince* and had
prosperous success in his wars against the Britons, and against Penda the
cruel Pagan King of the Mercians or Middle English. K. Kynigilsus a Rom
Catholic
As for the faith of this ancient and valiant King, that appears to be Beda
lib. 3 cap. 7. Godvvin in Birin. Cooper. An. 6^6. Bal Cent. 13. cap. 4.
who was the fourth Pope after Boniface 3. which Pope Protestants (as is showed
before cap. 13) account the first Antichrist and head of the Papist Church,
because he procured Phocas the Emperor to declare that he was head of the
Church, and in like sort they account of all the Popes since that time. And it
is not likly that Pope Honorius would send any hither that did not believe him
to be head of the Church, in which point (as D. Reinolds and D. Whitaker say)
the essence of a Papist does consist. Besides this Honorius in his Epistle in
Beda lib. 2. cap. 18. plainly calls S. Peter head of the Apostles, and cap.
17 he sends two Palls, one to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and another to
the Archb. of York; K Kinegilsus converted by a Canon regular.
more over he was a Canon regular as says Ciacon in his life, as also was S.
B^rin whom he sent, which order Bale Cent, 1. cap. 82. calls one of the
horns of the beast, and Cent. 1. cap. 70. plainly refuses Honorius as a
Papist saying, P. Honorius a Papist.
He instituted the feast of the Exaltation of the holy Cross, added the
invocation of the dead Saints to Greg. Letanies, and ordainet that there should
be a Procession every Saboth day. Hence the Procession in Churches seem to
have had their beginnings. Secondly the same S. Birin, Apostle page 338.) of
the Westsaxons, S. Birins esteem of a Corporas.
wa^ so addicted to mass and things belonging thereto, a^ for the love of a
Corporas which he had left on the shore when he took shipp for England,
Miracle touching a Corporas.
when he could not persuade the mariners to retu^ne to fetch it, he adventured
his life by walking on the sea to go for it, as Malmsb. lib. 2. Pont. page
241. Iornelasensis, and so many Authors affirm as (says Fox lib. 2. page 122.
I can not but marvel, And if he were not obstinat could not but believe. And
Capgrane in his life says that his bones were found in Pope Honorius 3. and
Archb. Stephans time with a leaden Cross upon his breast a little Chalice
Thirdly this King became a Monk as Fox testifies lib. 2. page 110. and 134.
and for what end has been before declared, which is an evident badg of lib.
3. cap. 7. which Oswald erected Crosses and prayed before them, and being to
die him self prayed God to have mercy on the souls departed, out of Beda cap.
2. cap. 12. which are evident tokens of Papistrie. Fifthly, This truth is
evident by the open confessions of our adversaries. For Bale Cent. 13. cap. 4.
writes that, Protestants confess K. Kinegilsus to have been a Papist.
Birini opera etc. By the industry of Birin in the year of our Lord 635.
Dorchester with the Contrie therabout under pretense of the Gospel received the
Papisticall faith. And that S. Birin was enrolled amongst the Papisticall
Saints. Thus the Roman religion of this first Christian King is both evident,
and confessed.

Holy men in K. Kinegilsus time.
3. In this Kings time, besides S. Austin and his fellows, of whose miracles
wrought for the testimony of the Roman Catholic faith is before spoken, See
Bed. lib. 3. cap. 7. Sur. tom. 6. Malmsb lib. 2 Pont. Capgraue in Birin.
lived the said S. Birin, whom to omit Catholic authors Cooper Chron. An.
636. calls a holy man. Cambd. in Brit. page 338. says, He was admirally
famous for the opinion of sanctity. Godwin in his life says he was a very
zealous and devout man. The holiness of the conuerter of K. Kinegilsus to the
Cath. faith.
And Fox Acts lib. 2. cap. 122. says, that by his godly labors he converted
the King to the faith of Christ. And amongst others his miracles walked as is
said upon the seas (a thing scarce heard of since S. Peeters time) to fetch his
corporas, Fox dare not deny S. Birin VValking on the sea to fetch a Corporas.
which is so certain as Fox. L. cit. dare not deny, yet says he (if we will
believe him on his word) that if this miracle were done, it was not done for
the holiness of the man (yet you see how holy, him self, and other Protest.
confess him to have been) or corporas, but for conversion of the heathen. But
it suffices that God would work so great a miracle for conversion of the
heathen to the Roman faith. In this Kings time lived also King Oswald, Miracle
for confirmation of prayers made before Crosses
whom Fox Acts page 133. calls a Saint, and who by virtue of prayer (which
he made before a Cross) with a far less army vanquished his enemies, as not
only S. Beda lib. 3. cap. 2. and Catholic writers, but Fox also Acts lib. 2.
page 121. Cambd. in Brit. page 720. and others do grant. So well did God then
like praying before Crosses. As for diverse other miracles done by S. Oswalds
relics and by very chipps of his Cross, which S. Beda lib. 3. cap. 2. 10.
11. and other English writers do record, Fox dare not deny Saint Osvvalds
miracles.
Fox loc. cit. says, he has not to affirm what the people of that time
affirmed of him, As if he were amazed, not knowing whether to confess the
miracles, and so condemn his religion of falsitie; or deny them, and so
condemn him self of impudency; Protest. confess miracles to have been done
by relics and the Cross
Especially seeing that Iuel Art. 1. diu. 19. Bell. Survey page 353. and D.
Whitak. lib. 10. cont. Dur page 866. confess that God has often times wrought
miracles by the relics of Saints, and also done strange miracles and driven
away Devils with the Cross, as testify Iuel Art. 14. Diu 3. And Fox him self
Acts page 85. testifies that Constantin the great professed that he did
overcome his enemies salutari Crucis signo: Field. lib. 3. of Church cap. 20.
lib 4. cap. 31.
by the holsom sign of the Cross. In this Kings time also Sigebert King of
the East Angles left his Kingdom, and became a Monk, A King a m^nk and diverse
Kings Daughters Nonnes.
and S. Edburga daughter to King Ethelbert, S. Eanswid daughter to King Edbald,
and S. Ebba a Lady of the blood royal left their estates, and became Nonnes.
Beda lib. 3. cap. 18. Capgraue in vita Eanswidae, Cambd. in Brit. page 670.
Hunting lib. 2.

King Senwalch the 2. Christian King.
4. THe second Christian King of the Westsaxons was Senwalch, son (as Beda
lib. 3. cap. 7. and others record) of Kinegilsus, began his Reign An. 643. and
reigned 31. years twice vanquished the Britons, The valor and virtue of K.
Senvvalch.
and took a great part of land from the Mercians, and as Malmsb. writes lib.
1. Reg. cap. 2. was comparable to the best Princes, the middle and last of his
time* and so religious that (as Florent. An. 843. Fox. Acts. page 122. Stow
page 96. write) he built the Cathedral Church at Winchester, and gave all the
Contrie within 7. miles about for maintenance of Priests that should serve
therein, though Godwin in vita Agilberti say his Father began the work, and
that he did but finish and confirm his Fathers deed and grant, and add thereto
three Manners. K. Senvvalch a Romans Catholic
But as for the Roman Religion of this religious and virtuous King it is
manifest, first lib. 3. cap. 9, Malmsbus. lib. 1. cap. 2. Godwin in Agilbert
and all agree. which Agilbert was so notorious a Papist as Fox in his
Protestation before his Acts reckons him amongst Romish monks much drowned
(as he says) in superstition with Dunstan, Lanfranc, and such like. And in a
Synod defended the Roman use of Easter and round shauing of Priests crowns, as
is to be seen in Beda lib. 3. cap. 26. and Fox page 123. Thirdly because after
Agilbert his Bishop was Elutherius, who at this Kings request as Beda lib. 3.
cap. 7. Godwin in vita Elutherij write, was consecrated by S. Theodor, whom
(as is before showed) Protestants confess to have been lib. 2. Pont. page 255.
Which Egwin Bale Cent. 1. cap. 91. says was a Benedictin Monk ad
superstitiones natus, borne for superstitions, helped, vt statuae ponerentur in
Templis and venerarentur: for the placing of Images in Churches and worshipping
of them, and was after canonized, and how great he was with Pope Constantin
appears by his life in Capgraue. Fifthly, unto whom (writes Beda lib. 4.
cap. 2. and Godwin in his life) all the whole Church of the English Nation did
consent and submit them selves: Therefore then this King and all his Christian
people were as sincerly Papists as S. Theodor him self was. Holy men in K.
Senvvalch his time.


5. In this Kings time among other holy men lived the blessed Bishops S. Chad
and Tedda, whose virtue and miracles are recorded by S. Beda lib. 3. cap. 23.
and lib. 4. cap. 3. likewise there lived in that time K. Oswin who vowing to God
to make his daughter a Nonne if he overcame his enemies, K. Osvvin vouing to
make his daughter a Nonne gets a miraculous victory.
got the Victory though he had but one Legion against thirty ex Beda lib. 3.
cap. 24. Hunting. lib. 3. Westmon An. 855. And if he had not been prevented by
death meant to go to Rome, and there to end his life, as witnesses Beda lib.
4. cap. 5. K. Sebbi and his son become Monks.
There lived also S. Sebbi King of the East saxons who together with his son
Sighard became a Monk as may be seen in Beda lib. 4. cap. 1. Malmsb. 1. Reg.
cap. 6. Stow Chron page 79. In like sort there lived Oswie a marvelous devout
and godly man (says Beda lib. 3. cap. 14) and Sigibert a holy King of Essex,
Diverse Kings daughters holy Nonnes.
of whom writes Beda lib. 3. cap. 22. And at the same time S. Eartongatha
daughter of Ercombert King of Kent; S. Edelburg daughter to Anna King of East
England, and Sedrido his daughter in law, S. Eartongath. S. Edelburg Sedrido.
with diverse others went into France, and there became Nonnes flourishing with
great virtue and miracles, as you may read in S. Beda lib. 3. cap. 8.
Heresvvid. S. VVithburg. Elfled. S. Hilda.
Likewise Hereswid mother to Adolph King of East Angles ex Beda lib. 4. cap. 23.
And in England became Nonnes S. Withburg daughter to the said King Anna ex
Florent An. 798. Elfled daughter to King Oswiex Beda lib. 3. cap. 24. and also
S. Hilda a Lady of the blood royal ex eodem lib. 4. cap. 23. and diverse
others. Bale Cent. 10. cap. 9. and Capgraue in Botulpho makes mention of
certain sisters of King Athelmond King of Sussex who in this kings time An.
650. were No^nes in Gallia Belgica. Then also lived S. Bathilda in Engl. woman
Q. of France and after nonne. Sur. tom. 7.
And Fox lib. 2. page 133. says king Cissa built the Monastery of Abington
An. 666. Cooper says, 665. In this time also as S. Beda writes lib. 3. cap.
26. Even the habit of religious men was had in great reverence. Honor of our
Anceitors to Priests nnd Monks.
So that where any of the Clergy or religious persons came he should be
ioifully received of all men as the servant of God. If any were met going on
iorny they ran unto him and making low obeisance desired gladly his benediction
either by hand or mouth who would ever have thought that the children and
posterity of these Ancestors would make it treason to be a Priest, or thinck
it a pleasing thing to God to make them away with cruel deaths.

Queen Sexburga. III.
6. The next Christian Prince was Sexburga vife to King Senwalch. Who began to
reign An. 672. or; 674. as others say, and held it one year. Non Deerat says
Malmsb. lib. 1. Reg. cap. 2; The valor of Q. Sexburg.
The woman wanted not spirit to dispach the affairs of the Realm, she raised
neu armies, and ^etained the old in obedience, she governed her subjects with
clemency, threatened her enemies terrib^ly, executed all things in that manner
that besides her sex nothing made any difference. Her Romans Religion.
The Roman religion of this noble Queen is manifest by what has been said of
her husband, and by the Council which S. Theodor in her time (as Huntingtod
lib. 2. page 318. says and appears by Beda lib. 4. cap. 5.) kept at Hereford
with all the Bishops of England. Stow Chron. page 96. says she builded a
Nonuery in Shepei, and b^came her self a Nonne and Ablesse in Ely: But I think
that was an other Sexburga Queen of kent, of whom we shall speak herafter.
For Malmsb: says she died after she had reigned one year. In the reign of
this Queen Florent: faith in Chron: befell that famous act of a far more
renowned Queen Ethelred of Northumberland, who was twice married and lived 12.
years with herlast husband Egbert a young man and King of Northumberland, S.
Ethelred twice married and yet a virgin. Bed. lib. 4. cap. 19. Camb. in Briton.
page 438. Stow chron. page 92. Florent. An. 672. Huntingt. lib. 2. vvestmon.
An. 679. S. Ethelreds body incorrupt. Also S. Edilburgs. Miracles by relics.
and yet (as both Catholic and Protestant writers have delivered) could by no
means be persuaded to have carnal company with either of them, and this year
with her husbands license left the wordl, and became a Nonne. Sixteen year
after her death her body, in testimony of her incorrupt virginity. was found
incorrupt in S. Bedas time, as him self testifies. lib. 4. cap. 19. The like
he reports lib. 3. cap. 8. of Saint Edilburgs body after 7. years burial.
And he adds that Devils were cast out, and diverse diseases cured by the
clothes in which Edilburgs body had been wraped.

King Escuin 4. Christian King.
The Valor of K. Escuin.
7. TO Queen Sexburg succeeded King Escuin in the year 674. or 675. as others
say. He was (says Malmsb.) Kinegilsus great nepheu by his brother, and of
notable experience in the wars. For the Mercians he over thrue with a
dreadful slaughter.. But as for his Roman Religion that can not be doubted of,
His Rom Religion.
For therein there is no mention made that he varied from his Praedecessors, and
because his Bishop was the forsaid Elutherius, and Heddie, of whom we, will
speak herafter. S. Ercenvvald and his miracles.
In this Kings time lived S. Ercenwald Bishop of London whose great virtue and
miracles wrought even by the chipps of his litter (as in the Apostles time by
S. Peter's shadow and S. Paul's napkins) are mentioned in S. Beda lib. 4. cap. 6.
Where also cap. 7. and seq: he relates the great miracles done by God in the
Nonry of Booking which Ercanwald founded, and whereof his sister Edilburg was
Abbess. Florent. An. 675. Cambd. Brit. page 453. Stow. page 81.
In this Kings time also dyed Wolfher King of the middle English who builded
Peterborow. and whose wife S, Ermenild and his daughter S. Werburg and his two
sisters S. Kinesburg and Kineswith became Nonnes. One Q. and 3. King. daughters
Nonnes.
Likewise his brother merowald had by his Queen S. Frmenburg three holy virgins
S. Milburg, S. Mildred, and Milgith and one virtuous son Saint Meraefin.
Florent. An 675. malmesb. 1. Reg. cap. 4.
This account those great Princes then made of monkish life.

King Kentwin 5. Christian Prince.
8. The 5 Christian Prince was King Kentwin, who began his reign An. 677, as
Malmsb. has in Fastis, or 676. as Florent has in Chron, The valor of K
Kentvvin.
and ruled 9. years. He was as they say son to the forsaid Kinegilsus, and
notae in bello experientiae marvelous expert in war as Malmsb. has lib. 2.
Reg. cap. 2. And as Florent adds An: 704. He chased the East Britons by the
dint of the sword. His Romans Religion.
His Roman religion is manifest. First because (as Fox writes Acts lib. 2.
page 110.) He died at Rome, and because lib. 5. cap. 19. and was (says Bale
Cent. 1. cap. 86.) a Monk, and consecrat by that famous P^pist S. Theodor;
which also affirms Florent. An. 676. Thirdly because in lib. 4.) was that
Council in hatfeild by Saint Theodor in presence of John Legate of Pope Agatho,
where the English Bishops professed their faith in such sort, as it was well
liked of Pope Agatho, Saints in K. Kenti vvins time
as may be seen in Beda lib. 4. cap. 17. and 18. In this kings time lived the
for said S. Heddi a very virtuous and holy man says Godwin in his life, And
Beda lib. 5. cap. 19. says undoubtedly that he was a just man, and testifies
that S. Aldelm his familier friend and successor, Great miracles by the Dust of
S. Heddi his grave.
and greatly esteemed of Fox Acts page 125. Cambd. in Brit: page 210, Bal Cent.
1. cap. 83, was wont to tell that at the place where he died many great miracles
and cures were done, and that men of that Province had made a deep pit by
carrying a way the Dust thereof, which cured many both men and beasts. In this
kings time An. 679. did S. Wilfrid convert Sussex, and wrough diverse miracles
as is to be seen in Beda lib. 4. cap. 13. And Stow confesses Chron: page 7.
And yet is he confessed to have been a Papist by Bale Cent. 1. cap. 88. and
Cent. 14. cap 21. to have maintained Non interpretabilem Papae authoritatem, as
he terms it; And then also lived the most devout woman Abbess Hilda of the
blood royal, ex Beda lib. 4. cap. 23; A great miracles for Confirmation of
mass.
And in this Kings time also An. 679. befell that great miracle for the
approouing of Mass and praying for the dead which S. Beda recounteth lib. 4.
cap. 22. of a Priest Who thincking his brother had been slain in a battle but
indeed was taken prisoner did often times (says Beda) cause Mass to be said
for his soul. By the saying of which Masses it came to pass that no man could
bind him but he was straight loosed again about eight a clock in the morning
when Masses began to be said. This miracle fell not out upon an obscure person
but in one that served Queen Edelred and in an Earls house, and not in
England only but in Frisland also, whither the man at last was sold. And many
says Beda that heard these things of this man were stirred in faith and godly
devotion unto prayer alms and and charitable deeds and to offer unto our Lord
hosts of the holy oblation and sacrifice for the delivery and relief of their
friends that were departed This same (says he) was told me of them that heard
it of the very man on whom it was done And therefore knowing it to be true and
certain I doubted no whit to put it into this our Ecclesiastical History.
Which words of this great Doctor and Saint then living may suffice to con-found
the incredulity, of any Minister. In the same Kings time also as Beda
records lib. 4. cap. 4. was a great mortality stayed by the intercession of
S. Oswald, Plagne cease by intercession of Saints.
and Masses said to give God thancks therefore at the apointment of S. Peter and
Paul appearing in a vision Which vision to be true, Two Queens nonns.
appeared by the miraculous effects following. In this Kings time also lived
Sexburg Queen of Kent who having left her Princly state became a Nonne under
her sister Saint Edelred in Ely, and succeeded her in the Abbesseship And Also
as Beda says lib. 4. cap. 26. Eanfled Queen of Northumberland wife to King
Oswin with her daughter Elfled in the Monastery of Whitbie.

King Cedwalla VI.
9. IN the year 686. succeeded king Cedwalla who says Beda lib. 5. cap. 7.
held it two years, The valiantnes of K. Cedvvalla.
and leaving it An. 688. (as Beda has in Epit.) was baptized of the Pope at
Rome on Easter even An. 689. and there died. He was as Beda writes lib. 4.
cap. 15. a valiant young man, Subdued Sussex and the I le of wite. And as
Malmsb. adds lib. 1. Reg. cap. 2. often times overcame the Kentish men. His.
Romans Religion.
His Roman religion is undoubted. For as Beda has lib. 5. cap. 7. being not
yet Christened, he left his Kingdom and Contrie and went to Rome, thincking it
to be singular glory and renown to him to be regenerat at the Sea Apostolic
with the Sacrament of baptism. And withal hoped that as soon as he was
cleansed from sin he should depart this world, Both which (says Beda) by the
providence of God were fullfilled. For he was baptized by Pope Sergius and
named Peter, that he might bear his name whose Tomb he came to see, and died
while he wore his white aparrell of innocence was buried honorably in S.
Peter's Church where in our time his body was found near to S. Peter's
Sepulcher. Saint Cutbert, and his religion and miracles.
In this Kings time dyed S. Cutbert. For as S. Beda says lib. 4. cap. 27. He
was consecrat Bishop An. 685. and having been two years Bishop soon after
died, and was wont, (as there and sequ. Beda writes) to hear men's
confessions, to offer sacrifice to God, and whose body eleven years after his
death was (as S. Beda says who then lived) found whole and sound, and the
Iointes and sinowes soft and pliable and many miracles wrought thereby. Devotion
of Eng^: people.
In this time says Beda lib. 4. cap. 27. it was the manner of the people of
England when any of the Clergy or any Priest came to a Village, they would all
by and by at his calling come to gether to hear the word and willingly harken
to such things as were said, and more willingly follow in works such things as
they could hear and understand.

King Ina. VII.
10. THe 7. Christian king was Ina who began his Reign An. 688. as appears by
S. Beda in Epit. and Malmsb. in Fastis, and held his kingdom (as Beda lib. 5.
cap. 7. and all testify) 37. years. He was says Malmsb. lib. 1. Reg. c. 2.
fortitudinis vnicum specimen: The admirable virtues of K. Ina. Malmsb.
The only mirror of fortitud, the Image of wisdom, and his lik in religion you
could not find. How worthy he was in the affairs of God the laws may
witness, which he made for correcting of the peoples manners wherein to this
day appears a lively representation of his piety Bale Cent. 1. cap. 97.
says, Balc.
magni consilij and fortunae homo a man of profund iugment and great fortune.
Fox Acts. page 127. Fox.
A worthy and valiant King Cooper An. 687. Cooper.
Ina of great power and wisdom and there with valiant and hardy and in feats
of arms very expert. To which Stow Chron page 96. adds that he was the
pattern of strength and manlines, Stow.
an Image of wisdom, and his like of no man known at that time for religion
and framing his life thereafter. These high praises for religion Valor and
wisdom (three singular properties of a Prince) do both Catholics and
Protestants give to this renowned Prince. His Romans Religion.
Now let us see what his religion was. First his Bishop was S. Aldelm a
notorious whose comma^dements (says Malmsb. L. cit) audiebat humiliter
ad-implebat hilariter. He humbly listened unto, and cheerfully fullfilled.
Secondly a Chapel of gould and silver (so termed of the ornaments) with
ornaments and vessels of gould and silver, Chlaices Images of gold and silver.
gave to the Altar 264. pounds of gould, a Chalice with a Paten of ten pounds
of gould, a Censor of 8. pounds, a holy water bueket of 20. pound of silver
Images of our Lord and our Lady and the 12. Apostles of 175. pounds of silver
and 28. pounds of gould, a Pall for the etc. Three Queens nonns.
Thirdly his wise Queen Ethelburga lived a Nonne at Berking as Fox says Acts
page 125. and others. His sister Queen Cuthburga of Northumberland a Nonne at
Winborn as Camb. in Brit. page 182. and Likewise an other sister of his called
Quen-burga as writes Florent An. 718. K Ina pilgrim to Rome and grants the
Peter Pence.
Westmon and others. Fourthly him self as Fox says page 125. setting a side
all the pomp and pride of this wordl associated him self in the fellowship of
poor men and trauailled to Rome with great devotion, where (as he says page
110) he became a Monk and page 125. granted a penny of every house to be paid
to the Court of Rome. Beda. lib 5 cap. 7. malmsb: loc. cit. Cooper An. 723.
Bale Cent. 11. cap. 97. Sleidan. lib. 9. Stow page 96. Bal. lib. cit Cambd. in
Brit. p. 192.
And page 136. founded the English Scoole or Seminary there. Fifthly as Cambden
testifies in Brit. page 193. he made verses to be engraue^ in the forfront of
Glossenburie in which he plainly confesses S. Peter's supremacy (says he)
that he was in Degree higher than S. Paul; had the Keys of heaven, was the
Porter, and the firm Rock. The verses

Caelorum portae lati duo Lumina mundi
Ore tonat Paulus, fulgurat Arce Petrus.
Inter Apostolicas radianti luce coronas
Doctior hic monitis, celsior ille gradu.
S. peter's supremacy professed by letters engraven in stone.
Corda per hunc hominum reserantur, and astra per illum
Quos docet iste stilo, suscipit ille Polo.
Pandit iter Caelo hic dogmate clauibus alter
Est via cui Paulus, iaenua fida Petrus.
Behold Christian Reader this ancient and famous King and consequently all
England in his time, which is 900. years ago believing, and not believing
only but professing, nor professing but engrauing in stone for testimony to
all posterity that S. Peter was in degree above all the Apostles, S. Peter in
degree above all the rest of the Apostles.
was the peculier Rock of Christians, the proper Porter of heaven, and
espetially had the keys of the celestial Kingdom; Which is plain-ly that
supremacy which their Posterity Catholics do attribut unto S. Peter and his
successors. And of the royal blood of this undoubted Catholic and reuoune^d
King and so devoted to the Church of Rome as first of all Christian Kings of
the wordl, His majesty descends of K. Ina. by his brother.
he made his Kingdom and every household thereof tributary thereto by payment of
yearly pension by his brother Ingles came King Egbert, who after reduced
England to a monarchy as testifies Paris Hist. page 126. and of this King
Egbert by lineall succession descends our present Souereign Lord King James.

11. In this Kings time besides him self three other English Kings left their
Kingdoms also and became Monks, to wit, Four Kings leave their kingdom and
became mo^ks.
Ethelred, and Coenred Kings one after the other of mercia or middle England,
and Offa King of Essex. The two last went to Rome, and there entered into
Religion. The third remained here in England, and after was made Abbot of
Bardney near Lincoln. And besides the Queens before mentioned Kineswitha
daughter, of King Penda and also espouse to the said King Offa became a Nonne
having before persuaded him to give over both his Kingdom and suite to her. And
besides these Osrick King of Northumberland as Godwill in the Bishops of
Gloucester says, Three Queens of mercia Abbesses one after the other.
but indeed King of the Victians as Beda called him lib. 4. cap 23. about the
year 700. founded a Nonnery in Gloucester, in which Kineburg Eadburg and Eua all
Queens of Mercia were successiuly Abbesses. The same says Cambd. in Brit.
page 316. Such rare and admirable love of God, and contempt both of pleasures
and glory of this world, reigned in our Kings, Protestants glory of the
holiness of our Cath. Anceistors.
Queens, and Princes of those days, that justly Cambd. in Brit. page 345.
calls this age seracissimum Sanctorum saeculum: a most fruitful wordl of
Saints. Oh when will Protestants breed such an age. In this Kings time fell
that most dreadful pumishment of God upon that Captain who in his sickness would
not confess his sins least he should seem fearful. Which S. Beda
recounteth lib. 5. cap. 14. where he tells how a little before the man's death
Angels appeared and showed to him a fair book, Dreadful punishment of one
that differed his confession.
but little in quantity wherein all his good deeds were written, and after
there came a huge multitude of Devils, who in a great black book showed him
all his ill deeds and sins, VVestmon An 921. Godvv. in B. of york.
and one of them struck him on the head and other on the feet which, strokes
crept into his body and when they met he dyed in desperation. In this Kings
time also dyed S. John of Beuerley who made S. Beda Priest, Miracles of S. Ihon
of Beuerlay.
whom he recounteth lib. 5. cap. 2. that by making the sign of the Cross
upon the tongue of a Domb man he restored his speech, and that he helped an
Earls wife with holy water, and cap. 5. cured an Earls son and his Chaplin
by his blessing. In this time also lived S. Wilbrord an English man, who An.
697. was consecrat Bishop by Pope Sergius, and sent to preach in Frisland and
Germany, which also S. Swibert and many English more did Marcellin. 1. mort
Surio tom. 2. Beda lib. 5. cap. 11. In this time also lived S. Boniface the
Apostle of Germany, whom Pope Greg. 2. sent thither to preach An. 719. whose
oath of fidelity and plain Papistrie you may read in Surius Tom. 3. and Baron
An. 723. See also Surius de rebus moguntin.
At that same time also lived that great Eremit and S. Antonie of England S.
Guthlac; S. Guthlac the S. Antoine of England.
Of whom because Fox Acts page 125. says, that he secth no great cause, why
he should be Sainted, Nether believe I (says he) his miracles. I will in this
Saint give the reader a taste of Fox his impudency, His holiness.
and a full assurance (if any can suffice) of S. Guthlac his miracles. Whereby
every indifferent man may judge of the like miracles of Saints. As for his
holiness Cambd, in Brit. page 472. says thus Guthlacus summa sanct titate etc.
Guthlac here (at Crowland) lead an heremitical life in exceeding great
sanctity, in honor of whom King Ethelbald with wonderful expense founded a
Monastery in a Marish and unstable ground, for religion and wealth very
famous. Behold this Protestant acknowledges that S. Guthlac led a most holy
life, and was so esteemed, that King Ethelbald (who lived at that same time)
soon after his death, His miracles.
built a goodly Monastery in his honor. And who will read his life in Surius
Tom. 2. shall find that he was an admirable Saint.

12. But as for the miracles of S. Guthlac if any humane testimony or evidence
can make a thing certain and undoubted, they are so. For Ingulph in his Hist.
printed and published by Protest: (who lived in the time of the Conquest)
sets down the Charter of King Kenulph a worthy Prince as all our
Chronicles testify, dated Anno Christi 806. in which the King says that he
and his Queen were eye witnesses of many miracles done at is shrine in these
words Kenulphus Dei misericordia Rex etc. Kenulph by the grace of God King etc.
The King and Q. of England fair say were eyevvitnesses of S. Guthlacs
miracles.
Be it known to all men that our Lord has magnified his Saint, the most
blessed Confessor of Christ S. Guthlac, who corporally rests in Crowland
Monastery with most famous signs and worthy wonders, yea with fresh and in
numerable miracles, as both I and my Queen have seen with our own eyes in
our Pilgrimage. English Pilgrims with images of Saints in their hats.
And there the king freketh all Pilgrims that come to S. Guthlac cum signis
eius in caputijs aut capellis, with his images in their hatts or capps. from
all tax and tole. And to this Charter subscribe the said king kenulph, and
Cuthred king of kent, Celwal ^rother to King Kenulph, Testimony of K. Burdred
for Saint Guthlacs miracles.
Wilfrid Archb. of Canterb. two Bishops, and one Abbot, and diverse others. And
he sets down an other Charter of king Burdred, in which he testifies that
Crowland. Pro frequentibus miraculis etc. In respect of the frequent miracles
of the most holy Confessor (S. Guthlac) is always a fertile mother amongst the
vinyards of Engaddi. And that God by apparent miracles of S. Guthlac has vouch
saffed to show his mercy. To which Charter subscribe the king An. 851. with
the whole consent (as he says) of the Parliament then gathered against the
Danes, Archb. Ceolreth, six Bishops, two Duks, three Earls, and diverse others.
And Ingulph adds that in the Parliament the Archb. Ceolreth and diverse
others, Many cured miraculously in the Parliament.
as well Prelates as Nobles were suddenly and miraculously cured of a kind of
palsy, which at that time much offended England and there upon omnes ad
visitandum etc. All presently bound them selves in conscience by a most strict
vow to visit in a devout Pilgrimage with all possible speed the most sacred
tomb of the most blessed Saint Guthlac at Crowland. The whole parliament
vovveth pilgrimage.
What now will Fox say against this cloud of witnesses omni exceptione maiores?
Will he say (as Ministers use to say of Priests and Monks) that they forged
these miracles for gain? But this were madness to say of such great Kings and
Princes; or will he say that they were deceived? Fox his confusion.
But some of them were eye witnesses, and some of them were such in whom the
miracles were wrought, as the Archbishop, and Bishop of London, who testify
the same in their subscription. But by this the indifferent Reader may both
perceive, what credit he may give to the miracles of other Saints and with what
impudence (without any testimony to the contrary) they are denied of Fox and
such like. And therefore I will not make any more Apology hereafter for the
miracles which I shall rehearse, but only cite my Authors from whom I have
them.

King Ethelard. VIII.
13. KIng Ina going to Rome An. 728. as Florent has Chron. left his Kingdom
to Ethelard, Valor of K. Ethelard.
who held it most quietly (says Malmsb. lib. 1. c. 2.) 14. years* he was
says Malmsb. Cousin to King Ina, and a valiant Prince. His Romans Religion.
His roman religion appears, both by that King Ina so notorious a Papist
chose him to whom he would commit his kingdom, as appears by Beda lib. 5.
cap. 7. and also by other things which are by Protestants confessed of the
religion of this time. In this Kings time died S. Egbert Priest Anno 729.
Saints.
Ex Beda lib. 3. cap. 27. who led (says he) his life in great perfection of
humility and meeknes, continency, innocence and righteousness, and converted
the Scotts to the right observation of Easter. And S. Beda himself, that
glorious doctor of our English Church, the flower of Christianity at that time
for virtue and learning of whose high praises given to him by Protestants, and
of his perfect roman Religion I have said enough before. Here only I will add
the Elogy of Malmsb. lib. 1. cap. 3. Bedam (says he) mirari facilius etc, you
may sooner admire then vvorthly praise Beda, who living in the farthest corner
of the world with the flash of his doctrine have a light to all Nations. Here
wit fails words are vvanting, while I cannot tell what most to commend,
vvhither the mu^^^tude of his volums, Florent. VVestmon. Anno. 734. Huntingt.
lib. 4.
or the sobriety of his style. For doubtless the divine vvisdome had with no
sparing draught given him to drinck, that in so short a sca^tling of his life
could perfect so huge volu^es. The report of his name was so famous that the
cheifest in Rome had need of him for the resolving of doubtful questions. And
much more there of his holiness. VVriters Procure their works to be approved of
the Pope.
Where also he adds that he died anoiled and hovvseled. The like has
Florent: and Westmon. Anno 734. and Hunting. lib. 4. Caius de antiq. Canterb.
page 138. proves that Beda went to Rome, and there read his books coram
Romana Ecclesia: Before the Church of Rome and then gave them to other to copy
forth, which was (says he) ordinary in the Ecclesiastical vvriters of that
age to deliver their works first to the Pope of Rome to be examined. K.
Ceolvvolph a Monk.
In this Kings time Anno 737. (as is in the Epitome of Beda) Ceolwolfe King of
Northumberland (to whom Beda dedicated his history) left his Kingdom, and
became a Monk. And as Malmsb. 1. Reg. cap. 3. flourished with miracles. And
about the same time Frigedida Queen of the West Saxons went to Rome, Hunting.
lib. 4. page 340. Q Frigedida a pilgrim.
Godwin in the Bish. of Salsbery, which at that time (says Beda lib. 5. cap.
4. And Hunting: Devotion of English in going to Rome.
l. cit) many English men both of the nobility and commons spiritual and
temporal were wont to use with (...) emulation. In this Kings time also about
the year 730. as Godwin has in the Bishops of Oxford, (though Capgraue in her
life say 750.) lived the holy Virgin S. Frideswid, S. Fridesvvida.
who flying to save her maydenhood from Prince Algarus, he was miraculously
struck blind, Cambd. in Brit p. 331.
and she after became Abbess of a nonry built by her Father Dida^. These days
were so far from Protestancy, and so manifestly Catholic, as Bale Cent. 1.
cap. 93. says they were pessima tempora pubescente Antichristo: Very bad time
when Antichrist grevv to riper years: And Centur. 2. cap. 6. writes of
Cymbertus an English Bishop of S. Bedas time, After the custom of the rest in
the same age he taught and commended the Roman customs to be observed in his
Churches. And Fulke Annot. in Hebr. 10. says Beda lived in a superstitious
time, long after Antichrist did openly show himself. And 1. Petri 3. Beda was
carried away with the errors and corruptions of his time. Fox Acts page 126.
calls this time a Monkish age, And S. Ceolfrid master to S. Beda a
Shaueling. So plainly do they confess England this time to have been Roman
Catholic.

King Cuthred IX.
14. IN the year 741. as Florent has in Chron. Anno. 740. Malmsb. in Fastis
succeeded king Cuthred, and died says Hunting. lib. 4. and Malmsb. lib. cit.
the 15. year of his reign. He was Cousin as Florent. and Malmsb. and others say
(as Westmon. has brother) to king Ethelard, The valor of K. Cuthred.
and was as Hunting. lib. cit. and Houeden page 408. Rex magnus. A puissant
King, and mighty Prince, famous for his prosperous reign and victories. His
Romans Religion.
His Roman religion is manifest, both by that which has been said of the
former King, and also because in his time, (as Stow says Chron. page 88.) Pope
Zachary wrote a letter hither wherein he threatened to excommunicat them that
would not amend their incontinent life. The Pope threatens to excommunicate
ill livers in England. S Richard K. a pilgrim and his two sons and daughter.
Which was read in presence of the King and Nobles; no man thinking that the
Pope took more upon him than he might. In this kings time S. Richard forsook
his Kingdom and Contrie, and went on Pilgrimage to Rome, and died by the way at
Luca. His two sons S. Willibald and Winnibald, and his holy daughter S.
Walburg following their Fathers example, left also their estates and Contrie
and went into Germany to help. Surius tom. 1. Baron. An. 750.
S. Boniface their Kinsman in the conversion of that Nation.

King Sigibert. X.
15. IN the year 754. as Malmsb. has in Fastis succeeded King Sigibert. who
(as Malmsb. says 1. Reg cap. 2.) after a year was deposed by the consent of
all, for his naughtines. In his time An. 754. (says Beda in Epit. Sigebert in
Chron: and others) was S. Boniface an English man, and Apostle of Germany
martyred in Frisland with 53. more of his company. This blessed Saint and great
ornament of our Nation Bale Cent. 1. cap. 79. says was very superstitious,
Saints and martyrs. See the many and high praises of this S. Boniface both of
Catholics and Protestants ancient and new in Sacrari^s d rebus moguntin lib. 3
not. 57. 58. 59.
and brought the Germans to Papistrie. And other where says was next to
Antichrist meaning (after his manner) the Pope. Fox Acts page 128. calls him
Martyr of God. Stow Chron. page 85. says, He was martyred for the profession
of Christ and his holy Gospel. Cooper page 716. The Germans about this time
received (by Boniface) the faith of Christ. And yet was this Boniface so
notorious a Papist, as Fox. page 129. terms him a great setter up and
vphoulder of Popery. Bale Cent. 1. cap. 79. plainly says he brought the
Germans ad Papisticam fidem, to the Papistical faith. And Cent. 13. cap. 3.
cites these words of Boniface out of his epistle to the Pope. How many
scollers or disciples so ever God has given me in this my Legacy I cease not
to incline to the obedience of the Sea Apostolic. Surius tom. 3. Serrarius de
rebus Moguntin.
He imposed (says Bale) single life upon Priests. By this and much more in his
life in Surius and Baron Tom. 9. you may see what religion England then
professed, from whence S. Boniface and all his fellow laborers in Germany did
come.

King Kinulph. XI.
16. IN the year 755. (as Malmsb. in Fastis, Florent in Chron: and others
agree) succeeded king kinulph, and reigned 29. years as Malmsb. has in
Fastis, died An. 784. ex Florent, The valor of K. Kinulph.
Malmsb. in his History says. 31. years, Houed: writes the same, Malmsb. 1.
Reg. cap. 2. Clarus morum compositione militiaeque gestis. Honorable both for
his virtuous behavior and warlick prowes. The like has Hunting. lib. 4. and
Houed. page 408. Cooper. Chron. An. 748. says the virtue of this man surpassed
his fame. The Roman religion of this king is evident by his Charter set down
by Godwin in the Bishops of Bath in these words. His Romans Religion.
Ego Kenulphus. I Kinulph King of the West Saxons will bestow a piece of Land,
Good deeds for satisfaction of sins.
humbly ascribing it for the love of God and satisfaction of my sins with
consent of my Prelates and Nobles, to Gods blessed Apostle and servant S.
Andrew. Which kind of gift is contrary to the foundation of Protestancie, as
is before showed out of Fox, Abbots and others. And Fox Acts page 130. adds,
that about the year 780. (which was in this kings time) Pope Adrian ratified
and confirmed by revelation the order of S. Gregory's mass. When S. Greg.
order of Mass became universal.
At what time (says he) this usual Mass of the Papists began to be
universal and uniform and generally received in all Churches. In this Kings
time Egbert or Edbert King of Northumberland leaving his Kingdom became a
Monk, K. Eadbert a Monk.
Epitom. Bedae An. 758. Florent. Westmon. An. 757. Malmsb. 1. Reg. cap. 3. Stow
Chron. page 93. Fox Acts. page 131. In this Kings time An. 781. also died
Werburga quondam (says Florent.) sometime Queen to Ceolred King of Merchland.
Q. VVerburg a Nonne.
By which kind of speech he insinuates that the^ she was a Nonne, which is
plainly affirmed by Houeden page 404. And in Germany lived S. Lullus, S.
Burcardus, S. Willebald, Saints.
S. Liobe, and many other English both men and women, disciples of this forsaid
S. Boniface, who with virtuous life and miracles planted there the Catholic
Roman faith, which they carried with them out of England.

King Bithricus XII.
17. THe 12. Christian King was Bithricus, who began his reign An. 784. and
reigned 16. years as Malmsb. says 1. Reg. 2. and in Fastis, The virtues of K.
Bithricus.
and dyed An. 800. He was says he pacis quam belli studiosior, more desirous
of peace than of war Ethelwerd. l. 3. calls him Regem pijssimum. A most godly
Prince. His Romans Religion.
Cooper An. 778. says he Knightly ruled the Land. His Roman religion is most
notorious. For as Hunting. lib. 3. Houed page 404. Westmon An. 739. and others
write, Popes legates honorably received of all England.
in his time came Legates into England from Pope Adrian antiquam (say they)
renouantes etc. renewing the ancient League and Catholic says, who were
honorably received both of the Prelates and Princes, and held a Council at
Cealtid ex Houed. page 410. Besides he married the daughter of King Offa, K.
Offa and King Kenred become monks. Peter pence. Hunting. lib. 4. page 342.
Houed page 409. Bale Cent. 2. cap. 15.
who in his time left his Kingdom, went to Rome with Kenred King of
Northumberland, and there bound his Kingdom to pay the Peter pence, and finally
became a Monk as Fox writes lib. 2. page 3. and page 129. and others. Besides
of this King Offa Stow writes page 89. that he caused the relics of S. Alban
to be taken up, and put in a Shrine, Malmsb. 2. Reg. cap. 4.
and adorned with gould and precious stones, and builded there a Prinely
Monastery, His Charter (says he) is dated An. 793. with the witness of him
self, his son Egferd, 9. Kings, 15. Bishops, 10. Dukes, etc. By which we may
clearly perceive the Roman faith of all our Nation then. Westmon. also An. 794.
Tells how King Offa with the counsel of his Bishops sent to the Pope to have
privileges for that Monastery, Pope confirms our Kings Charters.
and the Pope answered that he should grante what he thought convenient Et nos
(says the Pope) And we by our priuiledg will confirm our original. And as
Paris has An. 794. Many Princes became monks.
He excepted it from all jurisdiction of Bishop or Archbishop, and subjected it
immediately to the Sea of Rome. His diebus (says Bale Cent. 2. cap 15. In these
days many Princes in England with shauing took upon them the profession of
Monks. In this Kings time An. 793. was the Innocent and holy King Ethelbert of
East-England slain, S. Ethelbert. K. Ethelrida his spouse an Anchoresse.
Malmsb. in Fastis and 1. Reg. cap. 5. Florent. Chron. Stow page 74. Fox Acts.
page 129. And Etheltida his espouse daughter of King Offa made her self an
Ancoresse or recluse ex Ingulph. In this time also was found the body of S.
VVithburg daughter of King Anna after 55. years burial, ex Florent An. 798.
S. Fremund K.
In his time also lived S. Fremund King and son to King Offa Vir (says
Cambd. in Brit. page 500. magni nominis. A man of a worthy name, and singular
piety toward God was canonized for a Saint. And Rictrith iamdudum Regina tunc
Abbattissa obijt. Q Rictrith Nonne.
Rictrith sometime a Queen then Abbess dyed, Houed. An. 786. And An. 799. died
Osbald then Abbot, K. Osbald Monk. Saints.
but once King of Northumberland, Houed. Ibid. In this time also died S. Lull.
Archbishop of Mentz whom not only Malmsb. lib. 1. Reg. cap. 4. but Bale also
Cent. 13. cap. 56. commends saying he was homo tum eruditionis etc. A man of
approved learning and sanctity, and gave him self as an example of virtue to
the Gentills that had any inclination to the Christian faith. And yet was he
scoller and successor to Saint Boniface that famous Papist. Ibid. cap. 57. Bale
calls Saint Burchard his fellow, Virum pium ac religiosum: a godly and
religious man. And cap. 70. he says that S. Wilhad Archb. of Brom and fellow
laborer with them, Martirij desiderio pro Romans Ecclesia flagrabat: Burnt with
desire of Martyrdom for the Church of Rome. English desire to die for the
Church of Rome.
In his time also lived that great Clerck Alcuin Confessor to Charles the Great
of whom enough has been said before.

18. Thus thou see Christian Reader how clearly the Catholic Roman religion
has been deduced through all those our first Christian Kings for the space of
the first 200. years after our conversion from Paganism to Christianity. The
effects of Catholic religion in our nation in 200. years.
And what notable contempt of the world and holiness of life it bred in that
time in our Kings, Queens, Princes, Ten Kings Saints in 200 yaers.
Clergy, and Commons, in so much that ten of those Kings that then were are now
accounted Saints: To wit, Ethelbert, Fourtene Kings Monks or Pilgrims.
Edwin, Oswald, Oswi, Sebbi, Sigebert, another Sigebert, Richard, Ethelbrit,
Fremund, And fourteen of them forsaking their Kindomes, either became Monks,
or went on Pilgrimages to Rome, namely Kinegilsus, Centwin, Cedwall, Ina,
Sebby, Offa, Who would not adventure his soul sooner with these holy Kings,
Queens and Princes than with one boy and a VVoma^. Princes Co^fessors. See
marcellin in vit. Simbert. Princes martyrs.
Sigebert, Ethelred, Coenred, another Offa, Cealwolph, Eadbert, Kenred, Osbald,
to whom I may add Oswin prevented by death. And 13. Queens nonnes to wit
Bathildis, Ethelreda, Sexburg, kineswith, (espouse to King Offa) Eadburg, Eua,
Emenild, Edelburg, Ethelburg. Canfled, Cuthburg, VVerburg, Erigedida, Rictirth
to whom I may add Heseswid mother to King Adolph. Besides, many Kings sons
as Sighord, VVillibald, VVinnibald, Merefin, Adelbert, and many more whose
names we know not. And many Princes Martyrs as Ruffin VVulfhale, Elbert,
Egbrigh, and one Confessor S. Pumold, And many Kings and Queens daughters that
became nonnes as Edelburg Eartongath Sedrido, VVithburg; Kings daughters
Mildred, Milhith, VValburg, Etheldrida.

19. Could such admirable contempt of the world spring from the Devils
religion? or rather from his who in our baptism binds us to renounce the
world and pomps thereof. Can grapes spring of thorns.
Could so great virtue and holiness of life rise from the Devil, the utter enemy
of virtue? or rather from God, from whom (as S. James says) comes all
goodness? Can Protestants imagine that God revealed his truth to them, and hid it
from so great Saints and servants of his as those were? Did God hide his truth
from those virtuous princes and reueal it to a boy and a woman.
who sought it so diligently, followed it so earnestly, and (as S. James
speaks) by their works have showed their faith, and yet notwithstanding
perished everlastingly as (no doubt) must needs be both thought, and said if
Protestants religion be the only truth of Christ, and Christ's truth the only
way (as no doubt it is) to salvation. No hope of salvation to our Ancestors if
the Cath. faith be not the faith of Christ.
And therefore how soever some Ministers say that they will not judge their
Forfathers, they cannot but think that these holy Princes and their people are
damned (which they are a shamed to say) or that there are diverse ways to
heaven, which is right Atheism, or rather Antichristianisme. For if there be
any other way to heaven than that which Christ taught, we make Christ a liar.
But let them thinck as they list, I hope all men that are careful of their
salvation and withal consider that as there is but one God and one Christ, so
there is but one baptism and one faith, to wit the Catholic (which who keeps
not entirely shall perish everlastingly) will both thinck and say: Moriatur
anima mea morte iustorum, Athan. in Symbolo.
and fiant nouissima mea horum similia. Let my soul die the death of the just
and let my end belike to these men. And now let us go from the Kings of a part
of England to the Monarchs of the whole.

CHAP. XXIIII. That all the Kings of England from the Monarchy to the Conquest
were Roman Catholics, proved in particular.
King Egbert XIII.
1. THe thirtenth Christian King of the West Saxons and first that reduced
England to a Monarchy, was King Egbert, who began his reign An. 800. and
reigned 37. years, died An. 837. He was (says Malmsb. lib. 1. Reg. cap. 2.)
worthily to be preferred before all Kings, The worthiness of K. Egbert. 1
Monarch of England.
And lib. 2. cap. 1. Regis Inae abnepos. King Ina his great grandchild by his
brother Inegilse, suldued the minds of his subjects by clemency and meeknes,
and left his son great occasions of commendations. Houed. hist. page 407.
says he was Vir strenuissimus ac Potens: most stout and puissant. And (as all
our English Cronicles testify) in his time subdued all the rest of our English
Kings. Hunting. l. 4. VVallos vicit: sabdued the VVelchmen. Florent An. 836.
Danos fugat: Put to flight the Danes. The Roman Catholic religion of this
victorious Prince is evident. His Romans Religion.
First because he suffered his son and heir Ethelwolph to be a Monk and
subdeacon, it is certain. Whereby (says Bale Cent. 2. cap 20.) He became the
Popes Creature by both professions. Secondly, because he committed his said
son Ethelwolf An. 827. Gotzelin, and Godwin in vit. Swithini, Surius tom. 4.
And as adds Gotzelin inter precipuos amicos numerauit. reconed him in number
of his especial friends. Now this Swithin was a Roman Catholic. For, as Bale
l. cit. grants he was a Monk, and as Malmsb. lib. 2. Pont: Gotzelin. l. cit.
Westmon. An. 862. and others report wrought miracles by the sign of the
Cross, is canonised by the Papists for a Saint. Thirdly because K. Kenulf (who
in lib. 1. Reg. Nulli ante se Regi. Nothing inferior, in power and religion to
any King before him, and whose praises shall be advanced on high so long as there
is found any indifferent judge in England, writing with all his Bish. and
nobility to Pope Leo begins his letter thus. Domino beatissimo: To my most
holy Lord and well beloved, Lord Leo the Roman Bishop of the holy, and
Apostolic See, Kenulf by the grace of God King of Merchland with the Bishops,
Dukes, and all Degrees of honor within our Dominions with health of most
sincere affection in Christ. Infra. The sublmity of the Sea of Rome is our
health, The prosperity of Rome, the joy of England.
and the prosperity thereof our continual joy. Because whence you have your
Apostolical dignity, thence had we the knowledge of the true faith. VVherfor
I thinck it fit that the ear of our obedience be humbly inclined unto your
holy comma^dements, and with our whole forces to fulfill what shall be thought
convenient by your holiness to perform. But now I Kenulf by the grace of God K.
humbly beseech your Excellency to receive me in quiet peace into your holiness
lap, and whom no means of merits do support, let the large abou^da^ce of your
blessing enrich for the gouerme^t of his people, that almighty God by your
intercession may together with me encorage the Nation against the invasion of
foreign foes which your Apostolical authority has imbued with the rudeme^ts of
the Christian faith. Rome taught England the faith: All K. Kenulphs
Predecessors had the popes blessing.
This blessing have all the Kings who swayed the Mercian scepter deserved to
obtain at your Predecessors hands, this same do I in humble manner request and
desire to obtain of you most holy Father, first by way of adoption to receive
me as your child, as I love you in the person of a Father, and shall embrace
you with the whole force of obedience. Again he says: Excellentiae vestrae:
We in most humble manner beseech your Excellency, to whom the key of wisdom
is given by God. Again: With great humility and also affection we have written
these to you most holy Pope, Our K. and Peers write with great humility to
the Pope.
beseeching in most earnest wise your Cleme^cie kindly and justly to answer
these things which we have been urged to propound. We send you here as a
small token of my loving mind, that is 120. Mancuzes with letters requesting
you to accept thereof in good part and vouchsafe to bestovv your blessing upon
us. And the Pope answering him says that this K. professed to be willing to
lose his life for him, and acknowledged (says the Pope) that Nostris
Apostolicis, etc. That no Christian presumes to go against our Apostolical
Decrees. Yea Fox p. 132. speaking of this K. and the others before him says,
They wanted the knowledge and doctrine in Christ, especially in the Article of
free justification in faith. Which, p. 840. he terms the foundation of the
Church and all Christianity, and therefore (says he) they ran the vvrong way.
And so concludes that Protestants truth was hidden to our forancestors, In
which I verily believe him.

King Ethelwolph XIIII.
2. THe 14. Christian King was Ethelwolph, son to the forsaid King Egbert,
who began his reign An. 837. and reigned 20. years and od months. He was
(says Malmsb. lib. 2. cap. 2.) by nature gentil, and more desirous of peace
than of war. Virtues and valor of K. Ethelvvolph.
And yet (says Malmsb. l. cit.) Danos non semel per se and suos Duces
contudit: The Danes he overcame more than once by him self and his Generals.
And besides other victories at Okley in Surey slew so many Danes (says Floren:
and westmon. An. 851. Houed page 413. and others) as never was heard in one
Realm, and at one time nether before nor after. His Roman religion is most
notorious. His Romans Religion.
First by that which has been said in the Pont. says was Leo 3. Bale Centur.
2 cap, 20. says was Gregor. 4. others say Leo 4. Thirdly he first sent his of
the Pope in manners and religion. Kings son sent to be instructed of the Pope.
And after went himself, and stayed at Rome a year, and there (as all
Catholic and Protestant Cronicles confess) bound all England to pay the
Peter pence. Ethelvv. lib. 3. cap. 3 Stow page 89 Coper. An. 852. Houeden.
page 415. Huntingt. lib. 5 Ingulp. page 862. VVestmon An ^57. What ma^^u^a is.
And as Bale page 116. speaks Prouinciam suam etc. He made his Country
tributarie to the Roman Synagog, and so (says he) was all England made subject
to the Roman Beast. Besides this he appointed every year 300. Mancuzes, which
were (as Caius says lib. 2. de antiq. cantab. page 287.) thirty pence a piece
to be sent to Rome whereof one hundred should buy oil for light in S. Peter's
Church, and one hundred for the same use in S. Paul's, and one hundred should be
given says Florent Anno. 855. Universally Papae Apostolico To the Universal
Apostolic Pope. The same has Fox lib. 3. p. 136. Fourthly he gave (says to
holy Church and religious men the tenth of his goods and Lands in West Saxons
with liberty and fredom from all service and civil charge. And Fox sets
down his Charter in these words. Ego Ethelwolphus etc. The faith of King
Ethelvvolph and his Noble^.
I Ethelwolph King of the West Saxons with the consent of my Prelates and
Nobles will grant an hereditarie portion of my land to be forever possessed by
God and the blessed S. Marie and all the Saints of God. Behold how the King by
the advice of his Bishops and Nobles gives Land to God and his Saints, and to
what purpose himself declares in these words following, For the redemption of
our souls, Good deeds for remission of sins.
for the remission of our sins. Which intention, as you heard before out of
Abbots and Fox, is contrary to the Protestants Gospel. And therefore Fox upon
these words says, Note the blind ignorance and erroneous teaching in these
days, and adds that they were led with pernicious doctrine to set remission
of sins and remedy of souls in this donation, and such other deeds of
their devotion. And further the King says, VVestmon An ^54.
as Malmsb. testifies lib. 2. cap. 2. Placuit Episcopis cum etc. It has
pleased the Bishops with the Abbots and the servants of God to apoint that all
our brethren and sisters in every Church shall sing on wensday in every week
fifty psalms, K. Ethelvvolph requires Masses for him alive and dead.
and every Priest two Masses, one for King Ethelwolph, and another for his
Dukes co^senting to this gift, for their reward and remission of their
trespasses. And for the K. living let them say Oremus Deus qui iustificas etc.
For the Duke also living also Praete^de Domine etc But after their death for
the K. alone, and for the Dukes deceassed jointly together, and this be so
firmly ordained throughout all the days of Christianity even as their liberty
is established, so long as faith increases in the English Nation. This Charter
of Donation was written in the year of our Lords Incarn 844. Indict. 4. the
fifth day of Nouemb. in the City of Winchester, in the Church of S. Peter
before the head Altar. And this they did for the honor of S. Michael the
Archangell and also for the blessed Marie Q. the glorious mother of God and of
S. Peter the Prince of the Apostles, and in like manner of our most holy Father
Pope Greg. and of all Saints. In this Chapter I note how, K. Ethelvvolph
commanded not in spiritual matters.
not the King but Bish. apoint Priests to pray and say Masses for him, and that
S. Peter is called Prince of the Apostles; the other points of Papistry therein
are more evident than that I need to point to them. All England Papist in K
Ethelvvolhps time.
And yet (as Ingulph says p. 862.) to this chapter subscribed all the Archb.
and Bishops of England, K. Bardred, and King Edmund after martyr, and Princes
of a part of England under King Ethelwolph, Abbots, Abbesses, Dukes, Countes,
and nobles of the whole La^d, and innumerable multitude of other people. By
which we may see the universal faith of our Contry of that time. And in a
Charter of King Berthulphus in Ingulph p. 861. The King prays God Quatenus
pro intercessione Guthlaci etc That through the intercession of S. Guthlack and
all the Saints he would forgive me and all my people our sins. Pardon of
sins asked by intercession of Saints.
In this Kings time An. 850. S. Wolsta^ nephew to two KK. was unjustly
murdered, and afterward honored by God with miracles, Flore^t. Chronic. Saints.
Also S. Ieron. an English Priest martyred in Holand, An. 849. Bale Cent. 13.
cap 75. In this K. time also lived one Offa K. of Eastengland, who leaving his
Kingdom, and travailing to the holy land, in old Saxony (from whence our
Nation came into England) elected S. Edmund for his heir, and sent him into
England: Capgraue in vit. Edmundi. Florent. An. 855. Houed. page 415. Stow page
76.

King Ethelbald. XV.
3. THe 15. K. was Ethelbald eld^st son to K. Ethelwolph who began his reign
An. 857. and reigned five years. He was at first dissolut and naught, as you
may see in Malmsb. lib. 2 cap. 3. But peracta poenitentia (says Westmon. Anno.
859.) Having done penance all the time he lived after, he governed the Kingdom
with peace and justice. Wherefore Hunting. lib. 5. page 348. calls him optimae
indolis aeuenem: a youth of very great towardnes, says that all England
bewailed his death.

King Ethelbert XVI.
4. THe 16. king was Ethelbert brother to the former, began his reign An. 862.
as Malmsb. has in Fastis, and held the government five years. He was says
Ingulph page 863. Valor of K. Ethelbert.
Validissimus adolescens, A most valiant young man and an invincible triumpher
over the Danes, he stoutly for five years space governed the Kingdom. Malmsb.
2. Reg. cap. 3. says he ruled strenue dulciterque: Manfully and sweetly. Houed
page 405. says pacifice and amabiliter, peaceably and gently. In this Kings
time died S. Swithin Anno 862. Florent. and Westmon. in Chron. Saints.
As for the Roman religion of these two Princes, His Romans Religion.
that appears both by what has been said of their Father, and what shall be
said of their two brothers.

King Ethelred XVII.
5. THe 17. king was Ethelred 3. son to king Ethelwolfe, Who began his reign
says Malmsb. lib. 2. cap. 3. Anno 867. and reigned 5. years, as his brothers
did. Fortitude and piety of K Ethelred.
Of him and his brethren Malmsb. says, They bouldly and stoutly entered battle
for their Country, and adds that this king besides ordinary skirmishes,
fought 9. picht Battles in one year against the Danes, nine battles in one
year.
and was oftener Conqueror: And that he slew one king of them, 9. Earlers, and
innumerable people* which also testify Ethelwerd lib. 4. cap. 12. Hunting lib.
5. Cambd. in Brit. says, He was Princeps long optimus. Couper Anno 863. satih
he was among his subjects mild gentle, and pleasant, against his adversaries
severe, fierce, and hardy. Of this Fox lib. 3. page 141. tells that being to
join batell with the Danes, Miracle in confirmation of Mass.
his brother Alfred gave the onset while the King says Fox, was at service and
meditations, and albeit word were brought him that his brother had the worst,
yet would he not says Fox stir one foot before the service was fully co^plet;
And adds that through the grace of God, and their godly manhood the King
coming from his service recovered the victory, and slew as Ethelwerd (who as
himself says descended of that K. lib. 4. c. 2.) says one King, Marvelous
victory.
five Earls. And that I may say so (says Ethelwerd) almost all the chiefest
youth of the Barbarians, that nether before nor after was there such a slaughter
heard of since the English entered Britanie. England defended by devotion to
Mass.
See you here this marvelous and miraculous victory confessed by Fox to be
obtained by the grace of God and the devotion of the King to his service! But
what service this was which God would thus approve by so miraculous a victory,
and by which England was then defended from destruction of Danes, Fox was
ashamed to tell. But our ancient Historiographers Florent. and VVestmon. An.
871. and Houed. part. 1. page 416. says plainly it was Mass said by a
Priest. K. Ethelreds Rom Religion.
Which alone suffices both to show that this King was a Roman Catholic, and
that Mass is divine service. Saints.
Besides that, Malmsb. writes, that this King entered battle, cruce Dei
consignatus: Signed with the cross of God. And (as Fox says, and Godwin in
the Bishops of Exeter) he builded the Abbey of Exeter. In this Kings time An.
870. ex Malmsb. was holy King Edmund (Cooper says Anno. 869. slain of the
Danes because he would not forsake the faith of Christ. VVestmon. 870. K.
Edmu^d. His brother Edvvald.
The same has Fox page 140. Florent. Anno 870. Of his great miracles wrought
after his death you may see in his life, in Surius Tom. 6. His brother and
heir Edwald (says Fox l. cit. and Capgraue in vit. Edwald.) became an
heremit. Duke Fremu^d.
Fremu^d also says Bale Cent. 2. cap. 22.) son of Algarus Duke of the
West Saxons, a beutifull young man, and only son, relinquished the government
of the commonwealth, which his parents left him, that he might follow Burchard
the Monk, and was after as Capgr. says in his life, slain of the same Danes
which slew S. Edmund. Chastity of S. Ebb and her Nonnes.
In this time also S. Ebb (says Stow Chron. p. 101.) Abbess of Couldingham,
cut of her nose and upper lip, and persuaded all the sisters to do the like,
to keep her virginity from the Danes, VVestmon. An. 870.
who thereupon burnt the Abbey and Nonnes therein.

King Alfred the great. XVIII.
6. THe next K. was Alfred the fourth son of K. Ethelwolfe, who (as Malm.
has l. 2. c. 4.) began his reign An. 872. and ruled 28. years and a half. The
worthiness of K Alfred crowned of the Pope.
He alone of all our Kings. (says Fox l. 3. p. 141.) took his crown and
vnctio^ of the Pope. And that we may see how God blessed him whom his vicar
crouned and anointed, he alone for his admirable deeds both in war and peace,
is surnamed the Great. And the praise which not only Catholics but also
Protestants give unto him in all kind of virtues surpass in my judgment the
praises of all Christian kings that ever have been. But for brevity sake, I
will content my self with the praises given to him by Protestants, who (you may
be assured) knowing him to be so manifest a Roman Catholic, as shall appear
anon, would give him no more than he deserves. Cambden
Cambd. in Brit. page 243. and 331. calls him Clarissimum and pientissimum
Regem. Bale.
A most renouned and godly King. Bale Cent. 2. cap. 26. says he was Egregiae
indobis and formae adolescens: A young man of a notable towardnes and beauty,
born unto learning and virtue He called for the best learned men to be his
Counselors and instructers: Eight hours every day he spent in reading,
writing, and disputing. He governed all things with an excceeding good wit, and
with singular prouidencie. He was esteemed an Architecter, and most perfect
Geometrian, a Gramarian, a Philosopher, a Rhethorician. an Historian, Musician,
and no vulgar Poet. Three Colleges he founded at Oxford, one for Gramarians,
an other for Philosophers, the third for Divines. Of studyes and the commonwealth he best deserved. Cooper An. 872. Of fair stature, and comely personage,
and no less renowned in martial policy than civil government. Stow Chron.
page 105. Victorious Prince, studious provident for widows, Orphans and poor
people, endued with wisdom, justice, fortitude, and temperance, a most
discreet sercher of truth a most vigilant and devout Prince in the service of
God, and divided the day and the night into three equal portions whereof the one
he spent in study prayer and such things as belonged to his mind and soul,
the other in eating sleeping and other exercise of the body, the third in the
affairs of the common Wealth. Fox.
Fox lib. 3. page 141. says Amongst all the Saxon Kings hitherto is found none
to be preferred or all most to be compared with this Alfred, for the great and
singular qualities in this King worthy of high renown, whither we behold his
valiant acts and manifould trauells for his Contrie, or his godly and excellent
virtues joined with a public and tender care of the weal public or whither
we respect his notable knowledge of good letters with a fervent desire to set
forth the same throughout all his Realm. And p. 143. 145. gives him high
praises for continence, valor, and learning, concluding thus. This valiant
virtuous and learned Prince Christianly governed his realm, And much more with
great admiration of this King, which you may read in him, and in Malmsb. lib.
2. cap. 4. Hunting. lib. 5. Ethelwerd lib. 4. Ingulfe, Florent. page 309.
VVestmon. Chron. Houed. p. 417. and others. His learning.


7. Only I will out of them note some of his vertuos. Fortitude.
Of his great learning is spoken before. For his valor Bale Cent. 3. cap. 43.
says, he fougt 57. times with the Danes. Cambd. in Brit. page 213. Nobili
praelio contudit, and page 444. Wisdom.
Danos contudit ad libitum: He repressed the Danes at his pleasur. And as
Malmsb. and others testify made them become Christians, or forswere the
Realm. Malmsb. lib. 2. cap. 4. VVestmon. An. 892.
For his government says Caius de Antiq. Cantab. page 328. Christianissimas
leges scripsit and promulgauit. He writ and promulgated most Christian laws,
and caused such peace as he made braslets of gould be hung up in the high way
which none durst touch. Chastity.
For his chastity it was such, that as Cooper An. 872. after many Catholic
writters testifies, he desired of God sickness that he might not offend against
chastity. As for his piety and devotion it was such as Florent. Westmon. An.
871. and others write Missam audire quotidie: Devotion
The religion of K. Alfred.
That he daily heard mass, and said his hours and Matins, and in the night
season vnknovvn to all his servants he freque^ted Churches to Which alone
suffices to show l. cit. and Stow p. 99. Caius l. cit. p. 325. confess) he
was crowned and anoinred of Pope Leo, and as Bale says termed his adoptiue
child. and as is before said instructed In reparandis, ornandis etc. In
repairing beutifying and enriching Monasteries he labored earnestly, amongst
which he builded two of great renoun. But Fox reckons three, one at
Shasburie, one at Ethling, S. Cutbert encourages the K. to recover England.
the third at Winchester. The cause of the building his Monastery at Ethling,
was because he being almost quite va^quisht of the Danes, and lying there hid
for a time, S. Cutbert appeared to him badd him be of good courage assuring him
both of the present vision and future victory over the Danes by a present
miracle. Profes of the truth of S. Cutberts vision to K. Alfred.
This vision was (as is said) confirmed then by a present miracle, and by the
perfect conquest of the Danes after following, believed of this notable prudent
King, and testified (as Fox p. 142. confesses) by Malmsb. Polichron. Houed.
Iornalasensis and others, and yet is termed of him without any reason or
testimony, a dreaming fable, only (as we may imagine) because it is said to
come from S. Cutbert For soon after p. 149. he crediteth a Vision of Egwin a
Herlot, albeit it have nothing so good testimony, because therein is no Christ's
Vicar, and sent alms to Rome Westmon. An. 889. and also to India, to perform
(says Fox p. 142.) His vovv to S. Thomas which he made during the time of his
distress against the Danes. In this Kings time Burdred King of Merceland
forsaking his Kingdom went to Rome, A King goes to Rome.
and Anno. 889. his Queen Ethelswitha followed him. Hollemen in time of K.
Alfred.
In this kings time also lived S. Grimbald, whom king Alfred called out of
France to teach in Oxford, and S. Neotus, Scientia (says Bale Cent. 2. cap. 1.
In knowledge and manners excelling, in counsel good, in speech wise, by whose
counsel Alfred founded a school at Oxford.

King Edward the elder. XIX.
8. IN the year 901. succeeded King Edward the Elder son to king Alfred, The
worthiness of K. Edward son:
and reigned (says Malmsb. lib. 2. cap. 3) 23. years, others say 24. He
governed the land (says Fox lib. 3. page 146. right valiantly, in Princely
government, and such like martial prowes he was nothing inferior to his Father,
but rather, exceeded him, subdued Wales and Scotland, and recovered all out of
the Danes hands. The same says Cooper An. 901. Stow p. 107. A great victory.
Malmsb. l. cit. Florent and Westmon. An. 924, Houed. p. 122. And Ingulph. and
Hunting. lib. 5. say that in one battle he slew two kings, and 10. Earls of
the Danes. And Ethelwerd lib. 4. cap. 4. writes that in all he slew 4. kings
of them. His Romans Religion.
The Roman religion of this valiant and victorious Prince is evident. First
because as king Edgar his grandchild in an oration (which Fox has lib. 3. page
170.) testifies he accounted S. Dustan his Father, helper and fellow worker in
all things, chose him as Bishop and Shepherd of his soul, and keeper of his
manners, obeyed him in all things, and preferred his counsel before all
treasure. Secondly because he obeyed the commandment of the Pope, who
threatened him excommunication if he procured diverse Bishoprics to be erected,
ex. Malmsb. l. cit. Cambden in Brit. p. 198. Thirdly because two of his
daughters Edfled and Edburga became l. cit. Houed. p. 421. Two daughters of
King Edward Nonnes and the third vowed virginity.
And as Bale says Cent. 13. c. 77. Gregory a son of his, became an hermit
in Swiseland. Fourthly because he took away his brothers or his brothers
sons wife from him, because she had been a Nonne, Hunt. lib. 5. Westmon. An.
801. In his time lived Saints.
and S. Fristan Bishop of Winchester a man (says Godwin in his life) highly
esteemed of, for his learning, but much more for his great virtue and holiness.

King Athelstan. XX.
The Worthiness of K. Ethelstan.
9. IN the year 924. succeeded king Athelstan, son to king Edward, and held
the Crown. 16. years, ex Malm. lib. 2. cap. 6. He was (says Fox p. 147.
Cooper. An. 925. and Stow p. 107.) a Prince of worthy memory, valiant, and
wise in all his acts, and brought this La^d to one Monarchy: For he expelled
the Danes, subdued the Scotts quieted the VVelchmen. The like says Bale Cent.
2. cap. 22. and also Catholic writers, as you may see in Malmsb. l. cit. Hunt.
lib. 5. Houed. page 422. His religion.
His Roman religion is most evident. For going to the Battle of Brumford
against many kings, and innumerable enemies, Ingulpg. Florent. An. 938. Hunt.
lib. 5. page 422.
he visited (says Ingulph) S. John of Beuerley by the way, with great
devotion, and God so blessed his devotion as in the battle he slew (says
Malmsb) the king of Scotts, and five kings more, A vvonderfull victory.
12. Earls, innumerable multitude of his enemies, and got one of the greatest
victories that ever English won. And in his return gave great gifts and
privileges to S. John of Beutrley, and made it a sanctuary for all Debtors and
Malifactors, Ex Ingulph, and Cambd. in Brit. page 636. Besides he was, says
Ingulph and Malmsb, greatly delited with a piece of the holy Cross, How K.
Ethelstad esteemed relics.
and Crown of thorns which Hugh king of France sent unto him: Made S. Aldhelm
his Patron, Cambd. p. 210. Builded (says Fox page 149) the two Monasteries of
Midleton and Mithelney for his brothers soul. Why Kings builded monasteries.
VVherby (says Fox) it may appear that the espetiall cause of building
Monasteries in those days was for the releasing sins both of them departed
and of them alive, which cause, says he, how it stands with Christ's
(Luthers) Gospel, let the Christian Reader try with him self. Thus Fox, which
confession of his may suffice to show how all that kings time all the Realm
was Roman Catholic. All Christendom of the same faith with K. Ethelston.
And how all Christendom abroad agreed with him in religion appears by the
marriage of his sisters to the Emperor, king of France, and other Christian
Princes. In this kings time befell a miracle in Duke Elfred whom the king sent
to Rome to purge him self of treason by his oath before S. Peter's sepulcher.
Miracle by S Peter.
But (says the K. in his charter, which Fox page 148. Malmsb and others have,)
having taken his oath, he fell before the Altar, and was carried by the hands of
his servants to the English schole, and the next night after he ended his life.
Then also lived Saint Birnstan Bishop of Winchester Qui etc. says Flore^t.
An. 932. Malm. Polichron: Saints*
Houed. Iornelacensis and others more as Fox confesses p. 148. who daily song
mass for the quiet rest of the souls departed.

King Ewmund XXI.
10. THe 21. Christian King was Edmund son to the forsaid Edward, who began
(says Malmesb.) An. 940. Worthiness of K Edmund.
and reigned six years and a half. He was (says Cooper An. 940. and Stow p.
108.) a man by nature di^posed to noblenes and justice. Huntin. lib. 5. calls
him inuictum, unconquered, and says omnia illi faeliciter successisse: all
things fell out happily to him: And Fox lib. 3. page 130. writes that he
achiued noble victories against his enemies, and set his study in maintaining
and redressing the state of the Church, which stood all then in building of
Monasteries and Churches, His Religion.
and furnishing them with new possessions. and restoring the old* Infra. In
the time of this king Edward or shortly after, Strait life used for merit sake
hardness, restraint of life with superstition were had in veneration, and men
for merit sake with God gave themselves to lead a straight life. which alone
would suffice to show of what religion this King was. Besides, that (as Stow
says p. 108. Florent. An. 942. Westmon. An. 940. Houed p. 423.) he was
altogether cou^selled and lead by S. Dunstan, at whose request he reedifyed
Glossenburie, and made S. Dunst^n Abbot thereof with a Chapter extant in Malmsb.
lib. 2. cap. 7. He grants many priuil^dges to Glossenburie for hope of
aeternall reward and forgiveness of his sins, In thi^ Kings time lived his
wife S. Elfegia who (says Ethelwerd lib. 4. cap. 6.) was canonized after her
death, Saints.
and miracles wrought at her tomb.

King Edred. XII.
11. The 22. Christian King was Edred, third son of King Edward. He entered
An. 946. and held the crown nine years and a half, as Malmsb. has lib. 2.
cap. 7. The worthiness of K. Edred and his virtue.
His magnanimity (says he) did not degenerat from his Father and brethren. He
subdued the Northumbers and Scotts. He humbled himself to the feet of holy
men devoted his life to God and S. Dunstan by whose counsel he made his court
a school of virtue. Thus Malm. Cooper An. 946. Stow Chron. page 108. says he
was a great maintainer of honesty and most abhorred naughty and unruly
persons, in feats of arms much commended, whereby he kept in obeissance the
Northumbers and Scotts and exiled the Danes. His religion.
As for his Roman religion there can be no doubt. For as Fox writes page 152.
He was much ruled by the Counsel of S. Dunstan, in so much as in histories he
is reported to have subjected himself to much penance inflicted on him by S.
Dunstan: Such zealous devotion (says he) was then in Princes. And as Florent.
An. 955. Malmsb. l. cit. Houed. page 423. Westmon. An. 955. write, when he fell
sick Accersiuit etc. he sent for blessed Dunstan his confessor. Ingulph says
Above all the Kings his Predecessors he had the purest conscience, and a
spetiall devotion to S. Paul. And p. 876. he cites his Chapter in the which he
erected a new the Abbey of Crowland as he says In the regard of the redemption
of my soul and is sorry that by the destruction of that monastery, prayers for
the souls of the kings his prodecessors have been intermitted. To which
Chapter subscribe two Arcbishops, 4. Bishops, many Abbots, and Earls. And Stow
page 198. says the King sealed this Charter with seals of gould.

King Edwin. XXIII.
12. IN the year 955. (says Malmsb. l. 2. c. 7.) succeeded Edwin, son to
king Edmund, and reigned 4. years. He was so bewtifull as Ethelwerd lib. 4. c.
8. says he was commonly called Pancalus, but as Malmsb. he abused his bewty to
lewdnes, for which and for banishing of S. Dunstan (writes Cooper An. 955.) he
was odible to his subjects. Fox page 152. adds that he was deposed of the
Northumbers and mercians, and Edgar chosen in his place, yet as it seems he
amended. For Hunting. l. 5. writteth that he ruled his kingdeme not without
commendation, and Osbern in vit. Dunstani writes, that by the prayers of S.
Dunstan he was at his death delivered from the Devils. His Roman religion
appears by the possession which, as Malmsb. says, Religion of K. Edvvin.
he gave S. Aldelm, whose body, says he, was then found, and in scrinio
locatum, placed in a shrine. In the Register of the Abbey of Bury she is said,
to have given to that Monastery the town of Becklis, and diverse other things.

King Edgar. XXIIII.
13. THe 24. K. was Edgar, second son to king Edmund, who began his reign,
(says Malmsb. lib. 2. cap. 8.) Anno 959. and reigned 16. years. The praises
of K. Edgar.
The praises which both Catholics and Protestants give to this king are
exceeding. Malmsb. calls him honor and delitiae Ang: The honor and delight of
English men, and says that inter Anglos etc. amongst English men the report
is, that no King nether of his or any former age in England, is to be compared
with Edgar. Ingulph an ancient and grave author p. 889. says he was flos and
decus etc. The flower and ornament of all his Ancestors, and the mirror of the
VVestern climat of the world, the beauty glory and rose of Kings. Florent An.
975. and Houed. p. 426. add, that he was as worthy to be remembered of
Englishmen, as Romulus of Romans, Syrus of Persians, Alexander of Macedonians,
Arsaces of Parthians, Charles the great of the French. Huntington lib. 5. p.
356. says Edgar the peaceable, a King magnificent, a second Solomon, in his
days the Land was much bettered, he was most devout to God, he built many
Monasteries. And Malmsb. says that in the year 1052. (which was about a
hundred years after his death) his body was found Nullius labis conscium void
of co^ruption, and that it wrought miracles. The like praises do the
Protestants afford him. Cooper An. 959. A Prince of worthy memory, for his
manifould virtues gratly renouned, so excellent in justice and sharp correction
of vices as well in his Magistrates as other subjects, that never before his day
was used less felony and extortion. Of mind valiant and hardy, and very
expert in martial policy. The like says Stow Chron. page 109. Fox Acts. lib.
3. page 154. says he was much given to all virtuous, and princely acts, worthy
of much commendation and famous memory, excellent in justice, maintained the
godly, loved the modest, Fox calls this King a Poehnix.
was devout to God, and beloved of his subjects whom he governed in much peace
and quietness, so God did bl^sse him with abundance of peace. No year passed
in the time of his Reign in which he did not some singular and necessary
commodity for the commonwealth. A great mantainer of religion and learning. He
had in redines 2600. ships (The same say Florent. and Westmon. Anno 975. Houed.
page 426.) of war, and made 8. The religion of K. Edgar.
Kings to row him in a boat, he setting at the stern and guiding it. The
Roman religion of this renowned K. is manifest. For Fox l. cit, Ingulph page
885.
says He was a great Patron of Monkish religion, builded, (as some say) as
many Monasteries as there be sondays in the year, or as Edner reports 48.
page 156. Edgar was seduced by Dunstan, who was drowned in all superstition and
did seven years penance at Dunstans apointment. And page 161. and 169.
recites an oration in King Edgar which also is in Stow page 111. wherein the
King speaks thus to the Clergy. It belongs to me to rule the lay people, It
belongs to me to provide necessary things to the Ministers of the Church to
the flock of Monks. Behold how he distinguishes between governing lay
people, and providing for clergy. Item he complains there that Priests
crowns are not broad nor lay people, and providing for clergy. Item he
complains there That Priests crowns are not broad nor their rownding
convenient, and that they came not devoutly to Mass, Co^sta^tins svvord in the
Kings hand S. Peter's in the Bishops hands.
and says to the Bishops, I have Constantins sword, and ye have Peter's sword
in your hands, let us join right hands, let us cuple svvord to svvord that the
Leapers may be cast out of the Temple. Touching which oration, Fox notes the
religious zeal and devotion of Kings, and the blind (says he) ignorance and
superstition of that time in both estates Ecclesiastical and civil in
esteeming Christ's religion chiefly to consist in giving to Churches and
maintaining of Monkery, wherein it appears (says he) how ignorant that time
was of the true doctrine of Christ's faith. K. Edgars time knevv not the
Protestants Doctrine.
And puts this note in the margent. The doctrine of justification unknown.
Bale Cent. 2. cap. 34. says Edgarus etc. Edgar earnestly serving the desires
of Monks, And by the enchantments of Dunstan, Ethelwald, and Oswald, being
made an Image of the Beast, did speak only as they gave him breath, and all
things then were ruled at their beck. Ingul. page 883. sets down his
Charter of Peterborowh, wherein he calls S. Peter Superum Ianitorem. The
porter of heaven, and says he apointeth there a market for diverse good
purposes both of temporal and spiritual profits, that Gods ministers may be
helped more near at hand, and that the Christian people meeting there amidst
worldly affairs may demand Gods help, Note.
whiles by demanding S. Peter's protection and by hearing the mystery of Mass
according to the faith of each one the faults of diverse sins may therein be
redeemed. And again: Hanc regiferam libertatem etc, we have procured this royal
liberty according to the primitive institution thereof, to be strenghned from
the Sea of the Apostolic Roman Church, by the author him self of this
writing most reverend Ethelwald. And to this Charter subscribe two Archbishops,
three Bishops, many Abbots, Dukes, and nobles. And Malmsb. l. cit. cites an
other Charter of that king granted to Glassenburie, which he requested to be
confirmed by Pope John 12. which Pope confirmed it saying that he took the
Monastery in protectione Romanae Ecclesiae and beatorum Apostolorum Petri and
Pauli: In protection of the Roman Church and the blessed Apostles Saint Peter
and Paul. In this kings time lived Saint Merwin says Florent. Saints in this
King his time.
An. 967. whom he made Abbess of Rumsey, and confirmed that Monastery (says
Stow page 113.) in the presence of all the Nobility. Also Saint Editha his own
daughter, who from her infancy was brought up in a Monastery, and would not
refuse that life to enjoy the crown after her brother King Edwards death. Also
S. Elsted a nonne whose life and miracles you may read in Capgraue.

S. Edward Martyr XXV.
14. I In the year 975. began S. Edward the Martyr says Malmsb. lib. 2. cap.
9^. son to King Edgar, The virtues of K. Edward martyr.
and reigned three years, who did (says he) follow the steps of his Eathers
religion and yield both ear and mind to good Council. Ingu^ph page 889.
says he was a simple and most holy young man, following much his Father in
manners. Cooper An. 975, and S^ow page, 113. say he was in all kind of honest
virtues comparable to his Father Edgar, began his souerainty with much modesty
and mildnes, and worthily favored of all. Fox Acts. page 159 Authors describe
him to be a virtuous and noble Prince, much pitiful and bountiful to the
poor. And Caius de Antiq. Cantab: Miracles.
page 294. says he is worthily termed a martyr. Cooper An 977. says after
his death God showed for him many miracles, which also testify Malmsb. l. cit.
Westmon. Anno. 979. and others. whereby the Reader make perceive what account he
may make of Fox, who l. cit. calls them tales. His religion.
His Roman religion is manifest partly by what has been said of his Father,
partly because Fox says l. cit. He Anno 975. And because as Fox and the same
Authors testity he stood Saints.
In this Kings time lived three great Saints S. Dunstan S. Ethelwald and S.
Oswald, of whom we will speak in the time of the next King when they died.

King Egelred. XXVI.
15. IN the year 979. says Malmsb. lib. 2. cap. 10. succeeded King Egelred,
son to King Edgar, and reigned 37. years. Who (as say Florent An. 978.
Qualities of K. Egelred.
Houed. p. 427. and Cooper An. 978. was Moribus elegans pulcher vultu and
decorus aspectu. excellently manered of fayer fa^e and gracious countenance.
His Roman religion is manifest, by what has been said of hi^ Father. His
religion.
Secondly because his mother built two page 177. 221. 228. and as Malmsb. l.
cit. says Corpus silicio, etc. She wrapped her-bodie in hair cloth. In the
night laid on the grownd without pillow she took her sleep etc.

and libertatis priuilegium, etc. And the priuiledg of the liberty confirming,
signed it Cambd. in Brit. page 327. Fifthly because he received the Legate of
Pope John 15. and by him made peace with the Duke of Norma^die, Miracles.
Malmsb. l. cit. In this time was S. Edward, King and martyrs body found
incorrupt An. 979. Houed. page 407. Then also lived S. Dunstan of whom some
thing has been said in the Archbishops, Saints.
and S. Ethelwald Bishop of Winchester, who (says Godwin in his life) was a
great Patron of Monks and no less enemy to married Priests. And S. Oswald
Archb. of York whom Godwin confesses to have been very learned and for his
integrity and conversation much reverenced. The greatest fault (says he) I
find in him was, in that he was very earnest in setting forth that doctrine of
Devils that debarreth men (who have promised to God the contrary) from
marrying. In this time also was martyred S. Elpheg Archb. of Canterbury, And
S. Edmund King and martyr miraculously flew Swain King of Denwark (as in the
Ecclesiastical histories it is reported of Saint Mercury Martyr that he slew
Julian the Apostata) This miracle Fox him self dare not discredit, but lib. 3.
page 161. writes thus of Swain. Miracle.
He entered the Territory of Saint Edmund, wasted and spoiled the contrie,
despised the holy Martyr menacing the place of his sepulcher. Wherefore the
men of the Country fell to prayer and fasting, so that shorlie after Swain died
sodenlie crying and yelling. Some say (says he) that he was stricken with the
sword of S. Edmund. In fear whereof Canutus his son granted them the fredome
of all their liberties and great freedoms, quitted them of all tax and tribut.
And after that time it was used that Kings of England when they were crowned
sent their Crowns for an offering to S. Edmunds shrine, and redeemed the same
again with condign price. And these times were so evidently Papistical, as
Fox in his Protestation before his Acts says thus: About the year of our Lord
980. sprung forth here in England, (as did in other places more,) a Romish kind
of Monkery much drowned in supestition. Of this swarm was Egbert, Agelbert,
Egvvin, Boniface, Wilfrid, Agathon, James, Roman, Cedda, Dunstan, Osvvald,
Athelm, Lanfrancke, Anselm and such other. But well it is that this James was
(as S. Beda says lib. 2. c. 20.) a good and godly man, and Deacon to S.
Paulin, who was S. Austines companion, by whom we may see the religion of S.
Austin and his fellows. Agilbert, Agatho, Wilfrid, Roman, Cedda, were holy men
much commended by Beda lib. 3. cap, 25. and lived in S. Austins time, or very
sone after, long before this time. The others Egbert, Boniface, Danstan,
Oswald, Anselm, were the famousest Saints which England has.

King Edmund Ironside XXVII.
16. THe 27. Christian King was Edmund Ironside, son unto King Egelred, who
succeeded An. 1016. and reigned one year. The valor of K. Edmund Ironside.
He was (says Malmsb. lib. 2. cap. 10. a young man of notable towardlines of
great strength both of mind and body, and therefore surnamed Ironside of the
English men. The like say Hunting lib. 6. Westmon. Anno 1016. Cooper Anno 1016.
and Fox Acts Page 162. wri^e that he was of lusty and valiant courage in
martial affairs both hardy and wise, and could endure all pain. His religion.
His Roman religion is manifest by that as the Register of Bury says he
reedifyed Glassenburie destroyed (as it seems) by the Danes, and by what has
been said of his Father.

King Canut. XXVIII.
17. THe 28. king was king Canut, a Dane who by force of arms and dint of
sword got the kingdom, beginning his reign Anno. 1017. and reigned 20.
years, Composed (says Malmsb. lib. 2. c. 11.) his life magna ciuilitate and
fortitudine. Virtues of K. Canut.
Of whom Hunting: lib. 6. Polidor. L. and others recount this story, Fox p.
164.
That as he sat by the sea side his flatterers magnifying him, called him Lord
of the land and sea, whose flattery to discover he commanded the waves not to
come near him, but they rising according to their course bewet the king,
whereat he smiling said to his coutriers, lo he whom ye call Lord of Sea and
land cannot command a small wave. Cooper An. 1018. says he was a sage gentle
and moderat Prince. And An. 1027. for his virtuous life worthy to live
perpetually. He was of great magnificence, and used such justice and
temperance that in his days was no Prince of such renown, toward God humble
and lowly. Bale Cent. 2. cap. 45. says, he was Iuuenis etc. a young* man of
excellent wit and high mind and notable in Christian modesty. That great
king who was withal king of Denmark and Norway was evidently a Roman His
religion.
page 163. Bale l. cit. Stow page 120. Florent. Houed. An. 131.
Hunting. l. cit. and others write, and taking his crown from his head set it
upon the head of the crucifix. Quo etc. (says Bale) By which he signified that
the Kings of those times were no Kings, but only the likeness Secondly Fox page
163. writes that following much the superstition of Agelnoth Archb. of
Canterbury he went on Pilgrimage to Rome, and there founded an hospital for
Pilgrims, gave to the Pope precious gifts, and burdened the Land with a tribut
called, Romescot. In his letters to the Nobles and Bishops of England in
Malmsb. and Ingulph him self says that he went oratum etc. to pray for the
redemption of my sins, and says that he had long vowed it, and thancketh
God that he had there honored S. Peter and Saint Paul, and all the holy places
of Rome. Et ideo hoc maxim, etc. And therefore I have done this principally
because I have learned of wise men, that Saint Peter the Apostle has received
great power of our Lord of binding and loosing, and that he is the Porter of
heaven, and therefore I thought it very profitable to require especially his
protection with God. says, he grants privileges to that Monastery by the
counsel of the Archbishop Agelnoth and also of all the Priests of God, and with
the consent of all my Peers for the love of the Kingdom of heaven, and pardon
of my offenses, and the relaxations of the transgressions of my brother King
Edmund. Whereby we see that both him self and his Bishops and nobles were
Roman Catholics. Fourthly he built (says Fox l. cit. Cambd. page 415.) Saint
Bennets in Norfolk, and turned Saint Edmunds Bury into an Abbey of Monks, And
Bale libro cit. adds, It is found that next after God he endeavored to appease
Saint Edmund by prayers and offerings.

King Herold. XXIX.
18. IN the year 1036. succeeded King Herold son to King Canut by Elfgina an
English woman, as witnesses Ingulph, and reigned 4. years and 4. months, ex
Malmsburie lib. 2. cap. 12. His Roman religion is manifest both by his Father,
Romans region of K. Herold.
and by that which Ingulph writes of him page 895. He gave to the Monastery
of Crowland a Cloak of silk set with goulden buttons which he wore at his
coronation, and he had done to us many more good things if over hasty death had
not taken him away.

King Hardy Canut. XXX.
19. THe 30. King was king Hardi-Canut, son to king Canut and Emma, who had
been wife to king Egelreld. Began his reign An. 1040. and ruled two years. He
showed (faith Malm. l. 2. c. 12.) exceeding great pity of mind toward his
brother S. Edmund the Confessor. Romans religion of K. Hardi Canute.
His Roman religion appears both by his Father, and because as testifyeth
Registrum Burine^se Dedit S. Edmundo libertatem.

King S. Edward Confessor. XXXI.
Virtues of K. Edward Co^fessor.
20. IN the year 1042. Edward Confessor and son to the forsaid king Egelred
began his reign, and reigned 24. years. He was (says Malmsb. lib. 2. cap.
13.) devout unto God and therefore directed by him, whilst he reigned, all thing
at home and abroad were quiet and calm. He slew by his Captains Machetat king
of Scotts, and put another in his place, and brought wales into the form of a
Province under England. Illud celeberime fertur etc. That is most famously
reported that he never touched any woman's chastity. And Florent. An. 1066.
calls him Decus Anglorum, The honor of Englishmen. But who will see more of
his virtues may read his life written by a most ancient and grave Author in
Surio Tom. 1. This only I will not omit, that to him did God first give the
virtue of curing the kings evil and the crampe, from whom all our Princes
since have received it. Fox lib. 3. page 164. and Cooper An. 1043. say that he
was a man of gentle and soft spirit, The like Cambd. in Brit. p. 330. Bal.
Cent. 2. cap. 12. Stow. page 121.
never dealt with his wife fleshly, guided the Kingdom with much wisdom and
justice, from whom issued as out of a fountain, much godliness pity and
liberality toward the poor, gentleness and justice toward all men, and in
all honest life he gave a a virtuous example to his people. Bal. supra.
And page 16. calls him virtuous and blessed King. Cooper page 1065. adds
That he purged the old laws and piked out of them certain which were most
profitable for the Commons. To these high praises Stow Chron. 122. adioyneth
that God greatly glorified him in his life by wonderful signs, The religion
of K. Edward Confess.
and cured the kings evil. Now let us see what the religion of this great and
holy king was. First he vowed An. 1049. Ealred in vita Edwardi. in ep. ad
Edwardum. Ealred in vita: Thirdly, sent two Abbots to a Concell held at Rhemes
by Pope Leo, Florent. and Houed. Anno. 1050. for the love (says Camb. in Brit.
page 376. of the chief Apostle, An. 1066. Ealred in vit. Sixthly, Pope Nicol.
writing to him, thanketh God that King Edward had love to S. Peter and with us
he consented in all the Apostolical Decrees, and therein absolved him from his
vow, and Westminster from all Episcopal jurisdiction, and says that to him
and his successors we commit the aduousion, and tuition of all the Churches of
England that in any place you may determine by the Counsel of the Bishops and
Abbots what things be just and right. Whereupon Bale l. cit. says: That sub
Nicolao 2. facti sunt Anglorum Reges etc. under Pope Nicolas 2. the Kings of
England were made the Popes Vicars. the Popes supremacy, In which (as
Protestants say) the essence of a Papist consists, in these plain words, To
the chief Father of the universal Church Nicolas, Edward by the grace of God
K. of England due obedience. Ealred in vit. And in his laws in Fox page 166.
appointed that a King shall swear upon the Evangelists and blessed relics of
Saints that he will maintain the holy Church with all integrity. And so
manifest it is, that this K. and our Country in his time were Roman Catholics,
as Sir Edward Cook the Kings Attorney in F. Garnets Arainment (which since is
printed) openly called, the time of Edward Confessor. Henry 1. Edward 1.
Richard 2. Henry 4, and ^. the very midnight of Popery, That times of
England most flourishing which Protest: confess to have been Papistical.
which were in truth the most flourishing times, that ever England saw. For what
King have we in virtue comparable to King Edward Confessor? in wisdom, to King
Henry the first? in valor and victories to King Edward the first, the
Conqueror of Scotland? and Henry 4. of England, and Henry the fifth Conqueror
of France?

King Herold. XXXII.
21. THe 32. and last King of the Saxons was King Herold who took the crown
An. 1066. and held it not one year. Valor of K. Herold.
He was says Cooper An. 1066. valiant and hardy. Florent. An. 1066. says he
was left successor by Saint Edward and chosen of all the nobles of England and
crowned of Aldred Archb. of york and began to put down unjust laws and to set
up just to become a Patron of Monasteries, to honor and reverence Bishops
Abbots Monks and Clerks, to show him self pious humble and affable, to hate
malefactors and to labor by sea and Land for defense of his Country he
overthrew the king of Norway in a great battle, but was sone after himself
slain and England conquered in a ruefull battle in Sussex by William Duke of
Normandy and after king of England. His Romans Religion.
His Roman religion is manifest both by what has been said of king Edward, and
because as Cambd. has in Brit page 384. Waltham Monastery he founded in the
honor of the holy Cross where he made his vows for victory against the
Normans. Westmon An. 1066. says, orauit ante crucem He prayed before the
Cross. Thus you see the Roman Catholic religion deduced not only fom all our
Christian kings for the 200. years unto the Monarchy but also from the
monarchy all the Saxons time unto the conquest thereof by the Normans for the
space of 266. years: in which time two of the said Kings have been Saints to
wit Saint Edward martyr and Saint Edward Confessor. Three have gone on
Pilgrimage to Rome, namely king Ethelwolph king Alfred the great and king
Canut: To whom we may ad king Burdred and king Edward Confessor who would have
gone. Two kings daughters Saints namely S. Edburga daughter to king Edward and
S. Editha daughter to king Edgar. And if we will know why God permitted our
Contry to be subdued of strangers. It was says Malmsb. lib. 3. in Guilielmo.
1. because the studies of learning and religion had decayed, Not a few years
before the Normans coming the Clergy could scarce stamer out the words of the
Sacraments, he which knew his gra^mer was a wonder and a miracle to the rest,
Monks were fine in apparel and had every kind of meat indifferent making a
mockery of their rule, The nobles giuin to glutonie and Venerie did not go to
Church in the morning after the manner of Christians but in their chambers
dalying with their wives heard only the solemnization of their wives heard
only the solemnization of Mattins and Mass by a Priest, making much have
therein. Every one commonly was given to tippling continewing in this exercise
nights as well as days, whereon vices ensued companions of dronkenes. But I
would not have these sayings to be understood of all. I knew many of the
clergy at that time walked the path of sanctity in true simplicity. I knew
many Laymen of all sorts and conditions within this same Contrie pleased God.
Hunting. also lib. 6. writes that before the Conquest, a man of God told them
that for their sins in murder and treason, and because they were given to
drunkenes and carelesnes of the service of God, there should come from France a
Lord that should depresse them for ever, and not only they but the Scotts also
should rule over them to their deserved confusion. S. Edmund also prophesied of
this conquest of England which though Fox page 165. call but a dream yet the
event following shows it was too true a vision.

CHAP. XXV. That the Kings of England from the Conquest to King Edward 3. time,
were Roman Catholics proved in particular.
1. THe 33. King of England was William the Conqueror who entered this Land An.
1066. and reigned 21. years. He got the crown of this Realm partly by dint of
sword and conquest, partly by the grant of King Edward Confessor, whose cousin
German removed he was. For as him self says in his Charter, in Cambd. in
Brit. page 111. What right K. Will. had to the Crown of England.
He got the Kingdom by the help of the grant of God and of his cousin glorious
King Edward, who appointed him his adopted heir to the Kingdom of England. And
Guitmundus in oratione ad Regem, says: He got England by the gift of God and
by the freindship of Edward his Kinsman. And Ingulph who then also lived,
says. An. 1065. Edward chose William and sent Robert Archb. of Canterb. who
should declare it unto him. And page 911. In the Kindred and consanguinitie of
Edward our famous King, William framed his conscience to invade England. Paris
page 1057. It is said that blessed S. Edward gave the Kingdom to William as a
Legacy on his death bed. The like has Walsing. ypodigm page 28. Houed. page
609. and others. Finally Fox Acts page 165. King Edward thought to make Edgar
Adeling his heir, but fearing partly the mutabilitie of English men partly the
malice and pride of Herold and others, perceauing thereby that be should not so
well bring his purpose to pass directed solemn Ambassadors to the Duke of
Normandy assigning and admitting him to be his lawful heir next to succeed
him after to the Crown. And King William trusting to the right of this title
offered Herold (as Fox page 166. 167. and others write) to try their two
titles before the Pope, but Herold refusing, William nevertheless sent and got
his title approved by the Popes judgment. This King says Hunting. lib. 6. page
370. was wise, Valor and virtues of K. William Conq.
but crafty, rich but covetous, vainglorious but loving his reputation, loving
to the servants of God, hard to this withstanders, the only author of peace
that a little girl laden with gould might pass tbrough England untouched.
The like has Malmsb. lib. 3. and Cooper An. 1067; Bale Cent. 2. cap. 56.
adds that he was of great courage and excellent in the knowledge of warlick
affairs. His Romans religion.
His Roman religion is manifest. First because as Westmon. An. 1085. and others
Paris. An. 185.
Every day he was present at Mass heard mattins Lauds Euensong with the
Canonical hours, K. Will. Conq. heard every day Mass mattins and Houre^.
nether would he suffer even upon most urgent and difficult affairs, him self
to be hindered. In the mean season he ceased not to kneel and to pray
devoutly. Secondly because as soon as he had gotten the victory he sent
Herolds Standerd to the Pope. Stow in Vt orarent: that they might pray says
Westmon. An. 1067. Paris 1066. Pro ibi mortuis for the dead there. And an other
at Cane in Normandy. Fourthly he made his K. Will. daughter a Nonne.
Paris An. 1075. Stow. page 177. S. Osmund was so inward with this King as Bale
says Cent. cap. 14. That he could not be absent scarce any time from King
Williams presence. And yet as he both there says, and Fox Acts page 184.
Godwin in the Bishop of Salsburie, this Osmund in the year 1076. was author of
the office or manner of saying Mass mattins and administering Sacraments after
the use of Sarum which (say they) was afterward in a manner received through
all England Wales and Ireland. Sixtlie Pope Alexander writing to him ep. 10.
says Among the Princes and rulers of the world we understand the notable form
of your religion, and writes to him to persist in the study of most Christian
devotion. And Pope Greg. 7. whom Protest. call Hilddebrand, Love between P.
Hildebrand and K. VVilliliam.
and hate most of all the Popes lib. 1. ep. 31. calls King William, the most
loving and principal son of the Roman Church. And ep. 69. says: That King
William reioised in his promotion, and showed all the affection of a good son
from his heart. And l. 6. ep. 30. We loved always King William peculierlie
amongst the rest of that dignity. And lib 7. ep. 26. says, that his Queen
Mathildis offered him what soever we would have of theirs he might have it
without delay. And lib. 7. ep. 5. says, That the King of England although that
in some things he behaved himself not so religiously, notwithstanding because
he would not consent to enter into league against the Sea Apostolic with
some, that were enemies to the Cross of Christ, being requested thereto but
compelled by oath the Priests to leave wives, the lay men to pay the tenths
which they detayned, is praysworthie sufficiently and more to be honored than
other Kings. This thus Pope that then lived. Seuenthlie King William although
he deposed almost all the old English nobility, yet he took not upon him to
depose any one Bishop or Abbot but procured Pope Alexander to send down two
Legates to do it. Eightlie, K. Will. Conq. took not upon him to depose Bishops
or dispose of Bishoprics.
King William preferred Lanfrank to the Archbishopric of Canterbury as all
know, whom the protestants confess to have been a notorious Papist. Ninthlie,
he page, 171. Baron An. 1084. and an other author then present write) that he
had increased 9. Abbeies of Monks, What account K. Will. made of Monasteries.
and one of Nonne^, and that in his days 17. monasteries of Monks and six of
Nonnes were builded: With such compass, says he, Monasteries fence of
Countries.
Normandy is fenced and all things which any noble men in Lands or Rents have
given to God or Saints for their spiritual health, I have courteously granted
and confirmed their Charters. These studies I have followed from my first
years. This I leave unto mine heirs to be kept in all times. In this my
children follow me continually, that here and for ever before God and men you
may be honored. p. 174. and the said Authors report, b^ing to give up the
ghost, K. Williams last words praying to our ladies
with great devotion he lift up his eyes to Heaven, and holding abroad his
hands said, I commend my soul unto our blessed Lady Marie Mother of God, that
she ^y her holy prayers may reconcile me to her most dear son our Lord Jesus
Christ. And with these words (says Stow) he presently yielded up the ghost.
And page 176. he adds that he was buried at a Mass, and that the Preacher
desired all to pray for the dead Prince. This was the end of this victorious
and undoubted Catholic King.

Fox his confess: of the Cath. time under K. William Conq. and since.
2. And so Catholic these times since the Conquest have been, as Fox Acts page
167. speaking after his manner says, Before the Conquest infection and
corruption of religion was great, but in the times following it did abound in
excessive measure. Which he said only because the histories of the times
following are more exant and perfect, and so afforde more plain and more
frequent testimony of the Catholic faith than those of the former times,
though they as you see afford sufficient. Bilson also of Obed. page 321. says
that the Pope enforced upon the Normans the headship of the Church. Wherein he
confesses that the Normans admitted a chief point of Papistrie. Saints in K.
Williams time.
In this kings time lived that holy Queen of Scotland S. Margaret grandchild
unto king Edmund Ironside, whose holy life is written by Tungat an English man
Bishop of S. Andrews in Scotland. Who was says Bale Cent. 2. cap. 60.
oculatissimus testis Virtutum eius: a most certain eye witness of her
virtues. And Fox Acts. page 185. calls her virtuous and devout lady. And yet
was she a manifest Papist. For being to die she called for Priests, and made
her confession, Florent An. 1093. malb. l. 4.
and was anoiled and howseled, as testify the said Turgot, Houed. An. 1093.
Hunting. lib. 7. page 373. and others. In her life time She was a maintaner of
piety, justice, peace, Holiness of Q. Margaret.
frequent in prayer, who punished her body with fasting and watching* and of
this holy Queen is his present Majesty descended by both the Royal lines of
England and Scotland. In this Kings time also lived Berengarius a French
Deacon, who is the first that is named to have denied the real presence of
Christ's body and blood in the Eucharist, as the holy Church teaches says
malmsb. l. 3. who lived about that time. The same denied some ancient heretics
in S. Ignatius time as he testifies ep: ad Smyrn. but names none. But they
were then so fully put down, as from thence to Berengarius (which is almost a
thousand years) none is found to have denied Christ's real presence in the
Sacrament, Berengar. who denied the real presence denied also marriage and
baptism of Infants. Massou. Annal. franc. lib. 3.
besides such as denied that he had any real body at all. Berengarius denied
also marriag to be lawful and the baptism of Infants, as Durand then Bishop of
Liege writes in his epistle to Henry then King of France tom. 3. Biblio.
Sanctor. in fine. and Protestants confess, namely Oecolampadius l. 3. p. 710.
Crispin l. of the Church p. 289. But at last this Berengarius recanted all his
heresies and died a good Catholic, as the said Malm. witnesses. Against him
wrote our great learned Prelat Lanfranc and many others.

King William Rufus XXXIIII.
3. THe 34. Christian King of England was William Rufus Anno 1088. and reigned
13. years. Virtues of K. Rufus for a time.
He (says Stow Chron. page 179.) as long as Lanfranc lived seemed to abhor
all kind of vice, so that he was accounted a mirror of Kings. Cooper Anno
1089. writes that in martial policy he was very expert, and diligent in all
matters he went about, steadfast and stable in his promise, and marvelous
painful and laborious. But at last vices overwhelmed his virtues. His Romans
Religion
His Roman lib. 4. Paris An. 1087. He was brought up by Lanfranc, and by his
means chiefly, made King. Secondly lib. 4. page 184. Lincoln Minster in his
time had a Romish dedication. And as Paris says page 767. that being done the
king called two Cardinals who were present, who had received fulness of power
of our Lord the Pope for the disposition of Bishoprics, and of the same
Church. The ordination was such, that the Bishop being chosen and the Canons
placed in their possession, from thence forth they should in orderly
discipline of life serve God and his blessed mother day and night. Thirdly
because (as page 160.) Rufus gave to the Monks of the Charity the manner of
Berdmonsey, and builded them a new house. And in his Charter yet extant he
confirms his Fathers grant to the Monastery of Batel and says he does it
for the soul of his said Father, A plain Papi^^^ c^l Charter of K Rufus.
and also of his mother matildis of godly memory, and for the soul of his
most glorious predecessor King Edward, for my own salvation likewise and my
Successors, and for the quiet rest of those that were slain there in batel.
Which how evident a sign of Papistrie it is has been showed before. Fourthly
Rufus being once very sick made his confession to S. Anselm. Malm. p. 217. and
nominated him Archb. of Canterb. whom the Protestants confess to have been a
notorious Papist. Fifthly pont. p. 220. Florent. An. 1095. Fox lib. 4. p 185.
and others testify, that he sent two messengers to Pope Urban to entreat him to
send his Pal for him (Anselm) and with charge and pains provided it. And that
Gualter the Popes Legate dealt so with the King, that Urban (there being an other
Antipope) was proclaimed lawful Pope throughout all the realm. Wherefore
though this king took upon him to forbid Bishops to account any for Pope, or
to appeal to the Pope without his license (wherein he was resisted by Saint
Anselm as you may see in Malmsb. 1. Pont. page 217. 219.) it argues not that
he thought he might do so lawfully any more, than that he might be (as Fox
terms him page 1092.) a pillar and rauiner rather of Church goods, or as
Godwin in the life of S. Anselme terms him the most Sacrilegious Simonest
that ever reigned in England. In so much as Hunting. and Paris say An. 1100.
when he dyed, he had in his hands one Archbishopric, two Bishoprics, 12.
Abbeies, and, as Stow says page 183. said he would have all the spiritual
livings in the whole Realm. And Malmsb. lib. 4. adds that he encoraged the
Jews to dispute with the Christians, swearing that if they overcame he would
be of their religion. Other horrible Villainies of his, report Hunt. Paris l.
cit. and others more, which declare that he little cared to break Gods or the
Churches laws, but convince no more but that he was an ill Christian, and an
ill Catholic for life. Saints in K. Rufus time.
In this Kings time dyed S. Wulstan Bishop of Worceter, whom Godwin calls
Saint, and confesses that men had a great esteem of him for his streitnes of
life, and opinion of holiness. And of other Authors of that time he is much
commended, Marian, Cistertian order (...) founded by an English man.
Florent. Chron. Malmsb. 1. Pont. And his life is to be seen in Surius Tom. 1.
In this Kings time also S. Stephan Harding an Englishman founded the order of
Cistertian or white Monks, as Bale Cent. 2. cap. 63. Fox Acts page 185. Malmsb.
lib. 4. Reg. page 127. and others write. Malmsb. terms him The chief Author
of the whole fact, and especial ornament of our days. In this kings time died
also the forsaid Saint Osmund Bishop of Salsburie, the Author of that manner of
saying mass, Breuiarie, and administering Sacraments, which is called the use
of Sarum.

King Henry I. XXXV.
4. THe 35. Christian king was Henry 1. youngest son to William Conqueror,
and borne in England, began his Reign An. 1100. and reigned 35. years. For his
knowledge (says Fox lib. 4. p. 191.) and science in the 7. liberal sciences he
was Surnamed Beuclerck. Valor and qualities of K. Henry. 1.
Cooper and Stow An. 1101. say he was a noble and valiant Prince, and mighty
of body of comely visage, pleasant, and sweet countenance, excellent in wit and
eloquence, and had good hap in battle. The like write Catholics of him. As for
his religion it is evident to be Roman His Romans Religion.
First because his Archb. was S. Anselm, to whose piety he ascribed his
conquest of Normandy: Ediner in vit. by the authority of Eugenius 3. Pope
(says Cambd. in Brit. p. 350.) placed there Canons regulers. Paris p. 98 and
VValsing. p. 38. name four Monasteries p 204.) Atholph Prior of S. Oswald p.
152. Florent. VVestmon. An. 1107. Houed. 1108. Fifthly says Paris p. 96. Houed.
An. 113^. Malmsb. lib. hist. nouel. lib. 1. Pope Innocent the second was most
honorably entertained of him, and by his help was admitted through all p. 192.
sets down this letter of his to Pope Pascall. [To the venerable Father
Pascall chief Bishop Henry by the grace of God K. health. I greatly rejoice
with you at your promotion the Sea of the Roman Church requesting that the
freindship which was betwixt my Father and your Predecessors may also continue
betwexne us firm and sure.] And at the same time says Fox page 193. he sent
another letter to the said Pope craving of him his pal for Gerard Archb. of
York, the form whereof here follows. K. Henry 1. Professes the P. to be
universal. P.
To his reverend and beloved Father Pascall Universal Pope, Henry by the grace
of God king of England] and ends thus [I pray our Lord long preserve your
Apostleship.] Ibid. Fox writes that this kings Embasador said to the Pope
[that England of a long continuance had ever been a province peculier to the
Church of Rome and paid duly unto the same yearly tribute] Finally in this
kings time the Cistertian Monsts entered into England. Fox Acts p. 185.
Cistertian monks enter into England.
Bale Centur. 2. c. 63. And in his last sickness as the Archb. of Roan writes
to Pope Innocent in Malmsb. hist. Nouel. l. 1. Manner of King Henry's death.
he confessed his sins was absolved, and received the body and blood of our
Lord with great devotion, and lastly at his own request was aneyled. And the
Kings Attorney in the arainment of F. Garnet calls this Kings time the very
midnight of Popery. S. Cutberts body found incorrupt.
In this Kings time say Florent. and Houed. An. 1104. was the Shrine of S.
Cutbert opened by Raph Abbot, after Archb. of Canterb. and found incorrupt, in
the presence of Prince Alexander after K. of Scotland, and many more. Saints.
See Saint Anselmes miracles in malb. 1. Pont. p 216. 229.
In his time died S. Anselm before spoken of, and Thomas Archb. of York, who
when the physicians told him that he must either use the company of a woman or
die, he made choice of death. Archb. Thom. would rather die than use the
company of a woman.
For which Godwin in his life accounts him a martyr, though a little before
he had said that Saint Oswald in debarring Priests from marriage had set forth
the droctrine of Devils.

King Stephan XXXVI.
5. THe 36. Christian king of England was Stephan, grandchild by a daughter
unto the Conqueror. Valor of King Stephen.
He was crowned An. 1135. and reigned 19. years. He was (says Malmsb. lib.
1. Hist. Nouel.) Diligent and stout in war, of an immoderat mind, prompt to
enterprise any hard thing, and to his enemies inexorable, affable to all men.
Westmon. An. 154. A notable soldier and in courage excelling. The like has
Hunt. l. 8. Cooper Anno 1136. And Stow p. 206. says he was a noble man and
passing hardy, of passing comlie favor and personage, in all princely
virtues he excelled, as in Martial policy, affability, gentleness, and
bountiful liberality toward all. His Romans Religion.
His Roman religion is clear. First because his brother l. 8. Malmsbur. hist.
Novel. Secondly, because Stow says page 215. He founded the Abbeis of Coxall
in Essex, of Furnis in Lankashier, of Feuersham in kent, Fox page 201. Cambd
page 682. and. 388.
a Nonry at Carew, an other at Higham. Thirdly, because being to give battle on
Candlemas day, he heard Mass (says Hunting. lib. 8.) and the candle which he
offered, broke; and the Pix in which the body of Christ was put fell down upon
the Altar. which were taken for aboadments of the loss of the batell.
Fourthly, because in this Kings time began (says Fox Acts page 201.)
appellations Bishopp of Winchester brother to the King. In this Kings time Anno
1137. says Bale Cent. 2. cap. 63. began in England the Monks called Robertins
of Robert their beginner. But Capgraue in the life of Robert says these Monks
were Cistertians. Monks enter into Engl^nd.
In this time (says Bale ibidem) entered into England the Moncks called
Praemonstratenses, Anno 1145. And Anno 1147. began the Gilbertin Monks and
Nonnes, founded by S. Gilbert Lord of Sempringham. Cambd. Brit. p. 475.
Neubrig. l. 1. c. 16. Capgraue in Gilberto.
And this time Nicolas Breackspear an English Monk and Cardinal, afterward
Pope, converted Norway, (says Bale l. cit.) ad Papismum, to Papistrie. And so
manifestly were the times under King Stephen Papisticall, as Bale cent. 2. c.
74. speaking of them says here we understand that there was great want of the
pure doctrine of Christ Jesus. And cap. 73. says it was a most corrupt age. In
this Kings time died also Saint William Archbishop of York and Kinsman to King
Stephan a man (says Godwin in his life) very noble by birth but much more
noble in virtue and good manners, Saints.
Miracles.
many miracles (writes he) are said to be wrought at his Tomb.

King Henry II. XXXVII.
6. IN the year of our Lord 1155. King Henry second, grandchild by the
Empress Maude to Henri, 1. succeeded and reigned 33. years. The worthiness of
King Henry. 2.
He was (says Fox Acts page 234. Eloquent, learned, manly and bold in
chivalry. The like has Cooper Anno. 1155. and Stow page 216. Cambd. page 247.
has much of his praise out of Catholic writers of that time. Under him (says
Fox Acts page 224.) the Dominion of England extended so far as has not been
seen before Whom Histories record to have possessed under his rule, First
Scotland, to whom William King of Scots with his Lords temporal and
spiritual did homage both for them and their successors, the seal whereof
remains in the Kings Tresurie, as also Ireland, England, Normandy, Guiens*
Aquitan unto the mountains of Pirenei. He was offered also to be King of
Jerusalem by the Patriarch and Master of the Hospital. Now let us see what
was the religion of this potent King, His Romans Religion.
and of England when her Dominion was the largest page 234. tells how this
King heard Mass. Secondly page 232. tells how he built the Nonrie of Font
Euerard, the Priorie of Stoneley, of S. Martin in Dover, and of Basing weck. To
which Cambd. in Brit. page 488. adds Newsted in Nottingham shier, and page
321. Circester in Carthusiian Monks come into England.
Thirdly he brought Carthusians into England and built them a house at Withan,
Godwin in vit. Hugonis Lincoln. Houed. says this was An. 1186. Bale Cent. 2.
cap. 63. says it was 1180. And after Carthusians (says he) came in Kinghts of
Rhodes and of the Temple. And Cambd. Brit. page 728. says the Carmelits were
brought in at this time. Fourthly, page 216.) he was directed cheefely by
Thomas Becket in all things. Fifthly, (says the same Stow page 218.) He
obtained of Pope Adrian Bal. Cent. 2 p. 180.
and also to instruct them in the ^udiments of faith. And the Pope in the
letters of the grant calls him a Catholic Prince. Sixthly, he and Lewis King
of France going on foot, performing the office of lackeis and houlding the
bridel of his horse on the right and lef^ side, Baron. tom. 12.
conducted Pope Alexander with great pomp through the City Taciac unto the
river of Loir, Robert Monten. Genebre. in Chron. Bale Cent. 2 c. 94. Neubrigen
l. 2. c. 14. Thom. Cant. in Ep. ad Henr. 2. Seventhly p 502. sets down the
letter of Gilbert Bishop of London to the Pope, in which the Bishop writes
that the K. never auerted his mind from the Pope, nor ever meant it, but would
love him as a Father, and reverence the Church of Rome as his mother, and had
assisted the Pope in all his necessities with all his heart and strength. And
page 550. relates a letter of Cardinals who writ of the King, how obedient he
showed him self to the Church, of which in this our short relation it is not
needful to relate. Eighthly, Fox. page 227. Cooper An. 1072. and others write,
that he agreed with the Pope that he should not hinder appeals to Rome, and
that nether the King nor his son should depart from Pope Alexander, so long
as he should count him or his son for Catholics. Bale Cent. 3. cap. 4. says
He permitted Appeals to the Pope and willingly submitted him self and his
Kingdom to the Popes pleasure. And English men came into greater subjection of
Antichrist than ever at any time before. Ninthly he persecuted certain German
cap 95. calls Christians; and others whom Bale cap. 97. calls preachers of
Gods word. And Houed page 1573. reports that he and the King of France
purposed to go in person against the Albigenses, whom Protestants commenly
acount brethrem of their Church. Finally his death was Cum eger esset. says
Houed. page 654.) When he was sick unto death he caused him self to be carried
into the Church before the Altar and there he devoutly received the communion
of the body and blood of our Lord confessing his sins, And being absolved by
the Bishop and Clergy he died. And the times of this King were so manifestly
Roman Catholic, See more of this K. Romans relig. in Baron tom. 12.
as Fox Acts page 224. says, This age was all blinded and corrupted with
superstition. And yet page 225. affords it then the name of a Christian
Realm that had the word of God. And p. 227. notes the blind and lamentable
superstition and ignorance of these days. Bale Cent. 3. cap. 14. cries out
that sub Honorio 2. under Honorius 2. The life of man was corrupted upon earth
by Antichristian Traditions. Saints.
In this Kings time lived the holy Eremit S. Gudrig Vir (says Cambd. Brit. p.
668.) antiqua and Christiana simplicitate totus Deo deuotus, A man of ancient
and Christianlie simplicity wholly devoted to God. Whose holiness is described
by diverse, Capgraue, Houed. Miracles.
Anno. 1169. VVestmon. Anno. 1171. Neubrigen. lib. 2. c. 20. and 28. In his
time also lived and died glorious S. Thomas of Canterb. of whose miracles Fox
Acts page 225. says he has seen a book to the number of 270. of curing all
diseases belonging to man or Woman, amongst which he names one most subject
(as he thought by reason of the matter) to laughter. But who considers, that
all the members of our body were alike created of God, and may as well be
restored by him again when they are lost, and weighs the testimony which Fox
brings him self of the miracle, may by this judge of the certainty of the
rest. The matter was thus. An inhabita^t of Bedford having had by form of the
law (which then was) his eyes plucked out, and his stones cut away, but
unjustly, made prayer to S. Thomas for the restoring of them, which was done.
That the man had been thus maimed, the Burgesses and Citizens of Bedford
(says Fox) did testify with public letters. And whither he was cured or no,
was easy to know. All that Fox says against this or the rest of the miracles
is, that there was no necessity of a miracle in a Christian Realm having the
word of God. Forsooth he must tell God when there is necessity, yea tie Gods
hands to do nothing but for necessity. Had not the Jews the word of God when
they had the daily miracles of Probatica piscina? Does not the virtue of
miracles shine in the Church for ever as the notes of the English Bible
imprinted An. 1576. Johan. 14. do teach? But well it is that Saint Thomas his
miracles have so many and so authentical testimonies, as he must needs conremn
all huma^ authority who denies them to have been done.

King Richard Coeur de Lion. XXXVIII.
7. IN the year 1189. succeeded K. Richard Coeur de Lion, so surnamed of his
courage, Valor of King Richard Ceur de Lion.
son to King Henry 2. and reigned 10. years. He was says Cambd. de Brit.
page 331. Animi excelsi and erecti etc. Of an high and vprighit mind altogether
borne for the Christian common wealth, Polid. lib. 14.
Englands glory and terror of the Pagans. Cooper Anno. 1189, big of stature,
and had a merry countenance, in which appeared as well a pleasant gentleness, as
a noble and princely Majesty, to his soldiers favorable, bountiful, desirous
of war. Subdued the Kingdom of Ciprus, conquered the City of Acon, vanquished
the Sultan in the holy Land, whither he went with an army of 30000. foot and
5000. horse. His Romans religion.
The Roman religion of this famous and magnanimous King is manifest. page 656.
657. Paris 205. and others tell the manner of his coronation was thus. The Archb.
Bishops Abbots and Priests in Copes with the Cross before and holy water and
incense brought him to the Church. Again he took his oath on the Gospel and
many relics of Saints. After coronation began the solemn Mass, k. Richard
crowned at mass.
and when they came to the offertorie Bishops brought the king to offer, and in
like sort to take the Pax. And after Mass returned again with Procession,
page 222. Paris tells how he redeemed the relics of Jerusalem with 52.
thousand Bisa^tes. Quatenus (says he) To the end that Saints of God whose
bones he redeemed in earth might help his soul by their intercessions in
heaven. And page 497. He obtained of the Sultan that a certain Priest at the
Kings stipend might every day celebrate mass of the holy Cross at our
Saviors Sepulcher Thirdly retiring to England says Westmon. Anno. 1194. he
visited S. Thomas of Canterb. S. Edmund, and S. Albons Shrines, and after went
against his Rebels in Nottingham. Fourthly Houed. page 658. sets p. page
706. When king Richard went to the holy Land, he left the care of the
government of his kingdom unto the Sea Apostolic. And page 753. The same
Houed. sets down a letter of Pope Celestin in which the Pope says thus,
[The Church of England has always kept the sincerity of her devotion and
ancient faith with the Roman Church] Finally a little before S. Richards death
(says Fox Acts page 249. England alvvaies devout to the Church of Rome.
) Three Abbots of the Cistertian order came unto him to whom he was at his
absolution said these words, that he did willingly commit his soul to the fire
of Purgatory there to be tried til the Judgment in hope of Gods mercy. Saints.
In this public profession of Roman Catholic faith gave this renowned King up
his soul to God. In this Kings time died Anno. 1189. the forsaid Saint
Gilbert, who of his order erected 13. Monasteries in England. Polid. l. 14.
Then also lived Saint Hugh of Lincoln, of whom we shall speak hereafter.

King John. XXXIX.
8. THe 39. King was King John, brother to King Richard, who began his Reign
Anno. 1199. and reigned 17. years. Of this King some ignorant Protestants
brag, as if he had been a Protestant. Bale Cent. 1. cap. 75. because for a time
he disobeyed the Pope, polid. l. 15.
commends him of valor, liberality, and Christian piety. But with shame
enough For he lost all in manner that his Predecessors had in France, which was
near as much as England it self, Qualities of K. Ihon.
and had almost lost England too. Was, as the Earl of Northampton says of
him in the araignment of Garnet, impious, as well sans foy, as sans terre; and
that he was as likly to have departed with his soul as his Crown, if
necessity had pressed him. Nether was he ill only to him self, but to his
people and Contrie, from whom being not content by him self to extort what he
would, sent for many thousand Flemings to do the same, to whom he meant to give
Norfolk and Suffolk, Paris page 360. 367. And page 325. he names the
Ambassador whom King John sent to the Mohammedan King of Africa to offer the
subjection of him self and his Kingdom to him, and to accept the law of
Mahomet, which Paris learnt of them, to whom one of the Ambassadors told it.
Never the less what Christian religion he had, is evident to have been Roman
Catholic. His R^m. Religion.
First because he was chosen King cheefely by means of Archbishop Hubert,
Paris page 264. Stow. page 244.
Secondly because upon his crownation he took page 263. and next day after his
coronation went on Pilgrimage to S. Albans, page 264. at Lincoln offered a
chalice of gould. page 273, holpt to carry on his shoulders the body of S. Hugh
pa. 274. Houed. page 812. Thirdly he heard Mass (says page 246.) and fell
down before the Abbots of Cisterce desiring to be admitted of them Fourthly he
founded a goodly monastery at Beulieu, and erected a Nonry at Godstow to pray
(says Camb. Brit. p. 329) for his Fathers soul, for that persuasion had then
possessed the minds of all men. And in his Charter to Batel Abbey commands
all his Justices to defend the Possessions of that monastery sicut (says he)
nostra propria: as our own. And Regist. Buriense says, he gave a great
Saphir, and a Ruby to S. Edmunds cap. 37. ex page 253. writes that King John
submitted himself to the Court of Rome, and as Bale says Cent. 3. cap. 75.
Acknowledged the Pope to be head of all Christians. And though he disobeyed for
a time the Pope, yet that he did not for a difference in religion, but because
the Pope would make an Archb. of Canterb. whom the King misliked. And as
Cooper says Anno 1201. For what cause K. Ihon disobeyed the Pope for a time.
did this not upon judgment to set up true religion (says he) but upon
covetousness and of a forward mind. Finally, upon his deathbed (says Fox Acts
page 256. he much repented his former life, and had (says page 262.) a
Confessor at his death, and received the Sacrament at the hands of the Abbot of
Crocston, and died with these words: VVestmon An. 1216.
Deo and sancto VVolstano animam meam commendo: I commend my soul to God and S.
VVolstan, Paris page 389. Of the manner of his death Fox Acts. page 256.
writes thus: Some write, that he died of sorrow as Polidor, K. Ihon dies in
profession of the Cathol. says.
some of surfeting, as Redinger; some of a bloody flux, as Houed. some of a
burning ague, some of a cold sweat, some of eating apples, some of eating
pears, some plummes, etc. yet (says he) most writers agree that he was
poisoned by the Monk Simon of Swinfled. But who those were, he writes not,
nor could name one besides a nameles Author of that Chronicle, which, because
Caxton printed it is called, Caxtons Chronicle. And it is as Stow well says page
494. a fabulous book. And therefore Bale Cent. 3. cap. 75. refers this to
report, saing: Vt serunt, as men report. But who will not believe rather Paris
page 389. Westmon. Anno 1216. and others living in that same time, or sone
after, who say, he died of surfit and sorrow, then a Chronicle accounted by
Protestants themselves a fabulous book or written by a nameles Author long
after that time. In this Kings time, Saints.
died that glorious Saint, Saint Hugh Bishop of Lincoln, and Carthusian Monk,
whom Godwin, in his life, calls Saint. And says, By his integrity of life
and conversation, and the opinion of diverse Miracles wrought by him, has
purchased unto him self the honor and reputation of a Saint. He adds also,
that S. Hugh. Grew very famous far and near for his extraordinary abstinence
and austeritie of life. And that king John and king William, king of Scotts,
for great reverence they bare to his holiness, helped to carry his Corpse from
the gate of the City, until it came, to the Church door.

King Henry the III. XL.
9. IN the year 1216. succeeded, king Henry 3. son to king John, and reigned
56. years, dyed Anno. 1273. He was (says Cooper Anno. 1218.) of nature
gentle, Wisdom and piety of King Henry. 3.
of mind sage, and wise. And so pious, as Leolin Prince of Wales, (says Fox
Acts page 280.) protested, that he feared more his alms, than his puissance.
And Westmon. Anno 1272. speaking of this king, says. Of how great innocence
of how great patience, and of how great devotion he was in obeying his Savior,
our Lord knows, and they which faithfully adhered to him, and of how great
merit he was with God the miracles after his death testify. His Romans Religion.
The Roman religion of as Fox says in his Acts page 257. He was crowned by
Swall, the Popes Legate; and Stow adds, page 263. Being crowned, the
government of the King and his Kingdom was committed to the Legate, to the etc.
Secondly, because Continuator of Paris, who then lived, says page 1349. K.
Henry 3. daily, heard 3. sung Masses.
and Walsingham in Edward. 1. page 19. Every day he was accustomed to hear
three song Masses, and desirous to hear more served daily Priests celebrating
privately, and when the Priest did eleuat our Lords body he used to hold the
Priests arm, Devotion of King Hen. 3. Bal. Cent. 4 cap. 46.
and to kiss it. And when that Lewis king of France said unto him, that he
should oftener hear sermons, he answered, I had rather see my friend often than
hear an other speak of him, though never so A. Queen a Nonne
Bale Cent. 4. cap. 56. and Walsing. in Edward. 1. page 7. His Queen also
after his death became a Nonne, Walsing. page 14. Diverse kinds of Friars enter
into England.
says Stow page 268. the King assigned a house in Oxford; The Gray Friars,
Cooper, Anno 1222. The Croochet Friars, Anno. 1244. Bale Centur. 4. cap. 3. The
Austins Friars, Anno. 1252. Centur. 4. capit. 17. to whom cap. 46. he adds
the Paulins, the Friars of Armenia, the Friars de poenitentia, the Friars de
Viridi Valle, and the Bonhomes. Which last order Rodulphus l. 2. de Saincto
Francisco, says, was instituted by Richard Earl of Cornwall, and brother to
King page 589. the King met the Legate most dutifully at the Sea coast, and
bowing his head to his knees co^ducted him most respectively to the inermost
parts of his Kingdom, when he departed brought him with great honor to the
Sea. Stow Chron. Anno 1241.

Sixthly, because (as is to be seen in Fox Act. 287. and others) He wrote to
the Pope thus: Sanctissimo in Christo Patri etc. To his most holy Father and
Lord in Christ Innocent, K. Henry 3. calls the P Lord in Christ and offers
to kiss his feet.
by the grace of God chief Bishop health and kisses of his blessed feet. And
in the letter, [May it please your Fatherhood, we beseech you that our laws
and liberties which you may righly repute none other but your own, you will
receive to your tuitio^ to be co^serued whole and sound.] Upon which words Fox
makes this note: The K. in too much subjection to the Pope. And in a letter in
Paris page 839 The K. professes to the Pope that [In all the time of our
reign, we have submirted ourselves and our kingdom in all and through all
things to the will of your Father hood.] And page 863. he cites letters of the
Pope in which he professes. Profession of the King.
[That amongst the rest of the Kings of the whole world, we embrace in the
arms of our singular love our most dear son in Christ the renowned King of
England, The popes testimony of K Henry. 3.
who as a Prince Catholic and devout, has always studied to honor the Roman
Church his mother with a filial subjection and dutiful devotion, because he
would no way depart from her good pleasure, but rather what things he
understood to be gratfull and pleasing to her, he has performed with a ready
carefulnes.] And again. page 887. alleges other letters of the Pope to the
King, wherein he says:] Toward your person, as to a son and special devout
of the Apostolic Sea, we carrying a Fatherly affection of love do willingly
give audience to your requests, as far as we may with God and do impart our
benign favor. To these letters I will add two other public letters of the
nobility and Commons, and of the Clergy at the same time, taken out of Fox p.
288. Profession of the nobility and Commons of England of their subjection to
the Pope.
Paris page 901. and others. [To the reverend Father in Christ Pope Innocent
chief Bish. The nobles with the Communalty of the whole Realm of England
sending greeting with kissing of his blessed feet. Our mother the church of
Rome we love with all our hearts as our duty is, and covet the increase of her
honor with so much affection as we may, as to whom always we ought to fly for
refuge. Item. Neither is it to our said mother unknown, how beneficial and
bounfull a giver the Realm of England ha^^ been now a long time, for the more
amplifying of her exaltation. Again Our king being a Catholic Prince, and
wholly given to his devotions and service of Christ, so as he respects not
the health of his own body, will fear and reverence the Sea Apostolic, and
as devout son of the Church of Rome, desires nothing more, than to advance
the state and honor of the same.) And the said Fox page 291. and Paris and
Westmon. An. 1247. set down an other letter of the Clergy and Communalty of
Canterbury thus. (To the most holy Father in Christ Lord Innocent by Gods
provision chief Bishop: The whole Communalty both of the Clergy and laity of
the Province of Canterbury sends devout kissing of his blessed feet. England
ever since her first Christianity devout to the Church of Rome.
Like as the Church of England, since it first received the Catholic faith,
hate always showed it self faithful and devout in adhering to God and our
holy Mother the Church of Rome studying with all kind of service to please and
serve the same, Church of England prostrate at the Popes feet.
and thincketh never otherwise to do, but rather to continue and increase as
she has begun: So now the same Church most humbly prostrat before the feet of
your holiness, most earnestly entreat, etc.) And the same persons writing to the
Cardinals, call them Bases fulcientes Ecclesiam Dei, Pillars vnderproping the
Church of God. Moreover the said Paris page 929. has the letters of the
Religious men to the same Pope in these words. profession of the religions of
England touching their subjection to the Pope.
(To our most holy Father and dear Lord in Christ Innocent by the grace of God
chief Pastor of the universal Church, his devout sons the Abbots and the
Priors of this Province of Canterbury and York health and kisses of your
blessed feet. The whole Church is governed vndet one Father and Pastor, also
the Church of England is a most special member of the Church of Rome.) And
page 930. The Nobles, Clergy, and Universal People (wish as their duty is
health reverently to such a great Bishop.) And ibidem: The king writes again
thus. (He knows who is ignorant of nothing, that we always placed our mother
the Roman Church in the bowels of our sincere affection as her whom we would
love, K. Henry 3. would recur to the P in necessity.
and unto whom in immine^t insta^ts of necessity, as a son unto his mother,
whom she ought to foster and norish from her dugges of milk, we would recur.

Thus the King, Clergy, Religious, Nobles and Commons do most plainly and
publicly profess their Catholic religion, and subjection to the Pope, and
his spiritual superiority over them, in so much as Godwin in the life of
Sewal Archb. of York, Protest. confess K. Henr. Cath. religion.
says: This King subjected, and as it were prostrated him self to the Pope.
And Bale Cent. 4. cap. 23. notes that King Henry the third did not reign but
bore the Image of the Beast. And cap. 6. speaking of the time of this King,
says, The healthful truth was vanished out of this Land, men being led into
perdition. And cap. 34. Under King Henry 3. there was great decay of true faith
in Christ even unto our time, in the merits of condignitie and congruall of the
Papists, in Indulgences suffrages of Saints, Protest. except against all
vvritings from K. Hen. 3. to Luthers time.
vows, masses, Purgatory, Images, etc. And therefore exhorts all to try the
doctrine which flourished from the year 1270. to the year 1520. So manifest a
thing it is that this King and all his successors and Realm since him to the
later end of King Henry 8. were Roman Catholics. And albeit this King and
the commonwealth in his time repined some what at the Pope, yet that was not
for any points of faith or religion, but only (as you may see in Paris the
Kings Chronicler of that time and others) because he bestowed English Benefices
upon Strangers. VVestmon An. 1246.
Which he being then driven out of Rome and from his own living by a wicked
Emperor, was forced to do. Finally this King died (as Continuat. Paris page
1343.) Confessing his sins, beating his breast, absolved, houseled aneiled,
and honoring the Cross. Saints.
In this Kings time lived the holy Archb. of Canterb S. Edmund, whose body long
after his death was found incorrupt, Westmon. An 1247. and others. Also Saint
Richard Bishop of Chichester, A man (says Westmon. An. 1253.) Of eminent
knowledge, See Sur. tom 2.
and singular or rare sanctity. Godwin in his life says, All men greatly
reverenced him, not only for his great learning, but much more for his
diligence in preaching, his manifould virtues, and above all his integrity of
life and conversation. In regard of which and many miracles fathered, (says
he) upon him, he was canonized. In this Kings time also died that grear Clerck
Robert Grostet Bish. of Lincoln, whom the Protest. wou^d make one of theirs,
only, because he mislyked the Popes preferring of strangers to English
Benefices. But that reason is too frivolous. Besides that Westmon. An. 1253.
testifies, that the same year he died he wrote thus to the Pope. Salutem,
etc. Your wisdom knows that I with a filial affection devoutly and
dutifully obey the Apostolical commandments. Rob. Grostets profession of
subjection to the Pope and at his death he gave all his books to the graie
Friars. Godvvin in vita eius, vvher you see his Romans religion restified by a
Cardinal of that time.
] And your ancient writers are to far from accounting him no Catholic, as
they esteem him a Saint, and relat his miracles, as you may see in Paris and
Westmon. Anno. 1250. Only Paris page 1174. says, that he had good zeal but
perchance not according to true knowledge. In this Kings time lived that grear
scoole Doctor and Englishman Alexander de Hales.

King Edward I. XLI.
10 IN the year of our Lord 1274. succeeded Edward. 1. son to King Henry 3.
and reigned 34. years. He was (says Walsingham in his Ypodigmate page 98.
Great praises of K. Edward. 1.
) In arms strong, victorious warlick, who gained all England from the hands
of valiant Simon de Montfort, Wales he got from Leolin, Aquitan he wrested
from the King of France, Polid. lib. 17.
Scotland, he often subdued. Camb. Brit. page 700. says: He was a Prince far
excelling in whose most valiant mind God chused a most vvorthie lodging, that
he might match the heigt of royal majesty, not only with fortitude and
wisdoms but with beauty also and comlynes of body, whom fortune in the prime
flower of his age trained up in many wars and most difficult times of the
Commonwealth, whilst that she disposed him for British Empire. Which when he
was established in, he so governed having overcome the Welsh men, and
triumphed over the Scotts, that by good right he is esteemed another ornament
of Brittanie. The like high praises give him Cooper. Anno. 1274. Stow page 304.
Bale Cent. 4. cap. 58. and others. His Romans Religion.
As for the Roman religion of this renowned Prince, it is most Histor. page
16.) His wife Queen Eleoner dying, with continual prayers he did pray unto
our Savior Jesus for her, for ever ordaining and procuring for her the
celebrations of Masses in diverse places of his Kingdom. In every place and
Vilage where her Corpse rested, the King commanded a Cross to be erected in
memory of the Queen, that her soul might be prayed for of those that passed
by. page 33. He Translated a stone to Westminster, which the Kings of
Scottland at the time of their coronation were wont to use for a Throne,
commanding that a Chair should be made thereof for Priests to sit in when they
solemnised Mass. Besides page 13. His daughter Marie was a Nonne. And in
ypodingm. p. 88. He commanded that the Crown of gould that was the king of
Scots should be offered to S. Thomas the Martyr. And p. 71. He built an Abbey
of Cistercian Monks. And as Fox says Acts page 339. Went on Pilgrimage to our
Lady of Walsingham, to thanck God for his escape of a great danger. And of so
great account were religious men in his time, as Stow page 329. reckneth 61.
Abbots, and page 49.) he writes thus to the Pope, [To the most holy Father in
Christ Boniface by the divine providence chief Bishop of the holy Roman and
Universal Church, Edward by the grace of God king of England, Lord of Ireland,
Duke of Aquitan, health and devout kisses of your blessed feet. Beneth. We do
humbly beseech your holiness for as much as etc.] And p. 55. He and Fox 341.
set down a letter, wherein the Nobles and all the Barons assembled together in
parliament write thus to the Pope. This was scalled with 200. seals. ypodigm
page 89.
[We reverently and humbly beseech your holiness, that you would suffer our Lord
king of England, who among other shows him self Catholic and devout to the
Roman Church, etc.] And Westmon. Anno. 1302. puts the beginning of this
letter thus. To the most holy Father in Christ L. Boniface by the divine
Providence chief Bishop of the universal Church, The profession of subjection
to the P. by the whole Parlame^t.
his devout sons John Earl of Warren, Thomas Earl ofe Lancaster, etc.
Devout kisses of your blessed feet.] Behold how both the king and nobles
profess to kiss the Popes feet, and call him chief Bishop of the Universal
Church. In like manner Pope Boniface Writing, in VVestmon. Anno. 1301. to king
Edward says: Scimus fili, etc. We know my son, and now a long time
experienc the Mistres of things has taught us how toward the Roman mother
Church which in her bowels of charity has carried you representing a kingly
devotion, your reverent regard is showed, your zeal strengthened, and that in
all promptitude you obeying the true co^stitutions of the seat make your
repose* finally, after the kings death his body Destinati sunt, etc. says
VValsing. Hist. page 67. There were appointed of every great Monastery near
bordering six Monks, Cannons, or other religious, which should watch about the
body and continually solemnize the funerals. And the Cardinal Legate granted
Indulgence of one year to them, which did say our Lords prayer and the
Angelical salutation for the Kings soul. And so manifestly were the times of
this king Roman Catholic, as the Kings Attorney in the arrainment of Garnet
calls them, the very midnight of Popery. And Bale Cent. 4. cap. 46. cries
out: Under King Edward the goulden face of the primitive Church was obscured,
the cheifest beauty of the Gospel changed. The house of Israel was turned into
rubbish, the Ministers of the Churches degenerated into Dreggs and excrements,
the Friars bearing rule. In this Kings time lived that great school Doctor and
English man Richard Middleton, Bale Cent. 4. cap. 77. and dyed that glorious
Saint, Saints.
S. Thomas of Hereford, who in life was admirable for virtue, and after death
wonderful for the greatness and multitude of his miracles, Miracles. See Sur.
tom. 5.
which were examined with such straightnes, and approved with so great
authority, as who will believe any human testimony, can not but believe them,
as is to be seen in our ancient Manuscript yet extant.

King Edward. 2. XLII.
IN the year 1307. Edward 2. son to Edward 1. succeeded, Qualities of K
Edward. 2. Polid. l. 18. His Romans Religion.
and reigned 19. years. He was (says Cooper Ann 1308. And Stow page 337. fair
of body but unsteadfast of manners and disposed to lightness. His Roman religion
is certain, both by what has been said of his Father, and because Caius de
Antiq. Cantab. page 80. and Stow page 337. say, He sued to Pope John 22. to
renew the privileges of the Universities, which he did. Item. He builded the
Friars Church at Langley. Stow page 332. Vowed in the battle of Sterling to
build a house for the Carmelits in Oxford, which he performed. Stow page 334.
sent for two Cardinals to make peace between him and the Scotts, page 336. Had
a tenth of spiritual goods granted him by the Pope, page 339. Had a Carmelit
for his Confessor Bale Cent. 4. cap. 96. And as he says cap. 82. In this Kings
time came in the Friars De paenitentia into England, to whom the King gave the
Synagogue of the Jews. Item the Friars of the order of Martyrs the Sarabitae,
the Paulins, and the Trinitaries. Bale Centur. 5. cap. 13. calls these times
the middle darkness of Roman superstition. In this kings time lived that famous
subtle doctor Johannes Scotus. The Cath. religion hitherto in England without
any opposition.
And hitherto have we proved the Catholic Roman religion through all our
Christian Kings, not only clear and manifest, but also without any opposition
or contradiction saving of a few who in Saint Odo his time doubted of the real
presence, but were soon converted. Hereafter in our Country the Catholic
religion has found some opposition, (though small) by reason of VVick life,
(who arose in the next Kings time) and his fellows.

CHAP. XXVI. That the Kings of England from Edward 3. to Henry 8. were all
Roman Catholic proved in particular.
King. Edward. 3. XLIII.
1. THe 43. Christian King of England was Edward 3. son to Edward 2.
Worthiness of K. Edward 3.
Began his reign Anno. 1326. and reigned 51. years. He was (says Walsingahm
Hist. Anno 1376.) amongst all the Kings of the world renowned, benign, gentle,
Po^d. l. 19.
and magnificent, coragious of heart, humble, mild and very devout to God. This
man (says Cooper Anno 1327. And Stow p. 438.) Besides all other gifts of nature
was endued with passing comely hewty and favor, of wit prouide^t, circumspect
and gentil, doing nothing without great wisdom and consideration. Of excellent
modesty and temperance, and advanced such persons to high dignity as did most
pass others in integrity and innocence of life, in feats of Arms very
expert. Of his liberality and clemency he showed very many great examples.
Breefly in all Princely virtue he was so excellent, that few noble men before
his time can be compared to him. The like praise to him give Fox Acts page 374.
Bale Cent. 6. cap. 57. and others. His victories.
He won the great battle at Cressie where he vanquished the King of France
with two other Kings, took Calis, and at the same time overcame the King of
Scotts, and took him prisoner. And his son Edward surnamed the black Prince
with a very small army got the battle of Poitiers Wherein he took the French
king, and after that entered into Spain overcame the king and drove him out of
the Contrie. So that this king by him self and his company took two kings,
slew one, and vanquished three others.

Of all our English kings to Henry 8. Fox of most all challenges this King,
and says page 428. That above all other Kings to Henry 8. he was the greatest
bridler of the Popes usurped power. During all his time John VVicklef was
maintained with favor and aid sufficient. Indeed King Edward 3. Anno 1374.
made a law to forbid all procurement of English Benefices from the Pope: But
the cause thereof was, not that the King thought amiss of the Popes Authority,
but because he thought that the execution thereof in this point was
incommodious, and inconvenient to his Realm. For other wise none of all our
Kings have avouched the Popes supremacy, (in which Protestants account the
essence of a Papist to consist) so clear as he. For in his letters to the Pope
extant in Walsingham Anno 1336, and others he writes thus, Otterborne in
Edward: 3.
(Therefore let not the envious or sinister interpretation of detractors made of
your son find place in the bowels of your mercy and sanctity who will
after the ancient custom of our predecessors, persist in yours and the Sea
Apostolickes favor untouched. But if any such sugestion made against your
son shall fortune to come unto your holiness ears, Let not credit be given of
your holy devotion by your holiness thereunto, before your son be heard, who
trusts and ever intends to speak the truth, and to justify every one of
his causes before your holiness judgment, King Edward. 3, accounts it
heresy to deny the Popes supremacy.
whose authority is above all earthly creatures which to deny is to approve an
heresy.) Behold the King confessing first that it was hereditarie to him from
his Anceistors to abide firmly in favor of the Sea Apostolic. Secondly,
that he purposed ever to do so. Thirdly that it was heresy to deny the Popes
judgment, praesidere omni humanae creaturae: To bear rule over all human
Creatures. Oh when would this famous King have thought that any of his
Posterity should make that treason, which him self professes all his
Ancestors to have held, and accounts it heresy to deny. The same says Pope
Greg. 11. in VValsing. p. 104. Kings of England especial children of the Romans
Church.
And Pope Benedict in his answer of this letter in Walsingham page 124. says
thus. [Your Progenitors Kings of England, have excelled in greatness of faith
and devotion toward God, and the holy Roman Church, as her peculier
foster-children and devoted sons, and have preserved the splendour of their
progeny from any darkesome cloud. Between the state of your Kingdom and also
of the Kingdom of France we greatly desire to make a happy success of peace
and concotd. And against you my son I cannot shut up the bowels of my
Fatherly affection.) To which the King returned this answer in Walsingham page
130. (We have reverently and humbly accepted the letters of your Holiness. Also
with a cheerful heart we do beseech your clemency, that if it please you, you
will duly ponder our justice and intention founded upon the truth. And that we
as occasion served have favored the holy Roman Church in all fulness of devotion
sound love and gracious favor, K. Edw. 3: Professes to have ever favored the
Pope.
as you may conjecture of a most devout son. For God is the witness of our
conscience that we have desired to exalt and defend the honors and liberties of
the Church.) And again the king Anno. 1343 writing to Pope Clement in VValsing
page 150. says thus, Professes the P. is Bishop of the universal Church.
(To his most holy Lord Clement by the divine providence chief Bishop of the
sacred Roman and universal Church, Edward by the same grace of God King of
France and England and Lord of Ireland* devout kisses of your blessed feet
etc.) And then calls him, ( successor of the Prince of the Apostles. Infra.
We and ours do desire and ought to reverence your most sacred person and the
holy Roman Church. And page 15. Clement answers him thus. My deerly beloved
son you have known how to exhibit your sincere devotion to our Lord and to
your Mother the holy Roman Church, as of famous memory your Progenitors the
Kings of England have done whilst they lived.] And Fox himself Acts page 383.
sets down a letter of the K. and nobles to Pope Clement Anno 1343. thus.
[To the most holy Father in God Lord Clement by the grace of God of the holy
Church of Rome and of the universal Church chief and high Bishop his humble
and devout children the Princes Dukes Earls Barons Knights Citizens and
Burgesses and all the communalty of England assembled at the Parliament houlden
at Westminster the 15. day of May devout kissing of his feet with all humble
reverence and humility. The whole Parliament calls the Pope head of the
universal Church.
Most holy Father you being so high and holy a Prelat and head of the holy
Church by whom the holy Universal Church and people of God ought to be as by
the Son beams illightened etc.] Behold the whole Parliament calling the Pope
head and Bishop of the Universal Church, and offering to kiss his feet with
all humility and reverence. And again Fox page 387. sets down an other
letter of King Edwards to Pope Clement in this sort. [Most holy Father, K.
Edw. 3. plainly professes the Popes supremacy.
we desire your holiness, and in as much as lies in us, require the same, that
you that supply the place of the son of God on earth, and have the
government of all Christen men etc.] What could be more clearly spoken for the
spiritual supremacy of the Pope? And this same Roman religion of his is
evident by many other ways. For he founded (says Stow page 439.) the new
Abbey near to the Tower of London, where he placed white Monks to the honor of
God and our Lady according to a vow by him made being on the Sea in great
peril. And a Nonrie at Detford. Cambden. adds page 333. a Frierie of
Carmelits. He instituted also the order of the garter in honor of God and Saint
Georg, and among other rules appointed, that when any of the Knights died the
King should make a thousand Masses to be said for his soul, and others many
hundreds according to their Degree. He offered (says Fox page 396.) after the
blind (says he) superstition of those days in the Church of Westminster the
Vestments wherein Saint Peter did celebrat Mass. His Confessor was Thomas
Bradwardin, whom Bale Centur. 5. cap. 87. accounts a Papist. Finally as
Walsingham. An. 1376. writes he dyed thus. The Catholic end of K. Edward. 3.
The King when he could not speak, with very great reverence taking the
Cross did kiss it most devoutly, sometimes stretching forth his hand in sign
of craving pardon, and other times also letting fall from his eyes plenty of
tears, and kissing most often the feet of the Crucifix. And after his death
Pope Greg. 11. lit. in Walsingham Anno 1378. calls him, Catholicum Principem
and Pugilem fidei. A Catholic Prince and Champion of the faith.

And so evidently was this King and the Realm in his time Roman Catholic,
Protest. confess K. Edw 3. time to have been Cathol.
as Fox Acts page 377. upon a letter of the King to the Nobles of France makes
this note: Note the ignorance of the time. And page 396. The blind
superstition of those days. And page 424. This is out of all doubt that at
what time all the world was in most vilde and desperate estate, and that the
lamentable ignorance of Gods truth had ouershadowed all the earth, VVicklef
stepped forth etc. Behold here manifest that before Wicklef there was not one
Protestant in the whole world. And how ill a Protestant he was shall hereafter
appear. All the world ignorant of Protestancie.
And page 425. In this so horrible darkness of ignorance (says Fox) at what
time there seemed in a manner to be no one so little a spark of pure doctrine
left, In a manner no one little spark of Protestancie. VViclef first raised
forsooth the world
VViclef sprung up, through whom the Lord would first raise up again the world
which was drowned in the depth of human traditions. In like sort Bale Cent. 5.
cap. 85. says, This age was shadowed with the darkness of great ignorance,
and blinded with more than Diabolical fooleries. And Cent. 6. cap. 1. the
midnight of errors and a dim world. And cap. 8. In these times darkness of
great ingnorance possessed the world. cap. 23. The common blindness of the time
was in advancing the Idolatry of the Popish Mass. As for the coffeehouse
which some time this king had with the Pope, that was not for any matter of
religion, but because (as Cooper says Anno. 1343. Why K. Edw. 3. some time
discontented with the Pope.
) The Pope gave diverse Bishoprics and Benefices in England, which the king
thought not expedient for his temporal estate. And as for the favor which
VVicklef found in his time, that proceeded rather from the Duke of Lancaster
who governed all in the old age of the King, and for a time vpheld VVicklef,
not upon any liking of his heresy, but to spite thereby some of the Bishops
whom he hated, as Stow Anno. 1376, (wtih whom Fox agrees p. 393.) testifies
in these words, Why the D. of lancaster a while favored VViclef.
The Duke of Lancaster laboring as well to overthrow the liberties of the
Church, as of the City (of London) called unto him VVicklef, etc. And when
these contentions between the Duke and others were appeased. He commanded
(says Fox page 400. Edit. 1596. VVicklef to submit him self to his Ordinary.
The Cath. religion of the D. of lancaster:
Which clearly enough declares the Roman religion of that Duke, which also
other wise were evident by the honor wherewith he was received by the Cardinals
and Bishops in the Popes Court, Stow page 399. And by his Confessor John
Kinningham a Carmelit, who (says Bale Cent. 6. cap. 4.) first impugned
Wicklef. And Cent. 7. cap. 26. says that Gualter Disse (than who none in
Antichristi negotijs actuosior, more busy in the rules of Antichrists)
Confessor to the Duke persuaded him for the love at least of Papistrie to make
war in Spain, which then favored an Antipope: to which purpose Pope Urban
sent the Duke a standard and made his Confessor his Legate, and gave him
authority to preach the Cross with many Indulgences for all them that would
follow the Duke. At what time (writes Bale out of Purney a wiclefist the^
living) Inualuit tunc Antichristi furor prae caeteris temporibus. Antichrists
fury prevailed more than in other times. More over Polidor lib. 19. says that
two Heretics were burnt in London in this Kings time, whom Bale Cent. 5. cap.
74. calls servants of Christ. In this Kings time lived the virtuous Lady
Mary Countess of Saint Paul, a woman (says Stow page 437) of singular
example for life, Saints.
who builded Pembrooke hall in Cambridge, and S. John of Bridlinghton, of whom
we will speak in the next kings time. In this Kings time lived that witty
schoolma^ William Occham.

King Richard. 2. XLIIII.
IN the year 1377. succeeded King Richard 2. Nephew to Edward 3. by his son
Edward the black Prince and reigned 22. years. Qualities of K. Richard. 2.
He passed (says Cooper An. 1377. and Stow page 439.) all his predecessors in
bounty and liberality. His Roman religion is most manifest. His Romans Religion.
First because he was crowned at a Mass whereof Walsingham Anno 1377. sets
down page 458. In the Commotion of Tiler went to Saint Edwards Shrine, prayed
before the high Altar, offered and Confessed him self to an Anchor, Stow page
459. and gave to the said Shrine a Ruby then esteemed worth a thousand Marks
page 593. Made four Kings of Ireland knights at Mass page 501. And made the
Earl of Northumberland swear to him upon the host after Mass p. 520. But
most of all is his religion certain by his own letters to the Pope and by his
laws and Acts against the Wicklefists. Fox Acts p. 590. sets down his
letters to Pope Boniface 9. thus. To the most holy Father in Christ and Lord,
L. Boniface 9. by the grace of God high Pope of the most holy Roman and
universal Church, his humble and devout, Richard by the grace of God king of
England and France, and Lord of Ireland, greeting and kissing of his blessed
feet. And. page 511. he cites an Act of Parliament then made to declare that
Urban was true and lawful Pope; And pa. 556. says, King Richard procured
letters Apostolical from the Pope for the confirming of certain statuts of
his. And page 431. cites a letter of Greg. 11. written in this kings time to
the University of Oxford, wherein the Pope says, that England does not only
flourish in power and abundance of riches, but is much more glorious and
shining in pureness of faith, accustomed always to bring forth men excellently
learned in the knowledge of holy scriptures, gravity of manners, men notable in
devotion, and defenders of the Catholic faith. The like commendations he
gives in an other letter to king Richard. Yea to testify the Roman Catholic
faith of this time, and to stop the mouth of some Ministers, who are not a
shamed to say the Pope gives leave to sin, It pleased God this present year
1608. to raise (in a manner) a knight of that time, and to make him speak. For
digging to make a grave in Saint Faiths Church under Paul's, they found the
Coffin of Sir. Gerard Bray brook the cords whereof were fresh and the herbs of
good savor, and upon his breast a Pardon granted unto him of Pope Boniface of
that time, entire and whole in these words. Boniface Bishop servant of the
servants of God. To his beloved son Gerard Braybrook the younger Knight and to
his beloved daughter in Christ Elizabeth his wife, of the Diocese of Lincoln,
health and Apostolical blessing. It has proceeded from the affection of your
devotion whereby you reverence us and the Roman Church, that we admit to our
favorable hearing your petitions, those especially which concern the halth of
your souls. Hence it is that we inclining to your requests, do by the Tenor of
these presents easily grant to your devotion, that the Confessor whom either of
you shall thinck good to choose shall by authority Apostolic give to you a
plenarie remission of all your sins of which you shall be in heart contrite and
confessed, once only at the point of your death: You persisting in the
sincerity of faith, in the unity of the holy Roman Church, and in obedience and
devotion to us and our Successors the Bishopps of Rome canonically elected. So
notwithstanding that the said Confessor concerning those things, of which
satisfaction shall be imposed upon either, He inioine it to be done by you, if you
return from peril of death, or by your Heirs, if you then chance to pass
from this world, that which you or they are bound to perform as is aforesaid.
And least (which God forbid) in regard of such favor, you be made more prone to
committ sin, We will that if by any such confidence you should fortune to
transgress, that the foresaid Indulgence shall not any thing profit you.
Therefore let it altogether be unlawful for any man to infringe this our grant
and will, or with rash bouldnes contradict it. If truly any shall presume to
attempt it, let him know he shall incur the indignation of Almighty God and
his most blessed Apostles Saint Peter and Paul. Given at Rome, at S. Peter's,
the 9. of June, in the second year of our Popedom.

Behold, gentle Keader, this ancient pardon, and consider by it: First, the
high esteem that our Catholic Anceistors made of the Popes pardons, in so
much, that this worshipful knight would send to Rome to procure a particular
one for him self and his wife. Again how untruly Ministers say, that Popes
give pardon and leave to sin, seeing this pardon could not avail for any
sins committed upon hope of the pardon. But* espetially I would have thee
consider Gods wonderful disposition in the conseruing and revealing of this
Pardon at this time. What thinckest thou that this Knights grave should be
never opened till this day? That the Pardon should be preserved from corruption
so long lying in the earth? That that only Coffin in which this Pardon was,
should have the cords so long time sound and the flowers so long odoriferous,
what thinck we this Pardon auailed to the soul of this Knight (for which
purpose it only was given) when it wrought such benefit to his dead corpse.

But now to come to the Kings laws and Acts against the Wicklefists Fox Acts
page 441. says, Kings Richards laws against vviclefists whom Protest.
account their brethren.
The King adioined his assent to the setting down of an Ordinance which was
indeed the very first law which is to be found made against religion and the
professors thereof. bearning the name of an Act made in the parliament Anno 5.
Kichard 2. vvherin (says Fox) VVicklefs doctrine is called heresy, and
notorious errors and slanders, to engender (says the Act) discord and
dissension betvveene diverse estates of the realm. And order is taken for to
arest and imprison such till they amend. Ibid Fox cites the letters patents of
the King against Wicklef and some other there named, or any other noted by any
other probable suspicion of heresies Again page 460. King Richard writes to
the Shr^efe of Northamton against the VVicklefists thus. [VVe willing therefore
to withstand the Defenders and maintainers of such heresies, Do will and
command as well the fornamed as namely the forsaid John VVoodward to bs
apprehended, straightly charging the same to be imprisoned by their bodies, or
otherwise punished as shall seem good to the Justices.] And page 504. he
sets down the Kings Commission in these words. [VVe by our special Letters
Patents in the zeal of our faith have given authority and license unto the
forsaid Archbishops, and all and every of his Suffragans to arest all and every
one of them that will preach or mantain any such Conclusions repugnant unto the
determination of our holy Mother the Church. And in other let^ers charge all
not to hinder the Bishops of hereford in suppressing the Lolards. Yea page 406.
Edit. 1596. Fox cites a law made Anno 2. Richard 2. for burning of
VVicklefists Thus (says Fox page 505.) King Richard taking part with the Pope
and the Rom^sh Prelates, waxed somewhat strait and hard to the poor Christians
of the contrary side of VVicklef, and says that though none were burnt under
him, yet some were condemned, diverse abiured, and did penance. And page 513.
says. King Richard those to serve the humor of the Pope. K. Richard gathers
a Council against VViclef. VViclef condemned by 10 Bishop^ 44. deuines 20
lavviers.
To this Bale Cent. 6. cap. 1. adds, that Wicklef was banished for ^ome
years. And cap. 77. that Anno 1382. Wicklef was condemned by ten Bishops, and
forty four Divines, and twenty Lawyers. And cap. 82. says, that King Richard
at the commandment of Boniface 9. and Cent. 7. cap. 11. gathered a great
Council Anno 1392 against the Wicklefists. And Fox page 507. K. Richard
leaves all to suppress vviclefists.
and Walsingham An. 1395. and others write, that King Richard being in Ireland,
left all as soon as he heard increase of Lollards, and calling the chief of
them unto him threatened them greatly, if they followed Lollards any more, and
making one of them swear thereto, the K. swore to him, that if he broke his
oath, he should die a foul death. So earnest was that King against those, whom
Protestants account now their brethren. And albeit he consented to the Law made
Anno 1391. against those that procured or brought any excommunication of the
Pope against any, yet that Law was not made to deny any point of the Popes
authority, but because (as Polidor says l. 20) many were vexed daily for
causes which they thought could not be known at Rome easily, The King and Lords
Temporal and Commons (for the Lords spiritual rec^amed as Fox witnesses page
512.) thought it expedient that in this point the Pope should not use his
authority. Besides that when Pope Boniface 9. sent to have these Laws
recalled, the King (says Walsingham in Ypod^gmate, Anno 1391.) Vt silius
obediens. As an obedient child, determined to fulfill the Popes demaundes, but
the Knights of the Parliament would not abrogate the Statute against Prouisors,
because they would not have English Benefices at any time given to strangers.
And the times of King Richard were so manifestly Roman Catholic, as the Kings
Attorney in the araignment of Garnet calls the^ the midni^ht of Popery. Bale
Cent. 6. cap 96. Saints.
says that Almost all that were in those darck times did err through
ignorance of Gods law. In this kings time dyed Saint John of Bridlington whose
life is written in Capgraue who (says Bale Centur. 6. c. 63. Caelesti
Theologiae assiduus cultor adhaesit. And William Fleet an Austin Friar, who
was canonized as Bale Cent. 6. c. 41. reports out of Sabellicus.

Henry 4. XLV.
IN the year 1399. succeeded king Henry 4. granchild to king Edward 3. by John
Duke of Lancaster, Worthiness of K. Henry 4.
and dyed Anno 1413. having reigned 14. years. He was (says Polider lib. 21.
of a great courage, and after the end of civil wars entertained all most
gently. His Romans Religion.
The same has Cooper Anno 1399. and Stow Chron. page 424. His Roman Catholic
religion is most notorious. For as Fox Acts page 523. and others write, he made
the Statute ex officio. Where is appointed. That who so ever is convicted of
(Wicklefs) heresy before his Ordinary or Commissioners, that then the
Shriefes. Maiers and Bay lifs of the City, Contrie, or Town, shall take the
persons after sentence is pronounced, and cause them openly to be burned in
sight of the people. And page 517. Fox sets down the Kings Decree in
parliament, wherein he professes to be zealous in religion, and reverent lover
of the Catholic faith, And minding to root out all heresies out of his
Kingdom, And there commands one William Santrey a convict heretic to be
burnt, which perhaps is he whom Bale Cent. 6. cap. 75. says was burnt in
Smithfield An. 1401. In this time was burnt says Bale Cent. 8. c. 5. that
relaps William Swinderby a smith in London for denying the real presence, and
a Tailor the same year 1410. for the same cause Fox page 481. names his
brother John Badby burnt then, who (as Walsingham. ypodig. page 174, who then
lived, writes) said that the Eucharist is not the body of Christ, but worse
than a toade or a spider, And perhaps he is that VViclesist of whom that grave
Author Thomas Walden who (was there present) reports Tom. 2. c. 63. That
standing before the Archbishop and Bishops in presence of the Duke of york and
many nobles, Miracle f^^^ not of the B^ sacrament
he said that a Spider was more to be worshipped tha^ the Eucharist, and
suddenly from the top of the Church came a great spider and sought to enter
into his mouth, and would scarce be kept out by any man's help. Moreover Fox
Acts 5. 8. says that this King was the first of all English Kings, that began
the burning of Christ's (VViclef) Saints for standing against the Pope. That K.
Henry burnt VViclefs Saints is evident, But he was not the first which burnt
such as stood against the Pope, as appears by what has been said of Edward
3. K Henry 4. wholy bent to the Pope.
And finally he concludes that this king was bent altogether to vphould the
Popes Prelacie. And therefore in his Considerations, Considerat. 10. says,
Protestants rather dyed than lived in the days of King Henry 4. And when the
Lollards or Wicklefists requested him (as says Walsingham An. 1410.) either to
alter, or mitigate the forsaid Statute, he answered them that he would rather
enforce it. And when they proposing to him the same bait, What bait the
VViclefists Proposed to K. Henry. 4. to overthrow religion. The like offer
made Protestants which Sir Thom more confuted.
as Protestants did to King Henry 8. desired him to take away the Church
livings, because with them he might maintain 15. Earls, 1550. Knights, 6200.
Squirs, and 100. Hospitals, he detesting their malice commanded them to silence.

King Henry 5. XLVI.
IN the year 1413. succeeded K. Henry 5. son to King Henry 4. and died An.
1422. having reigned 9. years. The rare virtues of K Henry. 5.
He was (says Polidor lib. 22.) the only glory of that time, then whom none
borne either for greatness of courage or for virtue was more famous or excellent,
whose love even yet remains amongst men. The like commendations give to him
Walsingham, who then lived Histor. page 465. and ypodigm. page 178. Cambden
Brit. page 442. calls him Optimum Principem. Stow page 595. Victorious and
renowned King. He won the great battle of Agincourt, and greatest part of
France with Paris, and was appointed by the French King Regent of France, and
heir after his death. The Roman religion of this Victorious and virtuous Prince
is notorious. His Romans Religion.
First page 569.) he made a Statut An. 2. That all and singular such as were of
Wiclefs learning, if they would not give over should suffer death in two manner
of kinds, That is, They should be first hanged for treason against the king
(against whom they rebelled) and then burned for heresy against God.
Secondly, page 675* in all his life and all his doings was so serviceable to
the Pope and his Chaplins, that he was called the Prince of Priests. The
valiantest Prince of England called the Prince of Priests.
These were the Lollards who as Walsing. says Hist. page 435. were wont to
say. Now the Prince of the Pri^sts is gone, now our enemy is departed. Thirdly
he hanged and burnt Sir p. 581. calls him the public enemy. And he was so
fantastical at his death, as he talked of his own rising to life the third
day page 582. He burnt also diverse other Wicle^ists ex Bale Centur. 7. cap. 5.
And Fox page 481. tells that being yet Prince he was at the burning of the
forsaid John Badly, and commanded fire to be put to him when he would not
recant. Fou^^hly, he Hist. page 452. as Beethlem for Carthusians, Sion for
Brigittings, and another for the Caelestins. which two last orders came cap.
84.) was the great Clerk and gretest aduersaire of the Wicklefists Thomas
Walden Provincial of the white Friars. Confession of sins before victory.
Sixthly being to give the battle at Agincourt, the night before (says Walsing
Hist. page 438.) He and his soldiers spent the night in making their
co^fessio^s, and providing for their souls. And in ypodigm. page 188. tells
how at harflew they had a folemne procession before the blessed Sacrament. Of
this religion was that English King and English soldiers who won that glorious
battle, who conquered France, and made Anno 1416. England in her most
triumphant time accounted it great honor to be esteemed a Nation that ovved
devotion to the Church of Rome.
sent his Ambassadors to the Council of Constance, where Wickleft and his
doctrine were condemned, and there procured it to be ordained, that England
(says Stow) should obtain the name of a nation, and said one of the four
Nations that owe their devotion to the Church of Rome which until that time
men of other Nations for envy had let. Behold Christian Reader how the
most victorious that England ever had, and England in the most triumphant time
that ever she enjoyed, strove to be accounted a Nation that owed devotion to
the Church of Rome, and accounted that a principal honor. And at that time did
God bless our Nation with greatest victories, with hapiest success, with
largest Empire that ever since or before she obtained. And these times were so
evidently Roman Catholic, as the Kings Attorney in the araignment of F. Garnet
calls them the very midnight of Popery. And Fox in Considerat 10. says
Protestants rather died than lived under this King In this Kings time lived
that great Clerk Thomas Walden, Saints.
who (as Bale said Cent 7. cap. 84.) converted the Duke of Lituania with all
his people to popisme and as he reports out of Diverse is canonized.

King Henry. 6. XLVII.
THe 47. Christian King was King Henry 6. only son to King Henry 5. began
his reign Anno 1422. and reigned 38. years.. The piety of K. Henry. 6.
He was (says Cambd. in Brit. page 345. The best and most pious Prince. and
page 257. A most holy King a pattern of Christian piety and patience King Henry
7. so admired his virtues as he dealt with Pope Julius to canonize him. Fox
page 716. says, I doubt not but King Henry 6. was a good and quiet Prince
Stow page 595. says, he was of nature gentle and meek suffered all injuries
patiently. page 624. always na^urally inclined unto good page 705. after his
death worshipped by the name of holy King Henry, whose red hat of velvet (says
he) was thought to heal the head ach of such as put it on. In both states he
was patient and virtuous, that he may be a pattern of most perfect virtue. He
was plain and upright only given to pra^er and reading of scripture and alms
deeds. Of such integrity of life as the Bishop that had been his Confessor
ten years avouched that he had not all that time committed any mortal crime.
So continent as suspicion never touched him. Polid. l 24. says many miracles
were vvroughtly his body.
Far from covetousness so religiously affected that on principal holy days he
would wore sackcloth next his skin. He pardoned one who had thrust him into the
side with a sword, and of his natural inclination abhored all vices as well of
body as of mind. Thus do Protestants commend this holy king. His Romans Religion.
And his Roman religion is manifest. For Pope Eugenius sent to him a goulden
rose as to a Catholic Prince, Stow page 635. And under him were diverse
Wicklesists burnt An. 1415. 1430. 1431. 1428. And Bishop Pecock made publicly
to recant 1457. and had his books burnt before his face, ex Bale Centur. 7.
cap. 75. Godwin in Bishops of Chichester, Fox Acts Edit. 1596. page 605. and
sequen. sets down the names of diuets VVicklefists, whereof some were burnt,
some whipped, some made abjure the^r heresy under this king. And page 644. he
sets down public letters of the King dated An. 18. Regni where he
avouches the burning of one White a VVickle^^t, and calls him Traitor to
God.

King Edward 4. XLVIII.
THe 48. Christian Prince was Edward 4. of the house of York, who began his
reign 1460. and reigned 22. years. He was (says Stow page 689) of noble
courage and great wit. page 722. a goodly personage princely to behold, of
heart coragious, Valor of K. Edward. 4.
politic in counsel, in adversity nothing abashed, in prosperity rather
ioifull than proud, in peace just and merciful, in war sharp and fierce. His
R^m. Religion.
His Roman religion is manifest, For (Bale says Centur. 8. cap. 34.) That his
Confessor was John Stanborn a Carmelit. Qui totus iurauerat in Romani
Pontificis authoritatem: who wholly swore to the Popes authority. And Fox Acts
Editione 1596. page 659. puts one John Goose a VVicklefist burnt under him.
And Ibid. notes that since the time of King Richard 2. there is no reign of
any King to be assigned hitherto wherein some good man or other has not
suffered the pains of fire for the religion of Jesus (Wicklef) Besides Stow
page 690. says that King Edward went crowned in VVestmenster in the honor of
God and S. Peter, and the next day in paul's in the honor of God and S. Paul.
And his daughter Brigit became a Nonue polidor lib. 24.

King Edward. 5. XLVIIII.
THe 49. Christian Prince was Edward 5. soune to Edward 4. a child of a 11.
years old, who lived not many days after his Father. As for the religion
which this child had, it may easily appear by what has been said of the
Father.

King Richard. 3. L.
IN the year 1483, the 50. Christian Prince was Richard 3. brother to Edward
4, who took the Crown and held it two years. The qualities of this K. are
notorious in all Chronicles. K. Richards religion.
And his religion is known both by what has been said of his brother. And as
Polidor l. 25. he began a College in York of an hundredth Priests.

King Henry 7. LI.
IN the year 1485. succeeded King henry 7. of the house of Lankaster, and
reigned 23. years. Worthiness of K. Henry. 7.
He was (faith Stow) a Prince of marvelous wisdomme, police justice temperance
and gravity. Fox Acts. page 729. says the same. His Romans Religion.
His Roman Catholic religion is evident. For Fox sets down diverse
Wicklefists burnt or otherwise punished under him, as page 731. four. whereof
one the K. caused to be brought before him, but when he would not be persuaded,
was burnt. And page 774. he reckneth diverse others, and others abiured and
burnt in the cheek. Whereupon Considerat. 10. he says, Protestants rather died
than lived under King. Henry 7. And p. 776. says thus of K. Henry 7.
otherwise a prudent and temperat Prince permitted the rage of the Popes
Clergy so much to have their wills over the poor flock of Christ as they had.
Ibid. The persequution began now in the Church to be ^oat and he attributteth
the death of the K. to the persequution (forsooth) of the Gospellers. Moreover
page 799. He roporteth out of G. Lilly. how Henry 7. Anno 1506. send three
solemn Orators to Pope Julius 2. to yeald his obedience, Ex more (says Lilly)
to the Sea of Rome. And Stow p. 811. writes that Pope Julius 2. sent a cap of
maintenance, and a sword to King Henry 7. as to a Defender of the Church. And
Fox page 799. says that Pope Alexander 6. and Pius 3. had before done the
same. King Henry 7. builded also three Monasteries of Franciscans Pollidor in
vit. In this kings time lived John Alcok Bishop of Elie, Holy 7 men.
A man (says Godwin in his life) of admirable temperance for his life and
behauior unspotted and from a child so earnestly given to the study, not only
of learning, but of all virtue, and godliness, as in those days never any man
bore a greater opinion and reputation of holiness, He lived all his time most
soberly and chastely subduiing the temptations of the flesh by fasting study
and prayer and other such good means.

King Henry 8. LII.
KIng Henry 8. son to king Henry 7. began his Reign An. 1509. From the
which time to An. 1530. he continewed an earnest Roman Catholic. For (as Fox
says page 789.) From Anno. 1509. to 1527. diverse VVicklefists were presented,
troubled and imprisoned. And page 836. He sets down a letter of king Henry
Anno 13. To all Majors Sherifes, Bailifs, and Constables, and other officers to
assist the Bishop of Lincoln for punishing Heretics according to the laws of
holy Church. And Bale Cent. 8. cap. 62. says, that two were burnt An. 1515.
for the matter of the Sacrament. And cap. 75. that Barnnes was made to recant
Anno 1525. And likewise Bilney, Garret, and others An. 1527. Stow also and
others write how king Henry Anno 1511. wrote to the French king to desist from
molesting Pope Julius 2. and in the next year sent an army of ten thousand men
into France in the Popes defense. And An. 1513. K. Henry 8. zeal in defense of
the Pope.
Went himself in person with a royal army and conquered Torwin and Turney.
And not content thus manfully to have adventured his person to defend the Pope
with his sword, did in the year 1521. write also an excellent book in his
defense against Luther. The original whereof I have seen in the Popes Library
with the Kings subscription thereto in these bad verses, if I well remember.

Hunc librum Henricus Leoni decimo mittit
In signum fidei and pignus amicitiae.
This book to Leo tenth King Henry the eighth does send
In testimony of his faith, and token of a friend.
For which book Pope Leo gave to him and his successors for ever the glorious
title of Defender of the faith. And again in the year 1527. When Pope Clement
7. was taken prisoner, he gave monthly 60. thousand angels, for the maintenance
of an army for the Popes delivery. And after this made long time suit to the
same Pope that he would by his authority pronounce his marriage with Queen
Catherin to be none, and divorce them, which he not granting, King Henry (as
you shall hear in the next Book) renounced the Popes authority, and made him
self head of the Church, and yet remained in all other points a Roman
Catholic. Whereupon Bale Cent. 8. cap. 80. says, K Henry 8. nevver a
Protestant.
that King Henry did admit the Doctrine of Antichrist even in the matters of
greatest moment, and did retain the contagious dreggs. Sleidan Englil. 13. fol.
174.
By such phrases this wrech uses to understand Papistrie. And Fox page 1291.
grants, that Obits and Masses appear in his will. Most sever of all Engl.
Kings against Heretics.
And as he says page 1135. made it high treason to deny the real presence,
and fellonie to defend marriage of Priests, breaking of vows, or to condemn
Communion in one kind, private Mass, or auriculer Confession, without all
benefit of abiuration or Clergy. Which Laws were severely executed by him.
And at his death would gladly have been reconciled to the Roman Church, as
Bishop Gardener (with whom he dealt about that matter) protested openly in a
sermon at Paul's Cross. And so Catholic was the people of England in his time
even after his revolt from the Sea Apostolic, as when the Vicar of Croidon a
most famous preacher of that time, told them in a sermon at Paul's, that as
they had denied the supremacy of the Pope, so in time they would fall to deny
other points of the Catholic faith, Zeal of our grand fathers touching the
real presence.
even the real presence of Christ in the blessed Sacrament, The people at that
word cried out. Never Never Never. which yet now we find too true.

Queen Marie LIII.
AFter K. Henry the eight succeeded in the year 1546. King Edward the sixth
his son, a child of nine years old, which child wanting the use of perfect
reason, and unfit to govern him self, was the first Protestant Prince that ever
was in England, and turned the Roman religion which his Father had left,
(though maimed in one principal point) to open Protestancie. Not for the
miracles or rare virtues of the Preachers thereof, or their conuincing their
adversaries in disputation, as King Ethelbert changed his Paganism into the
Roman religion, as is before showed, but because the Lord Protector and his
accomplices thought it most suitable to their humors, and most fit for their
aspiring pretenses. But how unfortunate this exchange was, not only to the
souls of this King and principal Actors therein, but also to their lives and
bodies, you may read in Stow, The ill end of the kringets in of Probestancie.
where you shall see that the very same year 1548. that Proclamation was made
for receiving in both Kinds, the Lord Admiral (a chief agent in the change
of religion) though brother to the Protector, and Uncle to the King, was
beheaded for a Traitor, And the next year 1549. When Proclamation was made
against Mass, sone after also was Proclamation made against the Protector him
self, the principal author of the change, and he cast into the Tower. And in
the year 1552. when the new service book of Common prayer begun in Paul's,
the said Protector was beheaded, And the next year the King died, and the Duke
of Northumberland (an other principal actor in the change of religion though
against his own conscience, as he openly declared at his death) was beheaded
for treason, and Cranmer and Ridley and other favorers of that change were
deprived of their Dignities, and sone after burnt. This was the rufull end of
the first setters up of Protestancie. For maintenance whereof albeit a new
Queen was proclaimed, Nobles sworn, and the strength of England gathered, yet
in short time almighty God overthrew it again without any bloodshed by one
virtuous woman Q. Marie, Protestancie ouerthrone by a woman without any
bloodshed. Virtue of Q. Marie. Author of danger. positions l 2 cap. 14. Her
Romans Religion. In the arraignment of F Garnat. D Dove lib. of Recusancie vvil
have Bellarm. to be a Protest. or at lest no perfect Papist.
who all the time of her life lived so chastely and religiously, that all her
enemies could not to this day fasten the least suspicion of vice upon her. And
whom even Protestants write to have Been of nature and disposition very mild
and pitiful. Which argues that they well deserved the severity which she
showed toward them. And so earnest a Roman Catholic she was, as the
Protestants write of her, that there was, Not these thousand years a more
obedient daughter to the Church of Rome than she was. VVherby you may iugde of
the impudency of Doctor Reinolds who in his Confer. page 583. denies, not
only all the former Princes, but even Queen Marie ever to have allowed the
Popes absolute spiritual supremacy, (or as he speaks) the Popes Monarchy,
but only to have granted him such a pre-eminence, as the Duke of Venice has
in that state. But with her in the year 1558. ended all the glory of
Catholic Princes of England. Who (except King Henry 8. for a few years, and
King Edward 6.) had continewed from the year 598. till the forsaid year 1558.
the space almost of a thousand years. And after rose a new kind of
Protestancie, differing from that of King Edward the child's time. Not (as I
said before) through any miracles or strange virtue of the Preachers thereof, or
their ouercomming their adversaries in Disputation, but against the will of all
the Bishops and a great part of the Nobility, by the counsel of mere Lay
men, and the authority of a woman, who was induced to make this change, not
for zeal of religion (which she little regarded) but to assure her state the
more, because she feared if she acknowledged the authority of the Church of
Rome, her birth might be called in question. But of the cause, manner, and
means of erecting Protestancie, we shall speak more in the second book.

Epilogue.
HItherto (gentle Reader) thou have heard 53. Princes of England successiuly,
believing and professing the Romans Catholic faith, besides 70. and more others,
who reigned over certain parts of England, whiles it was divided into diverse
Kingdoms, whose names only I will here set down. Kings of Kent 13. Ethelbert,
Edbald, Ercombert, Egbert Lotharius, Edricus, VVith^ed, Edbert, Edilbert,
Alri^us, Edilbert-pren, Cuthred, and Baldred. Kings of the East Saxons 9.
Sebert Sigebert Sigher S. Sebba, Sighard, Senfred, Offa, Sclred, Swithed. Kings
of Eastengland 13. to wit Redwald, Carpwald, S. Sigebert, Egris. Anna,
Ethelere, Ethelwald, Adulph, Elwald, Beorna, Ethelred, Saint Ethelbright* S
Edmund, kings of middle England 17. Namely Peda, Vulpher, Ethelred, Coenred,
Ceolred, Ethelbald, Bernred, Offa, Egfert, Kenulph, Saint Kenelm, Ceolwulph,
Bernulph, Ludecan, VVithlof, Bertulph Burdred. Kings of the Northpart of
England 18. Edwin, Saint Oswald, Oswin, Oswi, Egfrid, Alfrid, Ostred, Kenred,
Ostrie, Ceolwulph, Egbert, Ostwuld, Mollo, Alred, Ethelbert. Alswald, Ostred,
Athelred, and some kings also of the South Saxons. Consider I pray thee now the
number of these kings which is above 120, far above the smallest number of two
Protestant Princes. Consider their sex and age, who almost all were men and of
mature years, VVheras of the Protestant Princes, one was a child, the other a
woman. Consider their wisdom and valor, in which they were inferior to no
Princes in Christendom. Consider their virtue, which was so great, as there
are more Kings of Ingland Saints, than of all Christendom besides. Consider
the end for which they first embraced the faith, which was nether to enjoy
their lust, nor to get any Church goods, nor to assure their temporal state,
but to gain heaven. Consider the Counselors, whose advise they followed
herein, were not ignorant and lay men, but virtuous and learned Divines.
Consider the motives which drew them to the Catholic religion, to wit, rare
virtue, great learning, admirable miracles of their first preachers. Finally,
consider how long they continewed in their faith, to wit almost a thousand
years, and how almost in every Kings time here lived some notable men, who
with rare virtue and miracles have confirmed their faith.

Consider I say all this, and then judge whither the Catholic religion of so
many and so worthy Kings, or the Protestant faith of one Child and one woman,
be more likely to be good and to come from God. Can we think that so many
Princes of mature years and judgment should be blind, rather then one child
and a woman, that these could see that in so few years which all they could
not perceive in a thousand? That these two should hit upon Gods truth for
temporal ends, rather tha^ they for spiritual? That that should be Christ's
faith whereto these two were moved by wordly (if not vicious) motives, the^ that
whereto they were moved by heavenly virtue and miracles? That that should be
Gods truth which began but the last day, rather tha^ that which has continewed
here this thousand years? Finally that a Child and one woman are gone to
heaven, and so many virtuous Princes with all their Archbishops Bishops Prelates
Diuins and Clergy, with all their Queens, Princes, Nobles Commons and
Ancestors for these thousand years, not withstanding all their wisdom,
learning, miracles, virtuous lives, and good deeds are gone to hell for want of
true faith in Christ? were (as the ancient Father Tertullian says to certain
Heretics of his time) so many millions christened in vain, believed in vain,
served God in vain, and are dead in their sins. Perhaps some will say that
the foresaid Princes and our Ancestors believed so much of the Christian faith
as is necessary to salvation. But then it evidently follows that the
Protestant faith is not the Christian faith. Because (as I have shown before
out of the confession of Protestants) those Princes knew not so much of
Protestancy as that which Protestants account the soul head and foundation of
their religion and without which they say all is lost, To wit, Justification by
only faith. Yea they are by Fox and others plainly denied to have known the
Protestants faith, and affirmed to have held diverse points quite opposite to
Protesta^cy. How then could they be saved by any point of Protestancy who knew
not so much as the foundation thereof, and with other points of their belief
ouerturned it? Wherefore others ashamed to condemn so many, so worthy, and so
virtuous Christians to Hell, and yet not daring to afford them hope of salvation
lest they should condemn their own religion, answer, that they will not
judge their forfathers, but leave them to Gods judgment. But these either are
ashamed to utter what they think, or have no firm faith at all. For if they
firmly believed their Protestant faith to be Christ's faith they must needs
thinck that all that have died without it are damned, for without true faith it
is impossible to please God, or (which is a spice of Atheism and right
Antichristianitie) that there are more ways to heaven than by Christ and his
faith, that there are many faiths, many baptisms, many Christ's, many Gods. From
which irreligious atheism God deliver my dear country. And thus having
sufficiently showed how Saint Austin was our English Nations first preacher and
what qualities he had fit for such a function and what kind of doctrine his was
and how it has continued in our country ever since, let us now view Luther and
his doctrine and see whither they have the like or rather quite opposite
qualities and conditions, that after having weighed both, we may the berter
judge whereof to make our choice.

Finis Primi libri.
THE SECOND BOOK OR SCALE, VVHERIN The qualities of Luther and of his Doctrine
are set down.
THE FIRST CHAPTER. That Luther was the first Author of the Protestant Religion.
Why Catholics might be alledaged against. Luther.
ALBEIT I might justly produce the testimony of Catholic writers, who lived at
the same time with Luther and some of them in the same Country also near unto
him to prove that he was the first beginner of disproued in any other weighty
matter, and of that gravity as it can not be thought that they would wittinglie
make them selves a scorn to the world by reporting notorious untruths, and
finally being Catholics whose testimony (as we see in England,) Protestants
use to account most sure, Catholic writers I say being thus qualified I might
justly produce their testimony especially in so easy a matter for them to
know, and so easy to be disproued if it were not true (For what more easy
than to name one living man that was Protestant before Luther if any had been)
yet partly because I would avoid all cauils, Why their testimonies are
forborne.
but especially because Protestants them selves testify enough in this matter,
I will abstain from Catholic witnesses, leaving it to the judicious Reader to
considet how evident our cause is, which we will prove only by the testimony
of our adversaries. Five kind of Profes that Luther was the beginner of
Protestantisme.
And that Luther was the first Author of Protestant Religion, I will prove.
First, by the Protestants confession of the inuisibilitie or no appearance in
the world of their Church or religion before Luther. and Teachers from our
Church. Fourthly I will prove it by reason. And Fifthly by their plain
affirming and granting that Luther was indeed the beginner of their religion.
To which profes I will add in the next Chapters a disprofe of such as some
Protestants challenge to have been of their religion in England in former times.

That the Protestants Church was not visible before Luther. Luther.
2. Thouching the first kind of proof that the Protestants Congregation was not
visible in the world before Luther, it may suffice that Luther himself lib. de
Capt. cap. de bapt. complayneth that The Popes tirany (says he) for many ages
has extinguished the faith. And lib. de libert. he cries out thus. Alas
Christian life is unknown in all the world. Erasmus a Co^fessor with Fox,
Erasm. cont. Epist. non Sab. Luther. Fox in his Calendar. Reinolds. Co^for.
page 152. 1^5. Calvin. The alteration of religion with the beginning of
Charles 5. took her original. Sleidan. prefat histor. Whitaker. Perkins.
and a man of good judgment with Doct. Reinolds writes that Luther taught many
things which for many ages the Church knew not. Calvin Praefat. Institut.
confesses plainly, that his doctrine diu incognita sepultaque latuit; Lay long
time unknown and buried. Again: In the ages past there was no face of a true
Church. For some ages all things were drowned in deep darkness. And lib. 4. c.
1.. 11. For some ages the pure preaching of the word vanished. Doct. Whitaker
cont. Duraeum page 274. we as plainly know (says he) the visible Church to
have perished as thou know a man to be dead: Perkins in his Exposit: of the
Creed p. 400. Before the days of Luther for the space of many hundred years
an Universal Apostacy ouerspred the whole world. The protestant Church hid for
many hundred years tog^t^er.
And in the Resor. Catholic p. 3^2. Our Church says he) in Luthers time
began to show it self as having been hid by an universal Apostasy many
hundred years together. Could one speak more plainly? And exposit. cit. p,
370. he says these many hundreds. which he means were nine hundred years.
D. Fulke in natis Apoc. 20. Fulke.
They (Protestants) were often driven into mountains and desert places of the
Alps, Apenin Hercinia silua and other corners of the world, or else dispersed
and kept close in all regions of Europe. Surueler.
The surueier of the pretended discipline. c. 8. in this latter age (says he)
when after a long darkness, it pleased God to restore unto us the light of the
Gospel. c. 4. All priests and people drowned in Popery from top to toe.
Priests of all sorts and likewise the people all of the^ together from the
top to the toe were drowned in the pudles of Popery. And I pray you who was
then a Protestant.

3. But how long was this ignorance, this darkness, this drowning of Priests and
people in Popery. Fox in his Acts edit. 1596. (which edition I cite in this
book) p. 767. Fox.
says. From 400. years heretofore and more the religion of Christ was wholly
burned into Idolatry. And p. 390. About the year 1370. all the world (says
he) was in desperate estate and ignora^^e of Gods truth ouershadowed the whole
world and there seemed in a manner to be no one little spark of pure doctrine
left. Again in his Protestation before his Acts. About the year 1215. and 1080,
Christian faith was exstinguished, then the true visible Church began to shrink
and keep in for fear. And further page 138 In the time of King Edgar (which was
An. 954.) and of the old Monks, superstition began to creep into the Church
for ignorance of free justification by faith. And yet further speaking of our
Christian Kings from our first Christianity unto the year 800. he writes
thus page 120. How much are we (Protestants) bound to God for the sincerity of
his truth hidden so long to our Ancestors and opened now to us. Protestantisme
hidden to our Anceitors.
Ibid. They lacked our faith. Thus Fox confesses that the Protestants truth
was hidden and unknown here for one thousand years almost. Nay p. 138. he
fears no to write that, Shortly after the time of Christ and his Apostles the
Doctrine of Christian Justification (which page 770. he accounts, the only
principal origin of our salvation, and page 767. the foundation of all
Christianity) began to be forgotten. Bale.
In like manner Bale an other great Antiquarie Centur. 6. cap. 69. calls the
time of King Richard 2. a darkish age. And Centur. 5. cap 85. The age (says
he) of K. Edward 3. was covered with darkness of extreme ignorance. And in King
Henry 3. time as he writes Centur. 4. cap. 6. Wholesome truth perished from
earth. And under K. Henry 2. (as he writes Cent. 3. c. 14.) Man's life was
corrupted upon earth with Antichristian traditions. So that all this time there
was no room for Protestants on earth. And yet further Cent. 1. page 69. From
the year 607. (says he) purity of heavenly doctrine vanished in the Church.
And p. 65. After Greg. the first purity of doctrine perished. And Cent. 1. c.
74. Protestancie for a thousand years only in Idiots and in holes.
From Phocas (who lived An 602.) till the renewing (says he) of the Gospel
(by Luther) the doctrine of Christ was for that space amongst Idiots and in
lurking holes. Do thou hear Reader in whom and where this new Gospel was for
almost 1000. years together? Napier.
Napier also in his Treatise upon the Reuelat. page 145. Even 1260. years
(says he) the Pope and his Clergy has possessed the outward and visible
Church of Christians reigning without any debatable co^tradiction. Gods truth
(says he p 191. 161. 156) most certainly (note the word) abiding so long
latent and invisible. Behold this Protestant confessing that their truth was
invisible for more than twelve hundred years* Fulke.
yea Fulk in his Answer to a Counterfeit Cathol. page 35. will have the Church
to have decayed immediately from the Apostles time. And to conclude with Luthers
testimony as I began with it. He Galath 1. fol. 27. Luther.
has these words. When the light of the Gospel after so great darkness began
first to appear. And Galath. 3. fol. 154. Of this difference (taught by me)
between the law and the Gospel there is nothing to be found in the books of the
Monks Canonists Scholemen, Luthers doctrine not known to the ancient Fathers.
no nor in the books of the ancient Fathers. And Galat. 5. fol. 271. This was
common in these our days before the light and truth of the Gospel was reveled.

4. Thus you see it evident by the confession of Luther and diverse other
Protestants both domestical and foraine that their Church, their faith and
religion was invisible and unknown to the world before Luther. And this
inuisibilitie of their Church before Luthers time do all Protestants mantaine,
who affirm the calling or sending of Luther Calvin and such like to preach, to
have been extraordinary or only from God, because either there was no protest.
church or ministry, of which they could be sent ordinarily, or at least none
such known to them. And hervpo^ may any man of judgment gather that indeed
their Church and religion was not at all before Luther. For if it were not
visible how came they to knowledge of it? Or if as Fox says in his Protest. it
was not reported in Histories how know they that it was? Can they tell what was
in times past without relation of those who the^ lived, unless they pretend some
such revelation as Moses had to know the Creation of the world? Is it not a
mere fictio^ or imagination, such as every new start up Heretic can avouch?
Is it not a witles and witfull assertion to affirm that there has been ever
such kind of people, and yet not to be able to name one man of the^, one place
where they were, one witness of their being? Does Gods word force us to such
poor, miserable, yea incredible shifts? Or rather is it not wrongly understood
when we are compelled to invent such shameful shifts, or else to confess that
Gods truth and religion was no where in the world before Luther? Iuel.
Surely to use even Iuels words in the like matter, Articulo 2. division. 8. It
must needs be a strange Church that had nether beginning nor ending, no
defender, no reprouer, no mouth to utter or ear to hear it, nor pen to write,
nor place to rest in. Tertullian
And we may say to such as Tertullian said to old Heretics. Who are you?
whence are you? when came you? VVher lurked you so long? The meetings of
witches though they be brought together by the devil yet be often times seen.
Protestants for one thousand years more invisible them Fairies.
The meetings of Fairies though they be spirits some times are discried. And
were there Protestants these thousand years and yet more invisible than either
witches or Fairies? were there Co^gregations of them and yet nether seen, heard
or imagined of by the world? Surely this kind of Church has her being as
Protest. have their Justification, that is merely by belief or imagination, not
by real existe^ce. But as Tertullian said of old Heretics so some now Will
be ee^e without Scriptures that they may believe against Scripture. For what
more without Scripture either of God or man, than that there has been a
Protestant Church for these thousand years and yet we nether saw any such, nor
any that then lived has told us? And what m^re against Scripture than to
believe that Chtist and his Church kept (especially for so long time) in
penetralibus in corners and lurking holes, Math 4. and 24.
that his Church and Pastors are not a city built upon a mountain, a light
set open upon a candlestick that it may shine to all? Or how could any of them
be saved if they professed it not seeing confession is made to salvation. Romans
10.

5. And this kind of argument must needs seem forcible both to Protestants and
Puritans because they both use it against their adversaries. For hereby the
forsaid Surueyer, cap. 5. proves that the Puritan discipline was never before
Calvin, because in all times before there is no mention or record of it. Now
Puritans prove that there were no Anabaptists before this age.
And likewise the Puritans prove that Anabaptisme was not before our days as
you may see in Colloquio Francatal. whose words because they make much to our
present purpose I will here rehearse. If you (say they to the Anabaptists) be
the Church of God it will follovv that God was without a people and a Church
till the year 1522. in which Nicolas Storck and a little after Thomas Muncer
laid the first foundation of your doctrine. And this they prove thus. For if
you read all Histories from the beginning of the world you shall not find a
people which had a Confession of faith like to yours. But because say they
nether God was from the beginning without a people and Church, nor the
everlasting King Jesus Christ without a Kingdom and your Congregation began
first An. 1522. it follows that you can not be the true Church and people of
God. Thus Purita^s against the Anabaptists, and we object the same to them.

6. As for the second point of the newnes and late rising of Protestancie
Luther Prefat. Epist. Galat. fol. 2. says thus: That the Protestants Church is
new and lately risen. Luther. Apology alias Iuel.
In these days this healthful knowledge of Christ is now revealed and raised
up again. And the Apology of the English Church in plain terms
acknowledges the newnes of their doctrine thus: It was easy for these men
(Papists) forty years ago to devise these and other greater crimes against us
when in midst of that darkness some beam of truth then unknown and unheard of
began first to rise. Lo he confesses that 40. years ago Protest. doct. was
not heard of before but then began first to appear. But let us hear him
further. When Martin Luther (says he) and Hulderic Zuinglius most excellent
men and sent of God to lighten the world began first to preach and the matter
was yet new (note) and the event uncertain and there could be no such heinous
wickedness imagined which for the nevvnes (Note again) and strangenes of the
matter would not be easily be believed of the people against us. Sleid prafat
Histor. says the original of Protestancie was in the beginning of Charles. 5.
reign. Reinolds.
Behold it twice confessed that their doctrine was new and strange also 40.
years ago. And page 13. he bids us to think of the beginning and
proceedings of their religion. D. Reinolds also in his Confer. page 152.
writes thus: It is more likely that you (Papists) who by long continuance of
time have had long occasion to steal away truth should corrupt the Fathers
than we who have not had it. Lo Reynolds confesses that Protestants have
not long continewed. Calvin.
Calvin also 4. instit c. 1. parag. 2. has these words. Albeit a heavy
desolatio^ which we every where see, do cry that there is nothing of the
Church remaining. And c. 3. para. 4. plainly avouches that there were no
Churches rightly settled, Cooper.
and therefore they needed to be sent extraordinarily. Cooper in his Chronicle
An. 1535. says, that Luther vvrote that Gods light was lately renewed. Fox.
And finally Fox to omit others in his Acts p. 788. confesses most plainly
that Luthers doctrine was new in the year 1524. Protestants doctrine but in the
blade. An. 1524.
For the^ (says he) the doctrine of Luther first beginning to spring and being
but in the blade, was not yet known vvhitherto it te^ded, nor to what it
would grow. And in like sort p. 791. he terms also, Zuinglius doctrine new.
To these I might add that the Patriarch of Constantin. to whom the Protest.
sent their doctrine, condemned it and calls, it altogether new doctrine. And
upon the newnes of their doct. it comes that these terms are most usual with
Protest. The doctrine of the Gospel was borne a new. Calvin. 4. instit. cap.
7. 24. Apol. Aug. page 56. 194. Whitaker. cont. Dur. page 19. 140. Bale Cent. 8.
cap. 60. 68. 100. Cent. 1 cap. 74. Field. of the Church lib. 3. cap. 39 Survey
cap. 8.
The Church restored, The Gospel restored. Christ's doctine renewed, Gods word
began to shine. The renouatio^ of the Gospel. The rising of the new
Jerusalem. The birth of the Gospel. Second birth of Christ Religion borne
again. And their first masters their first Bishops their Apostles or
Evangelists, Luther, Latimer, Ridly and the like. Hence what will follow every
one sees, to wit, that the Protest. Church or faith is not the Church or says
of Christ, which begun about 16. hundred years ago; but a new Church begun not
yet one hundred since. Or that Christ's Church and faith was quite dead and
gone, and Luther raised it again to life. And what Church then I pray you was
that wherein he was Christened? was it Pagan? were his Godfathers Heathens? was
he when he was baptized made a Paynim? whence came this new Church raiser? from
what heaven fell he? from what sea sprunge he? from what earth rose he? That
all the first Protestant Preachers had been before Romans Catholics.


7. Touching the third point to be proved that the Protestants first and cheef
teachers were once Roman Catholics and went from our Church and religion it is
so manifest as nether is it nor can it be denied. For Luther 1. Gal fol. 37.
says thus of him self: I was as earnest for the Popes laws as ever any was, I
honored the Pope of mere conscience. And fol 38. I di^ so highly esteem the
Popes authority that to dissent from him even in the least point I thought it
a sin worthy of everlasting death and would my self in defense of the Popes
authority have ministered fire and sword. And fol. 188, We that are old have
been trained up in Popish error even from our youth. Thus testified Luther for
him self and his German Protestants. Calvvin.
Calvin 4. instit. cap. 2 parag. 4. for him self and the French Protestants
says thus: We have departed from their (Popish) Church. c. 6. para. 1. We
have left the Sea of Rome cap. 15. parag. 17. We confess we were long time
blind and incredulous, understood not the matters of baptism, now we accuse
our blindness and hardness of heart. Iuel.
The Apologer of England speaking for him self and the English Ministers
writes thus page 188. We have indeed gone from the Pope we have shaken of the
yoke of the Bishop of Rome. Fox.
Finally Fox Acts page 3. speaking generally of Protestants says: It is true
that we are removed from the Church of Rome. And D. Reinolds amongst his
Conclusions makes this one. Reinolds.
That the reformed Churches in England Scotland France Germany and other
Kingdoms and Common wealths have severed them selves lawfully (says he) from
the Church of Rome. And if this be so notorious and confessed of all the chief
Masters and Churches of Protestants that before Luthers revolt they were all
Roman Catholics, undoubted it ought to be of al other Protestants of meaner
sort, and consequently there was never a Protestant before him.

8. Fourthly I prove by reason that Luther was the first beginner of
Protestancy. For as Iuell says Art. 1. diuis. 7 Eckius, Pighius, A question
never ansvvered by Protestants.
Hosius, and others who lived in Luthers time have cried out a maine in their
books and pulpits where was your religion before Luther began. The like has
Fox Acts page 749. and all know to be Acts page 749. proposing the forsaid
question to him self names a few, who rather show that there were no
Protestants in England before Luther. For 1. all the persons whom he names
abiured their faith as him self confesses page 750. and died (as he writes)
shortly after for greef or lived with shame. For his Church consisting of
abured persons How protested they that abiured.
2. these abiurers were (as he sets down) in the year 1521. four years
after Lurhers new preaching, and we ask for Protestants before his preaching.
3. no one of these abiured persons was accused for holding justification by
only faith which point is the soul head and foundation of Protestancie as has
been showed before and shall hereafter: so that without it they could be no
Protestants. And if they had held it, Fox.
it would have been discovered. For as Fox says page 650. The Catholic Prelates
made such diligent inquisition and examination as nether was any word so
closely spoken of them no articles mentioned, but it was it discovered.
Wherefore indeed those abiurers were but pore relics of the Lollards of whom
we shall speak hereafter. That Luther was Author of Protestancie confessed by
Protestants. Covel. Dove.


9. Lastly I prove that Luther was the beginner of Protestancie by the plain
and open confession of diverse Protestants and testimony of Luther himself.
For, Doct. Couell in his book of Articles published by authority Art. 19. page
130. says thus: Some Protestants make Luther and Calvin Authors of the
religion among us. D. Dove of Recusancie p. 32. Luther (says he) in his time
began a Reformation, Harborough.
And a book termed the Harborough and much esteemed in the beginning of Q.
Elizabeth, Luther begot truth.
makes England to speak thus. I am thy country England, who brought forth
that blessed man John VVicklef who begot Hus, who begot Luther, who begot
truth. And in the margent has this note. Fox.
The second birth of Christ. Fox also Acts page 770, says Luther plucked down
the foundation of Papistrie by opening one vein long hid before, Luther opened
the vein of all truth.
the touch stone of all truth and the only principal origin of our salvation,
which is our free justification by faith only. And the Author of the book
called Prognostica finis mu^di or Antichristus writes thus The spirit which
tells things to come works not but in time of the Gospel which Luther as
it is confessed (note the word) toward the end of the world did first bring
in. And p. 13. Prognost.
Luther first brought in his Gospel. Schusselb. Impudency to say there were
Gospellers before Luther. Milius. Morgerstern. Ridiculous to say any had pure
doctrine be for Luther.
The seduction of false prophets is not manifest but under the Gospel which
before Luther as we said never went since the primitive time of the Apostles.
And Co^rad Schusselb. l. 2. Calvin Theol, p. 130. doubts not to call it
impudency to say that many learned men before Luther did hold the doctrine of
the Gospel. Georg. Milius in explicat. art. 7. Confess. Aug. If there had been
(says he) right beleuers before Luther there had been no need of a Luther an
reformation. Benedict Morgenstein tract. de Euchar. page 145. says, it is
ridiculous to think that in time before Luther any (note) Manifest to the
whole world that etc.
had the purity af doctrine and that Luther should receive it from them
considering it is manifest (note again) to the whole Christian world that
before Luthers time all Churches were overwhelmed with more than Cymerian
darkness and that Luther was divinely raised to discover the same and to restore
the light of true doctr ne. Protestancie began by one man alone Sleid. prefat
historia.
Thus Protestants: but let us hear also Luther him self: We dare glory
(says he Prefat. in Corpus doctrinae lipsiae 1561.) that Christ was first
published of us. And de Captiu. initio. speaking of his impugning indulgences
says: I alone did then roole thi^ stone. And 1. Galat. fol. 26. we by the
grace of God have gotten here at Wittenberg the form of a Christian Church.
Luther first preached his Gospel.
And 3. Galat. fol. 109. many gave thanks to God that through the Gospel
which we first (note) by the grace of God then preached etc. fol. 142. we have
received the first fruits of the spirit. 4, Galat. fol 205. Sectaries at the
beginning of the reformation of the Gospel were glad to hear us and read our
books. Luthers Gospel revealed to the world by him.
Ibid. The truth of the Gospel, God has now again in these latter days
reueiled by us unto this ungrateful world.

10. Thus you see it evident by many ways that Luther was the first institutor
of Protestant religion and founder of their Church, and consequently that their
religion and Church, is a devise and invention of man. Whereupon what will
follow every one sees. And as Luther was the Author of Protestancy in Germany,
so also from him it spread into England and other Countries, not only by means
of his books, but also by his and his scholars Melancthon Pomeran and others
particular letters written to English men, and by the example of the German
Protestants which as Stow says King Henry 8. followed in rejecting the Pope,
And finally because Tindal who is termed the Apostle of England went as Fox
says, page 983. Tindal the Protest. Apostle of England taught by Luther.
into Germany and there had conference with Luther. Whereupon the said Fox says
page 1013. that from Germany Luthers Gospel began to spread his beams here in
England. And so we may justly account Luther the Author or founder of
Protestant religion in our English Nation. Protestancie came out of Germany
into Engl.
And howsoever some will obstinatly deny, against all the forsaid profes that
Luther was the Author of their religion, but it was (forsooth) before Luther,
though they know nether where, nor in whom, nor can produce any witness: yet
neither does any, nor can any deny, K Henry ^ in Sledan lib. 8. fol. 1^2.
says Protestant* came into England out of Germani^
but that this late revolt of our English Nation from the Sea of Rome, came
originally from Luther, as the union there of to the said See above one thousand
years ago proceeded from Saint Austin: which suffices me to compare the union
in faith of our English Nation with the Sea of Rome with the disunion thereof,
What is shevved of luther the like may be proved of Calvin or any other
Sectmaister of our time Besides our ministers say Luther differs from the^ in
no substantial point Iuel Apol Field of Church Reinolds Confer. VViclef no
Protestant.
in their two principal Authors S. Austin and Martin Luther. And thus having
showed that there was no Protestant living, either in England or other where when
Luther began, let us see whether there had been any in England in times past.

CHAP. II. That VVicklefe and his followers were no Protestants.
1. ALbeit Protestants challeng some few others who lived about Wicklefs time,
yet because their greatest hope is in him and his followers. in so much that
Doctor Fulke answer to a Counterf. Catholic page 24. says, that he weeneth
that we will not deny VVicklef to have been of their Church, I will for breuity
sake omit the rest, 1 VViclef knevv not so much as the foundation of
Protestancie.
and show that even Wicklife and his company were far from being Protestants.
First, because to hold justification by only faith is as is before showed lib.
1. cap. 21. by general consent of Protestants the head, the soul, the
foundation of their Church and religion, And as Luther says Praefat. Epist. ad
Galat. As many as hold not this doctrine are either Jews, Turks, Popish, or
Heretics. But Wicklef and his mates held not justification by only faith.
VViclef held not justification by only faith.
For as Melancthon cheifest scholar to Luther writes Epist. ad Fred. Micon.
inter Epist. Zuinglij page 622. He nether understood nor held the justice of
faith. Besides nether Wicklef, nor any of his followers were ever accused by
any of the Catholic Inquisitors of those times of that point, albeit as Fox
says page 750. their inquisition was so strait, that no article could be
mentioned amongst them, but it was discovered. Moreover many of Wicklefes
books are yet extant, and nevertheless no Protestant has yet found this their
fundamental Article of justification by only faith in any of his books. How
then could Wicklefe be a Protestant who knew not so much as the head soul and
foundation of Protestancie? 2 VViclef holds diverse things condemned by
Protestants.


2. Secondly, Wicklef held diverse things which Protestants condemn, as that,
if any Bishop or Priest be in deadly sin, he does neither order consecrat nor
baptize, which Fox page 400. says can hardly be defended. See more of his
Articles in Council. Constan^^^n.
And that so long as a man is in deadly sin he is no Bishop ot Prelat in the
Church of God. That temporal Lords may according to their own will and
discretion take away the temporal goods from the Church men whensoever they
do offend. which articles Fox page cit. defends no otherwise then by saying
that preaduenture they were not so strictly meant of him as they were gathered.
Moreover Fox page 414. amongst other articles of Wiclefe cites these. To
enrich the Clergy is against the rule of Christ There is no greater Heretic
or Antichrist than the Clerk who teaches that it is lawful for Priests and
Leuits of the law of grace to be endued with te^porall possessions. To which
Stow Anno. 1376. adds this other. That neither King nor any seculer person
could give any thing perpetually to any person of the Church. Further more as
Fox has page 392. he extolled the perfection of poverty of the begging Friars,
and as Stow says l. cit. adjoined himself to them. And the cause why he
inueighed against the Church was as there Stow says because he had been
deprived by the Archbishop of Canterb. of a benefice that he unjustly as was
said was incumbent upon. Why VViclef impugned the Cath. faith.
Lastly Fox page 410. sets down a letter which he wrote to Pope Urban 6.
Anno 1382. (which was about three years before he died) wherein he confesses
the Pope to be Christ's Vicar on earth and adds thus: If I have erred in any
of these points I will submit my self to correction even by death if necessity
so require. Diverse other points which Protestants detest are collected out of
his books by the Author of the Protestants Apology for the Roman Church page
106. And more of Wicklefs wicked life and doctrine you may see in walsingham
histor. page 188, 206. 302 ypadig. page 139 142.

3. 3 Protestants refuse VViclef. Pa^taleon. Melancthon.
Thirdly diverse Protestants refuse VVicklife for one of theirs and account him
an Heretik. As Pantaleon Chronall. page 119. placing VViclife amongst Heretics
says thus of him: VViclife with the Lollard preaches his heresy in England.
And the foresaid Melancthon epist. cit. I have looked (says he) into
VVicklefe, who makes a great ado about this controversy (of the Eucharist)
but I have found many other errors in him by which we may judge of his
spirit. Surely he neither understood nor held the justice of says. He
foolishly confounds the Gospel and civil affairs, nor perceaueth that the
Gospel gives us leave to use the policy of all nations. He laboreth to
prove that Priests should have no propriety. He will have no tithes paid but
to those that teach. He sophistically and very seditiously cauilleth of civil
dominion. In like manner he sophistically cauilleth at the common received
opinion of the Eucharist. And in loc. Com. titul. de potest Eccles. he plainly
says that VVicklefe played the made man. Doctor Caius also lib. 2. dt
Antiquit. page 268. obiecteth Wicklife to the oxonians as a disgrace to their
university. Caius.
And Stow in his Chronicles describes Bale Oldcastell and others his followers
as notorious malefacors and rebels to their Prince. Stow.
Luther.
yea Luther himself explicat. Art. 30. speaking of Hussits who were
Wicklefists in Bohemia (so termed of Hus Wicklefs principal scholar) says.
So D. Dove of Recusancie will have Bellarmin a Protestant or no perfect Papist.
They do not well who make me a Hussit, for he held not with me. And in disput.
Anno 40. tom. 1. page 493. Hus says he tought horrible and devilish
blasphemy. So far was Luther from accounting Wicklefs followers for
Protestants.

4. Finally the Sheriffs in England ever since Wicklefs time do take on oath
to persecute Lollards, 4 The Sheriffs svvear to pesecute VViclefists.
which was the vulger name of Wiclefs followers. Which King Edward 6. Queen
Elizabeth and his present majesty and Ministers would not suffer, nor the
Protestant Sheriffs would take such an oath if they accounted Wiclefists
Protestants. And it being thus manifest that Wicklef and his company were no
Protestants, much more manifest it is that no other English man before King
Henry 8. his time was Protestant. Cranmer.
Which thing Cramner never doubted of when (as Bale reports Cent. 8. cap. 90.
he offered to defend, Protestancie not used in Engl for one thousand years
before K Edw. 6.
that the religion appointed by King Edward 6. was more pure and agreeable to
Gods word than what (said he) had been used in England this thousand years. So
clear it was in Cramners judgment that Protestancie had not been used in
England for one thousand years before him. But because some Protestants do hope
to find some foating of their religion in the ancient Britons before that time,
let us see of what religion they were, that thereby it may appear that nether
English nor British were ever Protestants before Luthers time.

CHAP. III. That the ancient Britons were never Protestants.
Why Protestants chaleng the Britons.
1. THe reason why Fox, Bale, Fulke and othert calleng the ancient Britons for
Protestants, is not because that they can prove that thy held their fundamental
point of Justification by faith, or any such rites (as S. Austin speaks in
Beda lib. 2. cap. 2.) and ceremonies. heresy, lib. 1. c. 1.
as has been showed before, yet they ever held so many points of Catholic
religion, as they never could be Protestants, but quite opposite to them.

2. And as for the religion of the Britons for the first 300. years after
Christ, which was the time in the persecution of the primitive Church, that may
be easily gathered by the religion which they professed straight after the
persecution was ended, under their glorious Contriman the first Christian
Emperor Constantine the great. Both because there is no mention of any
alteration made by them in religion all that time, and also because Gildas cap.
9. and Saint Beda lib. 1. cap. 4. and 8. write, that till the time of Arian
heresy, or as Bale cent. 1. cap. 70. Fox in his Protestat: Fulke annotat. in 2.
Cor. 12. testify, till the time of S. Austins coming there was no change of
their religion. Let us see therefore what religion they professed in
Constantins time.

3. First they builded, says S. Beda lib. 1. Ancient Britons Catholics
Miracles believed in places of Martyrdoms. Temple of holy Martyrs.
cap. 7. a Temple of a marvelous rich work in the place where S. Alban was
martired, and believed in that place sick persons to be cured, and many
miracles to be wrought. Secondly they builded, says he l. 1 c. 8. Temples of
holy Martirs. And the like did Constantin himself Eusebius. lib. 3. de vit. cap.
47. To this D. Abbots against D. Bishop p. 173. answers, That Constantin by
building Churches in the honor of Martyrs meant not to honor their persons but
to celebrat their names. (matyrs) do signify their persons, he in building
Churches in honor of Martyrs, meant To honor Martyrs by building Churches is to
honor them by a religious act.
build Churches is no civil or profane act, as is to built Trophes or such
monuments, but a religious act, so to honor Martyrs by building of Churches is
to give the^ religious honor. And if Christians by building of Churches in
honor of Saints had meant Collins.
Wherefore Collins in his sermon at Paul's Cross 1607. dedicated to the Archb.
of Canterb. and allowed of him says page 52. that building of Churches to
Saints was one cause of Protestants for forsaking our Church.

3 Pariers for dead, and in honor of Saints.
4. Moreover Constantin (as Eusebius. says lib. 4. de Constant. ^60. caused
himself to be buried in the Church of the Apostles Ita vt post obitum etiam
precibus illis quae eo loci ad honorem Apostolorum futurae essent dignus
haberetur. Behold Co^stantin hoping after his death to be helped by prayers:
See his majesty's allowance of Constantins religion in all points, in Confer.
at Hampton Court. page 69. Objection.
and those made in honor of the Apostles, which are two especial points of
Papistrie. To this D. Abbots l. cit. page 177. answers, that Eusebius
mistook Constantins meaning for he desired no prayers to be made for his
soul, Because he said lib 4. cap. 63, Now indeed I know that I am a happy
man, that God has accounted me worthy of immortal life, and that I am now
made partaker of the light of God. And again, that he had obtained the true
life, and none but himself understood of what happiness he was partaker, and
therefore he hastened and would not delay his going to God. Thus Abbots. has
accounted me worthy of eternal life are not in Eusebius translated by
musculus a Protestant, but for them are these iam me aeternam vitam sortitum
liquet. Is it not I pray the (Reader) strange, that Abbots born last day should
know what was Constantins meaning better than Eusebius. who lived familiarly with
him? Nay better than all men than living, to whom Eusebius. says cap. 59. that
his intent was factum perspicuum made manifest? Abbotts takes upon him to
know the meaning of Eusebius. his words letter then him self.
Or that Abbots should gather Constantins meaning out of Eusebius. his words
betrer than Eusebius. that wrote them? Perhaps Consta^tin might, being a very
virtuous Prince especially straight after his baptism (as Eusebius. says these
words were spoken) say, with S. Paul nihil mihi conscius sum, and thereupon
account himself happy and worthy of eternal life and in spe to have obtained
it, yet must he needs add also with S. Paul nec tame^ in hoc iustificatus
sum, which might well make him desire prayer for him both alive and dead. If
Abbots could prove as he never shall, that Constantin said, as the Protestants
do, that he did not probably think, but certainly know, that his soul not
soon or late, but immediately after it were out of the body, should go to
hea^e^ as the souls of marti^s do, he might well say that Co^sta^tin cared not
for prayers after death. For upon certain knowledge of martyrs happiness we pray
not for them, but should do the^ injury (as S. Austin says) if we did. For
thereby we should show that we were not fuly assured of their hapines. We can
not pray for them whom we are assured to be in heaven. But for them whom
we only hope are there. Why.
But with probable knowledge, or hopeful truth, either of our own or others
felicity, we may both desire prayers for us after our death, or pray for
others dead. Because though we hope well, yet we are not fully assured, and till
we be assured of a thing, we may pray for it. And this was the case of
Constantin and S. Monica, when they desired to be prayed for after their death;
And of S. Austin and S. Ambrose when they prayed for Monica and Theodosius
whom they believed (as S. Austin speaks) to be in heaven, 4 Translation of
relics
but were not thereof certain and secure.

5. Again Constantin translated (says Saint Hierom cont. Vigilant. 5 Bless
with the sign of the Cross
) The holy relics of Andrew Luke and Timothy at which (says he) the Devils
roar, to Constantinople. He signed him self with the Cross, 6 Hope of
victory by the Cross.
and made him self be painted with the Cross on his head, Eusebius. l. 3. de
vit. c. 2. and 3. He professed to have overcome his enemies by the wholesome
sign of the Cross. Eusebius, de vit. lib. 1. cap. 33. 7 Worship of the Cross.
See Confer at Hamp. Court about the world Worship. page 75.
He worshipped the Cross, Sozom. l. 1. cap 8. He worshipped the Cross both
because he had had much help by it in battles against his enemies, and by
reason of his heavenly vision which he savve of it. But to believe we may be
helped by the Cross (as Constantin did) is papistical, as Do. Abbots grants
answer to Do. Bishop Epist. page 168. 8 Esteeme-of Nonnes.
His mother also did honor and serve as their maiden, Virgins. Deo sacratas
Dedicated to God. Ruffin lib. 1. c. 8. which Virgins if they were not Cloister
Nonnes as Abbots terms them page 171. 9 Priests confessed to have pouer to
judge. Kings.
they were votaire Nonnes, which Protestants can as ill abide. He professed
besides that he had no power to judge of Priests. God (says Constantin, 10
Profession of the Popes supremacy.
in Ruffinus lib. 1. c. 2.) has made you Priests, and given you power to
judge even of us: vvherfor we are rightly judged of you. You are given to us
as Gods and it is not convenient that men should judge Gods. 11 Priests and
people pray for Constant dead His majesty in Confer at Hampt. Court. says he
sees no reason but what was used in Constantins time may still continue
page 69.
Abbots page 191. says he spoke this of modesty and humility. But I ask
whither he spoke thus as he thought or no? If yea? The^ he thought Priests to
have power to judge him, if no? than he spoke against his conscience, and not
humbly but falsely. Further more in his Edict he calls Bishop Siluester the
high Priest and Universal Pope, and the head and top of all Churches in the
world. And finally when he was dead, many people (says Eusebius. l. 4. de vit c.
71. together with the^ that were dedicated to God, with many tears offered
prayers to God for the soul of the Emperor. By which you may see the
Papisticall faith both of that noble Emperor, and of his Priests and people.
And to expound their prayers for his soul, of only well wishing as Protestants
do to their friends departed, as Abbots expounds them p. 178. is ridiculous.
For if Eusebius had me^t that those only wished well, and not indeed prayed for
Constantins soul, he could have said so. Nay he would have said so. For the
law of History binds the writer to propriety of speech. But, durum telum
necessitas, For Protestants can not stand, unless scriptures, Fathers,
Historiographers be expounded figuratively. 12 Confession of Protestants.
And so manifestly was Pope Siluester who cathechised this Emperor, a Roman
Catholic, as Bale Cent. 1. c. 36. says. In these times (of Constantin)
Siluester began to lay the foundation of the Popes Monarchy and finding the
key of the Depth he opened the pit, if it be true (which he nether denies nor
reproves) which Papists write of him. And Ibid. All the Popes after Siluester
to Boniface 3. he terms mitred Bishops preparing by their Cannons and Decrees
the seat for the great Antichrist. And Napier upon the revelation p. 68.
calls the visible Church in Constantins time Antichristian, and Papisticall.
This was the Papisticall religion of this worthy Emperor. And undoubtedly the
same was the^ the religion of the Brito^s, who were his subjects and
Contrieme^, and amongst whom (as Sozome^ says l. 1. c. 5. he came to knowledge
of Christ. relig.

6. Now for the next 300. years until S. Austins coming, that the Britons were
no Protestants, may be proved out of diverse authors. Religion of Britons for
the second 300. years. Gildas.
First Gildas cap. 24. testifies that the Britons had holy Altars of stone,
and cap. 26. calls them celestis Sacrificij sedem. Seats of the heavenly
sacrifice: and reprehendeth Priests for sacrificing seldom, and calls their
sacrifices Sacrosancta Christi Sacrificia: 1 Altars of stone. Priests
Sacrifices.
Most holy sacrifices of Christ. Which argues that they then had true
sacrifices, true Altars, true Priests. 2 Vows of Chastity, and of Monkish
life. No marriage for monks after their vovv. Suearing by our lady and Saints.
Beda.
And touching Vows he condemns cap. 26. Kings for breaking them, condemns
one King for marying a woman who had vowed Perpetuam Viduitatis castimoniam:
Perpetual chastity in VVidowhood. And exclameth against an other King for
forsaking Monks life, and calls his marriage after his vow, Praesumptiuas
nuptias: Pretended marriage. Finally cap. 26. he testifies, that the Britons
used to swear by God, and by our Lady, and all Saints. All these Church in
honor of Saints. Monks. Anchorets.
and names no one point of Protestancie. As for S. Beda he says lib. 1. cap.
27. that they had a Church built in honor of S. Martin. cap. 11. and lib. 2.
cap. 2. That they l. 1. cap. 17. that S. German (with whom they agreed in
religion) by a few sprincles of (holy) water assvvaged tempests and drove
away Devils. c. 18. that he carried about his neck a bag of relics, Holy
water. Relics:
by which putting it to a blind woman's eye he restored her sight. Ibid. That
they went to S. Albans to give God praise, 3 Thanks to God by Saints. Lent
Pilgrimage.
and thancks by him (S. Alban) and there took of the dust where the holy
Martirs blood was shed. cap. 20. Observed the 40. days of Lent devoutly
singing Aleluia after Easter. Ibid. God (says Beda) gave S. German and S.
Luphus prosperous passage home for their own virtues sake, Prosperous
success attributed in part to Saints.
and also at the intercession of the blessed martyr S. Alban. All these proofs
affords S. Beda that the Britons were Roman Catholics before Saint Austins
coming, and no one proof, that they were Protestants. Galfrid.


7. Galfrid also lib. 9. c. 12. says that in this time Saint Dubricius the
Archb. of Wales was Apostolice sedis Legatus: that is, Popes legate.
the Popes Legate. Malmsb. lib. 1. Reg. c. 1. Malmesb. Huntingt.
And Hunting. lib. 2. say that King Arthur trusting in an Image of our B. Lady
which he put in his weapons, Some hope of help by images.
he alone put his enemies to flight with great slaughter. Stow also Chron. p.
61. says that King Arthurs body was found in K. Henry 2. time with a leaden
Cross fastened to that side of the stone that lay next his body. Stow. Burial
with Crosses.
Caius also a Protest. lib de Antiq. Cantab. page 75. Caius. Privileges
procured from Popes.
cites letters of Pope Honorius dated Anno 624. in which the Pope confirms
the privileges which his Predecessors had given to the Briton Students, and
prohibiteth any Archb. or Bishop to excommunicat the students. Such authority
did the Britons acknowledge the Popes to have over them. Bale. Orders after the
Romans manner. Catholic Monkerie Purgatoire. Austeritie of life. Britons of the
same religion with the French.
In this time also says Bale Cent. 14. cap. 6. Palladius was sent of Pope
Celestin to set order amongst the Scotts after the Roman manner. And cap. 11.
Brigit wrought great wonders with holy water. And Cent. 1. cap. 53. Aegiptian
Monkerie (so he terms our Monkerie) about the year 530. under Abbot Congel
took great strength and increase. And that S. Columba and Saint Brendan (who
filled France, Germany, Ierland, with Monks and which Brendan Cent. 14. cap.
78. he confesses to have held Purgatory) were scollers to this Congel. To
which he adds Cent. 1. cap. 50. That Gildas a Briton of this time did seek
the solitary places of the desert, and use heirecloth next his skin; And cap.
61. That Kentigernus used goat skins, and a strait cool. Which is no fashon
of Protestats. Finally S. Sampson a Briton Bishop going in those times out of
Britany into France, his religion was not only there admitted for Catholic,
but him self also had there a Bishopric given to him. And his Kinsma^ S.
Maglorius being a Briton, was ordered by him to dispense the quickening body
of our Lord: Real presence. Mattins. Mass.
Did eat barley and bean bread, on VVensday and friday took no meat, did
afflict his flesh with continual wearing of hearcloth, did watchfully say the
prayers of the night which are termed Mattins, and prostrat before the Altar
did sing Letanies, and finally offered sacrifice to God. Surius Tom. 5. What
sign is there here of Protestancie, or rather not of earnest Papistrie?
Britons in S. Austins time differ not in faith but about Easter. S Austins


8. And as for the faith of the Britons in S. Austins time, that, (besides some
few ceremonies) differed in nothing from S. Austins faith, but only about the
time of keeping Easter, as may be proved many ways. First, by S. Austin him
self, who in lib. 2. cap. 2. speaks thus to the Britons. Though in many
other points you do contrary to our custom (not faith) or rather contrary to
the custom of the Universal Church. Yet if ye will agree with us in three
things: That is, to celebrat Easter in due time, to accomplish the mystery of
baptism according to the manner of the holy Roman and Apostolic Church, and
lastly preach to the English Nation the word of God, all your other ceremonies
(not heresies) rites, fashons, and customs, though they be contrary to ours
we will suffer and bear with them. Behold S. Austin though so earnest a Papist
as has been showed before, yet offering to join with the Britous, if they
would amend only three things, whereof the first only concerned faith, the
other two concerned ceremonies, and charity. Would he, (thinck we) who was so
nice in matters of religion, as he would not join with the Britons unless they
conforned them selves to him in certain ceremonies, have not much more exacted
their conformity in Mass, use of Images, and such like points of religion, as
it is evident he used. if they had differed from him in such matters? Besides
you see, that the other things wherein they differed from him, were but (as he
speaks) ceremonies, rites, fashions, and Secondly, the Britons them selves in
Beda lib. 2. c. 2. publicly confessed, that that was the true way of
righteousness which S. Austin shevved. And the only reason which they give
there, why they would not

The Britons religion by the Irish and Scotts
9. But yet more fully will the Britons religion appear by the religion of
Irish and Scots in those days. For as, Laurence Mellit, and Iustus three
follow laborers of Saint Austin write in Beda lib. 2. cap. 4. The Scots did
nothing differ from the Britons. And the Irish being converted by S. Patrick a
Brito^, it is most lykely they agreed with them in religion, Hunting. lib. 3.
and sure it is, that they agreed with them in the time of keeping Easter.
What therefore can be proved of either of these two Nations, may be justly
inferred of the Britons. 1 S. Peter head of the Apostles, and hoped to be
patron.
Adamannus therefore an Irish Abbot in Beda lib. 5. cap. 22. professes Saint
Peter to be head of the Apostles and looked to have him as a Patron before God.
And Colman a Scottish Bishop who altogether agreed with the Britons, and
obstinatly refused to admit the Roman use of Easter, yet never the les agreed
with the Catholics without any co^tradiction (says Beda lib. 3. cap. 25. 2
Peter's supremacy.
) That these words Thou art Peter and upon this Rock I will build my Church
were principally spoken to Peter. And that unto him the keys of the Kingdom of
heaven were given. Which brefly is to confess with Catholics, that Peter was
head of the Church. For if these words, Upon this Rock I will build my Church
were principally spoken to him, surely he was principally made the Rock and
head of Christ's Church. Which Bale Cent. 14. c. 21. well perceived, when he
writes that S. Wilfrid (who then disputed with Colman) founded, non
interpretabilem (as he speaks) Papae authoritatem upon these words, Tu es
Petrus etc. To whom in this (as you heard) Colman agreed without
contradiction, and consequently believed, Non interpretabilem Papae
authoritatem, as well as Saint Wilfrid. And from this universal and former
belief of Saint Peter's Supremacy, it came that the Picts when they were
reconciled to the Roman use of keeping Easter and shauing Crowns, were all
glad that they were reduced to the discipline of S. Peter Prince and head (as
Beda reports their words) of the Apostles. lib. 5. cap. 22
whereby you may see how undoubted a thing the headship of S. Peter was then,
Reinolds Confer.
even among the Brito^s, Scotts, Picts, and Irish. 3 Purgatoire. Beda. lib. 3.
cap. 19. Bale Cent. 14. cap. 79.
In which point the essence of a Papist (as Protest. write) consists. Likewise
S. Furseus an Irish man, coming into England tells how his soul being taken
out of his body had seen the fire of Purgatory, ex Beda. And Bale says he
preached the Gospel not without human Traditions, 4 Traditions. Beda. lib. 4.
cap. 25.
so Bale terms Papistry. And one Adama^ a Scot confessed his sins to a
Priest, and did penance enioined by him, 5 Confession and penance. lib. 3.
cap. 3. Ibid cap. 2. Ibid. c. 12.
which are substantial points of papistrie. Saint Oswald also who was (as
says S. Beda) instructed and christened in Scotland, did (as the said S. Beda
writes) erect a cross and pray before it, and being him self, says S. Beda,
to be slain immediately, 6 Erecting Crosses praying before them and for the dead.
he made his prayer to God to have mercy upon the souls of the soldiers. Thus
we see that the Irish and Scots, and consequently the Britons, about S.
Austins time professed S. Peter to be head and primat of the Apostles, believed
Purgatory, confessed their sins to Priests, and did the penance enioined
them, erected crosses and prayed before the^, hoped to have SS. as Patrons
before God, and prayed for the dead. Which whether they be notes of protesta^cy
or Papistry rather I remit to the reader. to. S. Columban also an Irish Abbot,
who lived both before and after S. Austins coming and whom S. Austins fellow
labores spoke with all in France, as the^ selves report in S. Beda: lib. 2.
cap. 4.
This man (I say) was undoubtedly of the Britons religion, both because he
observed Easter as they did, and also because he was brought up with the Brito^
Monks in Ba^gor under their famous Abbot Co^gellus as Bale and Cambd. do
affirm; Surius tom. 6. Bale Cent. 14. cap. 12. Cambd. Brit. p. 537.
And yet besides his error about Easter, was a perfect Papist as you may see by
his life written soon after his death by Jonas his disciple (as Bale says)
where among many other notes of Papistrie he is reported cap. 5. Cent. 14. cap.
15. Monks have nothing proper. Blessing with sign of the cross. Church
dedicated with holy water, Procession, Mass*
to forbid his Monks to have any thing proper. c. 8. to bless him self with
the sign of the Cross, and c. 23. by it to restore sight to the blind. And c.
24. to visit S. Martins Tomb. But much more by the life of S. Gallus co^tryman
and scholar to S. Columba^* written by that grave and ancient Author Walfridus
Strabo in Surius to. 5. where c. 6. it is written that S. Columba^ dedicated a
Church in honor of S. Aurelia with blessing holy water and sprinckling it in
the Church, with procession and Mass said on an Altar. And cap. 10. S. Gallus
is reported to have made a Cross and set it up, Prayer before a Cross and
relics.
and taking from his neck a bag of relics of our B. Lady and the holy
Martyrs S. Maurice and Desiderius, to have hanged them on the Cross, and so
prayed before them to Christ that he would in honor of our blessed Lady and
the Martyrs and Confessors make that a fit habitation for him cap. 21. he is
reported to persuade a Dukes daughter (out of whom he had cast a Devil by the
sign of the Cross) to vow virginity and to refuse the marrying of a King,
Vovv of virginity.
which she did and prayed to S. Stephen to help her therein. c. 25. he is
reported to offer Sacrificium Salutare: Mass for the dead.
The wholesome Sacrifice, and to say Mass pro requie, for the rest of his
Father Columban then dead. And cap. 32. When he dyed, the Cross and candles
were carried before his corpse. Cross and candels before the dead corpse.
This, was the religion of Saint Columban and Gallus at the time of S. Austins
coming, and consequently of the Britons. And therefore no marvel if S. Austin
took no exception against any point of their religion, but only about Easter.
And so far was S. Columban from Protestancie, as Bale Cent. 14. cap. 12. says,
he wrote. superstitiously, and praised voluntary and men's works. After Saint
Columban and Gallus, lived S. Killian a Scott, whom Bale Cent. 14. cap. 23.
manifestly confesses to have been a Papist, and made Bishop by the Pope about
the year 686. And after him Maidulphus a Scott also about the years 690. who
(says he Cent. 14. cap. 26.) was sullied with Papisticall blemish and Monkish
impostures. And in the same Cent. Bale names many Scotts who left their
Contrie Praedicare Papismum, to preach Papistrie. Surius Tom. 3. Baron An. 631.
Bishops of Scotland consecrated of the P.
And about the year 631. (which was soon after) the custom of Scotland was
(says the Author of S. Wirons life) for the Inhabitants to choose their Bishop,
then to send him to Rome to be consecrated by the Pop^, as S. VViro was. Of
whom it is also written, that King Pepin of France confessed his sins to him.

11. Thus thou see gentle Reader, that albeit there be so great scarcity of
ancient records of British matters, yet on the one side their consent with the
Romans religion in many substantial points, Beza Praefat Bibl. ad Cond. Perkins
Refor. Cathol.
and such as Beza Parkins, and others confess to be quite opposite to
Protestancie, is evidently proved many ways. And doubtless their like agreement
in more points would be found, if more ancient momuments of those times were
extant. And on the other side there is no one ancient monument or scroul which
testifies that they held any one substantial point of Protestancie, as
Justification by faith only, Communion of bare bread and Wine, Denied
Purgatory, or prayer for dead, prayer to Saints, and such like. But
Protestants claim them only, because we for lack of ancient records can not
show particulerly that they agreed with us in all points of faith. As if all
were Protestants whom we could not show particulerly to have agreed with us in
all points, or it may not suffice any reasonable man to show particulerly that
they agreed with us in many substa^tiall points, and show the same generally in
all other points besides one, into which they upon ignorance. Because nether S.
Austin nor others found any other falt with the matter of their faith, nor
Protestants can show any other, How it is proved by the Britons that the
Cathol. faith is the true faith of Christ. Fox. Bale.
in which point also Protestants dissent from the Britons as well as we. And if
unto this euidency of the Catholic Roman religion of the Britons you adioine
what Fulk, Fox, Bale and generally all Protestants write of the certain truth
of their religion, it will evidently follow that the Roman faith is the true
faith of Christ. For Fox in his Protestation says, That religion remained in
the Britons vncorrupt, and the word of Christ truly preached till the coming of
S. Austin Bale Cent. 1. cap. 90. There was always amongst the Britons
preaching of truth most sure doctrine, and such worship as was by Gods
commandment given of the Apostles to the Churches. And page 73. calls the
Britons Church of S. Austins time Veram Christi Ecclesiam. Fulk.
And Fulk 2. Cor. 12. calls the Britons of S. Austins time Catholics, and
says, with them Christian religion had continewed ever since the Apostles
times. And thus having showed that before Luthers time there was nether English
nor British Protestant in all England; Let us now see when and how Protesta^cie
first began in Germany, and after in England.

CHAP. IIII. When, where, wherefore, and how Luther began to preach
Protestancie.
1. LVther having been long time an Austin Friar and all his life before so
earnest a Roman Catholic as you heard him self confess supra: cap. 1.
Sleidan. lib. 1. fol. 1.
and Fox in his Acts p. 770. and others co^test, began in the year 1517. and
on the morrow (says Fox page 771.) after all Saints in the city of
Wittenberg in Saxony to oppose him self against the Catholic faith in the
matter of Indulgences by publishing and manteining certain Conclusions against
them. The place, year, and day when Luther began Protestancie.
This (as all Protestant writters agree) was the place, the time, the matter,
wherein Luther began first to publish their doctrine. His Masters therein were
(as he says 4. Luthers masters of protestancie. Neque abhominibus neque per
homines. When Luther began to preach Protestancie he intended no reformation
at all. Fox. Sleidan lib. 1. fol. 1. Luther at first impugned pardons only to
boult out truth and with submissio^ to the Church.
Galat. fol. 208.) his gift of knowledge, his own study, and his outward and
inward tentations; By which last instructor perhaps he means his black
master, whom (as we shall see herafter) he confesses him self to have had.

2. As for the end wherefore Luther began his new doctrine, that could not be any
reformation of religion by him then intended. For as Fox confesses page 771.
In the beginning of this controversy Luther nether dreamed nor suspected of
any change that might happen in the Ceremonies. And not in the beginning only
but even a year after. For Fox l. cit. speaking of the year 1516. says thus.
All this while Luther never thought of any alteration to come of any Ceremony,
much les such a reformation of doctrine and Ceremonies as after did follow. And
a Protest. writer of Paralippomena Vspergen: whom Fox much follows says An.
1518. Luther showed him self to come in public against his will, but could not
stay him self. Yea Luther him self in loc. Com. Clas. 4. confesses that he
fell, into this faction (so he terms it) by chance and against his will. And
L. de Captiu. fol. 5. By force (says he) I was drawn into this quarrel. And
epist. ad Leon. 10. fol. 4. Eckius (says he) drew me into this unexpected
quarrel, catching me in a small word about the Supremacy which by chance
slipped from me. How then could this man intend reformation of religion by his
preaching against the old religion, if, as Fox said, Luther impugneth a
religion and yet means not to amend it.
for a year after, he did not so much as dream of any reformation, no not in
ceremonies? with what conscience think we did he impugn the old religion
whiles he neither meant nor dreamed to reform it?

3. Luther sought not Gods glory beginning protestancie.
In like sort the end for which Luther began to impugn the Cathol. faith
could not be Gods glory. For what glory could he inte^d by his new preaching
who meant not to make any alteration at all in Gods religion. Besides that he
often times offered both by word and writing to give over his new doctrine if
he might not be bound to recant, or his adversaries bound to silence. For as
Fox has page 772. Luther 4 times offered to suppress Protestantisme. Sleidan.
Engl. lib. 1. fol. 6. and in fol. 9.
in writing to Cardinal Caietan Anno 1518. he promised to proceed no further
in any mention thereof, so that his adversaries were likewise bound to keep
silence. And (says Fox) if the Bishop of Rome would have been content with this
submission of Luther he had never been touched any further of him. And again
in the year 1520. as Cooper has in Chron. he submitted himself to the P. of
Rome so that he might not be compelled to recant. And as Doct. Whitaker lib.
cont. Dur. page 11. If at the beginning he could have obtained never so little
of the Pope he would straight have been quiet. yet Luther him self epistol. ad
Leon. 10. says, Luther offered to recant what he had written touching
pardons.
I promised silence to Caietan and to make an end of my cause, if the same were
commanded to my adversaries. And then (says he) the matter stood in very good
terms, but he began to command me recant, and then it fell into much worse
estate. Wherefore what after followed came not by the fault of Luther, but of
Caietan, 2 Sleid. l. 1. fol. 10. says he submitted him self also An. 1519.
Sleid. lib. 1. fol. 17. See Sleidan lib. 1. fol. 1. 5. of Luthers submission to
the P. and Church of Rome
who suffered me not to be silent, when I then most desired. And ibidem, after
this again he says. I yielded to your authority and was ready to be silent.
And fol. 5. an other time he offered silence at request of his Friars. Here
Christian Reader I appeall to thy conscience, whether this man who so often
offered to suppress his new doctrine, so he were not bound to recant it,
intended by preaching it any glory of God? Nay whether by offering to
suppress it, he did not condemn both himself and his doctrine? Was his cause
good which (he speaks) was at best when it was to be suppressed, and put to
pepertuall silence? and became worse when his silence was not accepted, and
what followed thereof he would not have imputed to himself: was it Gods cause
which he would have buried would not have imputed to him? Surely this shows
that to be time which D. Empser an ear witness avouched that-he publikly said.
That this matter was nether begun for God, nor should end for him. Luthers
protestation that he began not for God.
was it not his pride, which could not brook the shame of recanting, or his
adversaries triu^phing over him, which made him go forward to that which his
Cnoscience told him was ill begun?

4. What then will you say mea^t Luther by his preaching against Indulgences?
The end for which Luther began Protestantisme.
Surely no other thing than for a time to spite the Dominican Friars, and to
hinder their credit and gain which having hindered by his new doctrine he meant
to have proceeded no further therein, if he had not been bound to reca^t what
upon spite against others he had preached. For whereas the Austin Friars had
been wont to publish the Indulgences which the Pope sent into Germany, the
Archb. and Prince Elector of Mentz appointed the Dominica^ Friars to publish
those, which were sent in the year 1516. Herupon Luther and diverse of the
Austin Friars were sore offended. And Luther more impatient than the rest, for
to spite the Dominicans, began first to preach, and after to publish
conclusions against the valor of indulgences. That this was the true cause of
Luthers new preaching, beside the testimony of al Catholic writers, appears
partly by what has been already said, partly also by what shall be rehearsed
further out of Protestants. Cooper. Sleid. lib. 1. fol. 1.
For Cooper in Chron. writhus An. 1517. Leo Bishop of Rome according to the
manner of his Predecessors sends down general pardons and license of other
things into Germany. By occasion whereof Mar. Luther an Austine Friar of
Wittenberg first began to preach to the people against Indulgences. Note how
he confesses that P. Leo his sending pardons was no new thing or peculiar to
him, but the custom of his Predecessors, and yet that Luther took occasion
thereof to preach against them which argues, that not the pardons themselves
gave Luther occasion to preach against them before, but some thing peculiar to
those pardons, to wit, the publication of them, not by Austin Friars as the
former pardons were published, but by the Dominicans.

For. protestants in their publik letters in Sleidan lib. 8. page 110. say
that all this dissentio^ in religion sprung of that some too much extolled
indulgences.
5. And this cause Fox insinuates a little more plainly page 771. where he
says, Luther was moved upon the sermons of one Tecelius a Dominican Friar, who
caused the Popes indulgences to be carried about the country, to publish
co^clusions against them. Lo the Dominicans and their sermons, or rather their
reputation which they got by publishing the indulge^ces, and not the
indulgences themselves, moved Luther to preach against indulge^ces. And what I
pray you should make Luther to impugn indulgences then, more then before, and
to impugn indulgences before any other point of Catholic faith, but that the
Dominicans had th^n and not before the publishing of them, and they were made
peculiar publishers of them, and of no other point of religion. And that you
may yet more clearly see, that no dislike of the indulge^ces themselves moved
Luther to impugn them Fox l. cit. confesses that Luther in the beginning did
not utterly reject indulgences, but required a moderation in them. Luther
offered to recant what he had written touching pardons. Sleid. Eng. lib. 1
fol. 9. Sleid. lib. 1. fol. 2. 5. Luther at first accounted indulgences
lavvfull.
And the Author of Paralip. Vspergen. adds that at first he did but lihgtly
strive against them, only for disputation sake: yea Luther himself in one of
his Articles set down by Fox page 1167. says thus. Indulgences are in the
number of those things which are lawful. And l. de Captiu. I did not think
(says Luther) indulgences to be utterly cast away. And Sleidan his scholar
adds histor lib. 13. that he scarce knew what the name of indulgences meant
when he first began to preach against them. How then could indulge^ces be the
cause of his revolt from the Cath. faith? But as the wise man says that by the
Devils envy death entered into the world: So may we say that by Luthers envy
against the Dominica^s Protestantisme entered into the world. And as envy of
other men's good moved Luther to begin this tragedy, so his own pride (which
would not permit him to recant what he had wickedlie taught) made him to
proceed, as appears by what has been said already. And Luther him self
confesses in Sleidan l. 13. that the Popes excommunication of him made him to
defend his doings and set forth many books; and Fox page 771. What made Luther
mantaine his doctrine.
writes, that the rage of Friar Tecelius who called him Heretik, made him to
mantaine the matter. So that not Gods glory or the goodness of his cause, but
even as him self and his best friends excuse him, other men's supposed injuries
moved Luther to mantaine Protestancie.

The manner of Luthers proceeding in Protesta^tisme. His inconstancy.
6. As for the manner how he proceeded in his new doctrine, it was very
inconstant, both in particular points and in his whole religion. For in his
answer to P. Leo his Bull in Fox page 1170. he writes thus: I embrace with the
full trust of my spirit thse Articles in the said Bull condemned, and affirm,
that the same ought to be holden of all faithful Christians under pain of
eternal damnation. And page 1174. I confess (says Luther) all these things
condemned here by this Bull for pure, clear, and Catholic doctrine. And yet
Fox notes in the Margent page 1167. thus: He retracteth these Articles, he
recalleth these. And 1. Galat. fol. 36. whether it be (says Luther) Cyprian,
Austin, Ambrose either Peter, Paul, or Ihon, or an Angel from heaven that
teaches otherwise, yet this I know assuredly that I teach not the things of
man but of God. And yet him self lib. de Captiuit. writes thus: I admitted the
Papacy to be good by man's law. And ibid. he admits three sacraments for a
time as he speaks. And yet soon after cast away the third sacrament, and the
Papacy utterly. And lib. cont. Catharin. he makes this recantation. Luther
rejects what he taught under pain of damnation,
I confess that in the beginning I thought ill of indulgences, of the Pope,
the Church of Rome, Councels, etc. And yet (as you see) he taught his doctrine
of indulgences and other things, as pure Catholic, and to be held of all
Christians under pain of damnation. Wherefore vain is the excuse which Field
lib. 3. of the Church cap. 42. makes for Luther by the example of Saint
Austin, who revoked some things which he had taught. Feilds excuse of Luthers
inconstancy rejected.
For Saint Austin revoked what he had taught as his own probable opinion, but
Luther revoked many things which him self had taught as points of faith, and to
be believed under pain of damnation, and therefore was inconstant and wavering
in his faith, which Saint Austin was not.

7. And the like inconstancy he used touching his whole religion, doubting for
a long time whether he should return to Catholic faith or go on with his
Protestancy. For Anno. 1518. which was the second year of his new preaching,
Luthers submission to the Pope after he had begun protest.
he wrote thus to the Pope as Fox page 771. Paralip. Vrspergen. and others do
witness: Most holy Father I offer my self prostrate at the feet of your Holiness
with all that I am and that; I have, save me kill me, call me, recall, approve
me, reprove me as you please. your voice the voice of Christ in you And again
made he would nether say nor hold any thing which the Church of Rome did not.
And after this the he came (says Fox page 772.) yielding his obedience to the
Church of Rome, and by writing exhibited to the Cardinal acknowledged his
excess in speech against the Popes dignity, and promised to make amends for
the same in the pulpit. And as touching the matter of pardons (says Fox) he
promised to proceed no further in any mention thereof so that his adversaries
likewise were bound to keep silence. Likewise An. 1519. which was the third
year of his Protesta^cy he wrote as Sleidan confesses, that in humane things
nothing is more excellent than the Church of Rome beside Christ only. And in
public disputation the same year confessed freely (as Melanctho^ cited by
Paralip. Vrsper. writes) that the And yet again An. 1520. (which was the
fourth year of his new doctrine) he submitted him self (says Cooper in Chron.)
to the Bishop of Rome so that he might not be compelled to recant his writings.
Cooper. An. 1510. Paralip. vsperg. 16. Fox. page 1169.
But finding that all his submissions would not be accepted without he recanted,
and that the same year his doctrine was condemned as Heretical, and him self
pronounced an Heretic, unless he recalled it with in 60. days, and being
secure by the protection of the Prince Elector, he resolved to proceed in his
wicked course, and so went on from naught to worse until he died an. 1546.
Protestants beholden to Luthe^s pride for their religion.
But thus you see that as long as Luther had any hope to escape recantation, he
still offered to give over his Protestancie, which plainly shows how ill him
self liked it, and that only pride and want of humility moved him to
maintain it.

CHAP. V. By what means Protestantisme spread so far.
1. lib. de praescript*
THe ancient writer Tertullian noted, that in his time some weak and wavering
Christians wondered, that Heresies spread so far and prevailed with so many. And
perhaps in our days some may in like sort wonder that Protestantisme is so
far extended. But let these wonderors (as Tertulian terms them) consider that
the Mahumetans impiety and the Arian heresy which denied the Godhead of
Christ were far larger. Let them also consider what Luther says 5. Galat.
fol. 251. that their is no doctrine so wicked foolish and pernicious, Luther.
which the world does not gladly admit embrace and defend, and moreover
reverently entertaineth cherishes and flattereth the professors thereof. Let
them I say consider this with that which anon I shall add, and they will leave
to marvel of the spreading of Protestancie, which (as all Heresies use to do)
creeps like a Canker. Besides that indeed though the name of Protestants and
Protestant religion be far spread, yet nether could Luther in his life time far
extend his doctrine (For as him self confesses 4. Galat fol. 199. 229. he
little prevailed, Luther could not far extend his doctrine.
And fol. 253. few (says he) are by our Ministry translated out of the
bondage of the Devil, And fol. 154 Even now whiles we live and employe all our
diligence to set forth the office and use of the law and Gospel there be very
few eue^ among those that will be counted Christians and make profession of the
Gospel with us that understand those things rightly. And after his death there
is scarce any province city or person which entirely holds Luthers
doctrine. So that as Tertulian said of valentinians that they were in many
places but Valentin their founder no where. So may we say that Lutherans or
Protestants are in diverse Countries but Luther in none. Which him self not
only feared but forsaw and fortold Galat. 4. fot 154. 201. And no marvel, for
if Luther were not constant to him self how could his scholars be constant to
him, if he controlled all the Fathers upon pretense of greater light why should
his followers forbear him.

2. But to call all that chaos and confused Mass of opposite errors
Protestantisme, which this day goes under that name, and sprung first from
Luther, and after was increased by others, and to omit the particular causes of
the entrance thereof into several Contries, the general causes of the increase
thereof were diverse rising partly from some abuses partly from the religious
persons and Clergy, partly from the lay people, Causes of spreeding
Protestancie.
but especially from Luther and his adherents and their doctrine. For it can
not be denied but there were some abuses in some places of some things belonging
to Catholic religion, as namely of indulgences. Of which abuses Luther took
his advantage to bring the holy things them selves into contempt, as appears
by what has been said before. And this occasion also Calvin and his companions
used in setting up their religion in Geneua, Surueyer.
as notes the Surueyer c. 4. where he well observes, that. when men have been
bitten with abuses, it is an acceptable point to hear the things them selves
exclaimed against. For it falls not (says he) under every simple man's cap to
distinguish well in that matter.

Galat. fol. 229. Luther confesses that if Catholics lives had been good he
could have done nothing.
If the Papacy had the same holiness and austeritie of life which it had in the
time of the ancient Fathers Hierom, Ambrose, Austin, and others, when the
Clergy had not yet so evil a name but lived after the rules and decrees of
the Fathers religiously and holily in outward show and unmarried what could we
do now against the Papacy? Ib. If that outward show and appearance of the old
Papacy remained at this day, we should peradventure do little against it by our
doctrine of faith, seeing we do now so little preuail. This mean used also
Calvin as witnesses the forsaid Surueier c. 4. Surueyer.
where also he notes that it is a plausible matter with the people to hear then
depraved that are in authority. In the lay people also Luther itching ears to
hear novelties. For as him self notes 1. Galat. fol. 14. The vnscilfull
multitude longing to hear news do join themselves to false Apostles. And in
others there was a desire of liberty, and of power to check their Pastors. And
how many this motive drew to follow Luther Melanchton his cheifest scholar
cited by the Surueyer c. 8. tells in these words. Melancthon confesses that
men follovved. Luther only for liberty.
Many for no other cause I see do love Luther but for that they thinck they
have cast of their Bishops by means of him, and have obtained a liberty, which
will not be profitable for our Posterity. Item. our fellows (says he) do
sight so for their own Kingdom and not for the Gospel. And this mean also
used Calvin and his crew at Geneua as the said Surueyer notes L. cit. saying.
Surueyer. So the Gracches moved sedition in Rome by their leges Agrarias.
It is a plausible matter with the people, especially to understand of any
liberty which may appertain to them selves. And finally in others of the
people there was a vehement thirst for the Church goods, which Luther by his
preaching exposed to the pray of Princes and people. This bate used the
wiclefists in K. Henry 4. time to cach that worthy Prince as Stow reports,
and with it partly, Protestants caught K. Henry 8. and used it to others. For
as the said Surueier writes. cap. 21. When reformation of religion was first
urged it was thaught such an effectual motive as would procure attention vz
to entitle Princes after a sort to the Church goods. Church, goods confessed
to be the effectual motive to Protestancie.
But did these reformers mean that Princes should keep those goods? No. For he
adds. The learned men persuaded them selves that if by any policy they
could overthrow Popery, Ministers move Princes to change religion for Church
goods, but mean to get all them selves.
it would afterward be an easy matter to recover them again. Besides (says
he) they did not so yield over their right in that matter to Princes, but it
was done with diverse cautions and prouisos, by virtue vvherof they supposed in
time to recover all again into their own hands. But (says he) they played
vvilie beguile them selves.

4 Protestation of false preachers.
4. On Luther and his partners side the first mean of spreding their religion
was which him self in these words 4. Galat. fol. 211. notes in false Apostles.
They make great Protestations that they seek nothing else but the advancement of
Gods glory, that they be moved by the spirit to teach the infallible truth,
and they promise undoubted salvation to those that receive their doctrine. An
other mean on their side was their dissembled sanctie. Which mean Calvin and
his company most used as notes the said Surueyer cap. 4. where he saierh.
Ministees hypocrisy to seduce the people.
It is not unknown to any of judgment what the profession of any
extraordinary zeal and as it were contempt of the world does work with the
multitude. When they see men go simply in the streets, looking dovvnevvard
for the most part, wringing their necks avvry, shaking their heads as if they
were in some present greef, lifting up the white of their eyes some time at the
sight of one vanity as they walk, when they hear them give great groans,
cry out against this sin and that sin not in their hearers but in their
Superiors, make long prayer, profess a kind of wilful poverty, speaking
earnestly against some men's having too much and soome men too little, which
beats into the peoples head a present cogitation of some division to be made
in time. When I say the multitude does hear such kind of men they are by and
by carried away with a marvelous great conceit and opinion of them, especially
when they take upon them to show a way or discipline which shall be nothing
preiuditiall to the people but rather bring them liberty, and yet shall
reform all things amiss as them selves would desire. Hitherto the Surueyer
whose words I have cited at large because they lively describe our first
Protestant Preachers.

5. But the most effectual mean which Luther had to spread his religion was
his lice^tious and fleshly sweet doctrine, wherewith on the one side he took
from his followers all fear of God both in this world and the next, and of man
too as much as he could and withal removed from them the exercise of all hard
and unpleasing things. And on the other side licensed them to enjoy all the
delites and pleasures of this world: and withal assured them both of as much
justice in this life and glory in the next, as any Saint in heaven had or
has. Luthers doctrine takes away the fear of God in this life.
For as for the fear of God in this life he takes that away by assuring those
that have his justifying faith, that all their sins are forgiven and all
punishment due unto them remitted. Which security Calvin some what increased
by adding that who once has justifying faith, can never leese it which two
points, who soever firmly believes I see not how or why he can fear God in
this life. For how can he fear God in this life who is sure that nether he can
leese Gods favor nor be punished of him for any sin which he commiteth? And in
the next life too.
And as for fear of God in the next world, first Luther took quite away
Purgatory, and though he left Hell, yet not for his followers whom he assured
that believing as he tought them they could not be damned whatsoueer they did.
So rich (says he) lib. de Captiu. cap. de Euchar.) is a Christian, as he can
not leese his salvation with what sins soever, unless he will not believe for
no sins can damn him. Takes also away fear of m^n.
And as touching fear of man also he took that away as much as he could. For a
Christian (says he 2. Galat. fol. 66.) is free from all laws and subject to
no creature. And lib. de Captiu. A Christian is bound to no law but to Gods. No
law can be imposed upon Christians by any right either of men or Angels, but as
much as they will themselves. Which doctrine D. Whitaker cont. Dur. page 726.
expounds thus: The conscience is bound to no law, but Gods. And page 731. The
particular laws of Magistrates have no command over the conscience. Which who
believes need not fear to break any ma^s law if he can keep it secret. Luthers
doctrine takes away exercise of all, unpleasing things.
In like sort Luther removed from his followers all difficult and hard things.
For he tought them that Gods commandments were impossible to be kept,
Confession Satisfaction, Abstine^ce, Fasting and austerity of life, he either
condemned, or accounted no more acceptable to God than feasting, and pampering
our bodies.

6. And on the other side, touching pleasures and delites of this world, he
licensed Bishops, Priests, Monks, Friars, Gives license to enjoy all pleasures.
and Nonnes to break their vows of chastity, poverty, and obedience, and to
marie, to to get riches, Luthers general indulgence to sin.
and to live at their own command; gave leave to the people to read and
understand Scriptures according to their private spirits, to make choice of
their Pastors, and to take all or a good part of Church livings. He freed
Princes from all Ecclesiastical subjection, and granted to all sorts of
people a license to eat at what time and what meat they list yea he gave a
general and direct indulgence for to syn. For 2. Galat. fol. 66. A Christian
(says he) has nothing to do with the law and sin. 3. Galat. fol. 114. sin in
us is no sin. And fo. 140. If sin vex the, think that it is at it is indeed,
but an imagination. ibidem True divinity teaches that there is no sin in the
world any more fol. 138. Christ says he is the only sinner. And his whole
drift in that book is to extinguish in his followers all feeling of sin or
remorse of conscience thereof, Luthers quiet of conscience in extinguishing
remorse of sin. Luther Sermon. de nativv. B. Mariae.
and this he terms quiet of Conscience. And withal this (as I said) he
assures every one of his followers that they are as just as our blessed lady,
and if they beliue as he teaches them as sure of heaune as she is. And do we
marvel to see common people to embrace so secure and pleasing a religion?
Surely we need marvel no more than to see water run the lower way or stones
roll down the hill. But alas poor souls who like silly fishes are caught
with this pleasing bat to their everlasting death. For this learning comes not
from above but as S. James speaks is earthly sensual and devilish what
religion of God can that be which abandoneth al fear of God? what piety can
that be which remoueth the exercise of hard things as for the most part the
acts of virtue are. What Christianity can that be which joins league with the
flesh and the world which Christians renounce in their baptism? And these
motives I have noted in the spreading of Luthers doctrine But let us hear the
foresaid Surueyer.

7. First (says he cap. 8. Luther and his parteners saught to persuade the
Pope and Bishops to to their reformation. Luthers means of spreading his
doctrine out of the Surueyer.
This is evident by Luthers to P Leo, to the Archb. of Mentz and others. But
finding small encouragement of them they were driven (says he) to fly to the
civil Magistrates. and the rather to move (says he) discontented that so good
an occasion was offered them to procure their greater liberty. Moreover Luther
and his were content to yield to much against their mind with many unequal
conditions. So at last the civil Magistrates began a reformation. The Pope, the
Bishops, and the cheifest of the Clergy impugned it, Whereupon their livings
which they had in any of those territories were seized into the hands of the
civil Magistrates. Thus you see even by the confession of Protestants, that
Luther could not persuade his religion to the chiefest of the Clergy, but
spread it by temporizing with Princes and States, with yielding too much eue^
against his mind, with exciting cities to rebel against their Bishops, and
take their livings from them. Which whither it be an Apostolic kind of
proceeding or no, I durst make the Surueier himself judge. Sure I am that he
greatly condemns the like proceeding of Calvin cap. 2. and fears that
Puritans will in time use the like course to reform him and his Company.

CHAP. VI. When, by whom, wherefore, and how Protestancie began first in
England.
1. IN the first book you have heard how all our Christian Kings to K. Henry
8. were Roman Catholics. Now it comes to show when, wherefore, and how he
altered the Religion of all his Forfathers and Predecessors. About the year
1527. The Protest. divines in German. would not auovv. K. Henry's deuorce.
Sleidan. Engl. lib. 10. fol. 139. Causes of K. Henry 8. revolt from the Pope
out of Cooper and Stow.
He fell in love with M. Anne Bullen daughter to Sir Thomas Bullen, who not
co^descending to his lust, unless he made her his wife, he made earnest suit to
Pope Clement to be divorced from Queen Catherin daughter to the King of Spain
with whom he had been married 20. years, and had had by her diverse children,
upon pretense that she had been married before to Prince Arthur his brother. But
the Pope taking great deliberation and long time in the matter, King Henry in
the year 1531. (not upon any dislike of the Popes religion (but upon occasion
of delay (as both Cooper and Stow say in their Chronicles, made by the Pope in
the matter of his diuorcement, and displeasure of such reports as he heard had
been made of him to the Court of Rome, and thirdly pricked forward by some
cou^sellers to follovv the example of Germa^s, caused proclamatio^s to be made
in the 29. of September forbidding all subjects to procure any things from the
Court of Rome. And not content with this, to spite the Pope more, he compelled
the Clergy the same year to give him 130. thousand pou^ds with the Title of the
headship of England, K. Hen. divorced from his first wife after he had married
a second.
so far forth as the word of God did permit. And in the year 1533. of his own
authority he married Anne Bulle^, and a good wile after made Cranmer divorce
him from his former wife than living, For which vnchristia^ proceeding being
excommunicated by the Pope, he was more enraged. And therefore in the year
1534. Protestants brag of procuring the title of the head of the Church to K.
Henry.
by Act of Parliament made him self head of the Church, which title Barnes a
Protestant says (as Fox records) that the K. got by his and his fellows
labors. And Tindal the Apostle, (as Protestants call him) of England who the^
lived, writing An. 1533, to Frith of K. He^ries intention against the Pope and
Clergy says thus in Fox p. 987 I smell a Counsel to be taken little for the
Clergies profit in time to come. Why K. Henr. revolted from the P. out of
Tindal.
But you must understand that it is not of pure heart and for love of the truth,
but to aue^g himself and to eat the whores flesh and drink the marow of her
bones. which because it is vritte^ somewhat enigmaticaly. K. Henr. forsook the
P. not for love of truth but for spite and covetousness. Beginning of
Protestancie in England. An. 1530. Counselars, thereto lay men. Motives* spite
and Cauetousnes.
Fox expounds in the marge^t thus, eating the whores flesh is to spoil the
Popes Church only for the pray and spoil thereof. Thus you see it evident eue^
by the confession of Protestants both the year when K. Henry 8, began to
revolt from the Pope. To wit 1530. and his Counselors therein, to wit, no
Bishops nor Divines but Laymen; who hoped (as they were) to be partakers of the
pray. And his motive there unto, not dislike of the P. religion or like of a
better, but malice against his person, and couetusnes of the Church goods. And
out of these two fou^tains have spro^g since all the Protesta^cie of Engl.
which whether they were liker to be fou^tains of Gods or the Devils religion I
leave to every one to judge.

2. Protestancie quite alters K. Henry's procedings.
And as the motives so his alteration were malice and couetuosnes, so his
proceeding after was ever cruel covetous and blooddy, quite different from his
procedings in the former time, For whereas before in 22. years of his Regn he
had been gentle and put none of his nobility to death besides the Duke of
Buckingham and Fearle of Suffolk for treason In 16. years after, of six
Queens which he had, he put away two, whereof one died for sorrow, other two he
beheaded the one for adultery, the other for incest also, a thing unheard of
before in Enlgish Q. the fifth he caused to be opened for to save the child in
her belly, Bloody proceeding of K. Henry after change of religion. first
Protest. Queen of England executed for adultery and incest. Queens. Cardinals.
Abbotts. Dukes. Marquis. Earls. Lords. Countess. Marquess. Rauin.
and the sixth he meant to have executed for heresy. Of Cardidals he beheaded
one, condemned an other, brought the third to death with grief and sorrow. Of
Lords Abbots he hanged, drawed and quatered six, Priors five, besides a great
number of Priests, Monks, and Friars. And of the Nobility he condemned one Duke
to perpetual prison, beheaded a Marquess, beheaded two Earls, one Earls
son and heir, and five of his Uncles all in one day, beheaded six Lords and
one Lords son and heir: and hanged one Lord, beheaded one Countess,
attainted one Marquess; and of knights, gentlemen, and others, executed great
numbers. And for his covetousness of Church goods, besides the 130. thousand
pounds, exacted as before of the Clergy, the very same year he suppressed the
Hospital of S. James nere to Charing Cross Anno 1532. suppressed the priory
of the Trinity in London. Anno 1534. suppressed the houses of the Obseruant
Friars in England and took to himself all fruits and tenths of all spiritual
goods and promotions An. 1534. took the relics and cheifest Iuells out of
Monasteries, Anno 1536. suppressed all religious houses to the value of 200.
pounds and under, and took all their lands and grounds. The number of these
houses (says Stow) were 276. the value of their lands then 32000. pounds and
more by the year. The moveable goods as they were sold at Robinhood penorthes
amonted to more tha^ one hundred thousand pounds. It was a pitiful thing
(says he) to hear what a lamentation the poor people in the Country made
for them. For there was great hospitality kept among them, and as it was
thought more than 10. thousand persons Masters and servants had lost their
livings by the putting down of those houses. Anno. 1538. All Abbeis and
religious houses were suppressed, and S. Thomas of Canterbury Shrine pulled
down, which was (says Stow) built of stone above a man's hight. The upper part
of timber which was covered with plates of gould damasked with gould wier,
which ground of gould was again covered jewels of gould 10. or 12. croouped
with gould wier into the said ground of gould. Many of these rings having
stones in them brooches Images Angels precious stones and great pearls etc,
The spoil of which shrine in gould and precious stones says he filled two
great Chests, the which six or eight strong men could do no more than carry one
of them at once out of the Church. By which one may gather the inestimable
riches which King Henry got by all Abbeis and Shrines. Moreover Anno 1540, he
suppressed the knights of the Rhodes. And finally An. 1505. all Chanteries
Colleges and hospitals were given to the K. And yet not content withal these
Church goods, What mischeef one point of Protesancie brought to England.
which were inestimable, within two years after, to wit An. 1540. imposed a
great tax upon both Clergy and Layty as never was heard of before in England,
as you may read in Stow and other. And withal coined base money in great
abundance which was after called down to half valowe, Protestancie at first
entrance undid English men, souls bodies goods, houses, Churches monuments.
Thus you may see how Protestancie or rather one point thereof, to wit, The
denial of the Popes supremacy altered this K. from a liberal and clement
Prince, to a most cruel and covetous man, and how it entered into our Country,
not only with the loss of our Contrymens souls, but also of their goods and
lives, and made such hauock of me^ and weeme^, of churches, houses, ancient
Monuments, stately buildings as if some fury had come out of Hell, or sum
mortal enemy had gone roging up and down our Contry. Protestants vvish of
Geneua and Beza.
Surly who well considers this may say of Protesta^cy as Ba^croft in his
survey c. 3. says of Geneua. It had been better for this Ila^d if never
English man nor Scottish man had been acquainted there And of Luther as he c. 8.
says of Beza those Churches that follow Bezas humor may justly wish he had
never ben born. And the Dangerous Positioner l. 1. c. vlt. says he thincketh
the Scottish Ministers wrought more mischief in that Country in 30. years tha^
the P. of Rome had done before, in 500.

3. Miserable success after Protesancie.
Finally the succes which this King reaped by his alteration was most
miserable. For whereas before he was loved of Englishmen at home, and feared of
strangers abroad, after this change made, he was secure of neither. For first
Lincolnshyre men rose against him to the number of 20. thousand, Commotions.
and straight after Yorkshier men to the number of 40. thousand. And these
insurrections being appeased the Yorkshier men twice after attempted an
insurrection. And from abroad he was accursed of the Pope, and stood in
continual fear that some foreign Prince would invade his Land. Prophetie of
F. Peto.
And as Friar Peto then told him to his face openly in the Pulpit at
Greenwich, that if he proceeded in his course it woule befall to him, as it did
to Achab. that doogs should lick his blood, and there should not be one left of
his issue to piss against a wall. The first whereof was seen to be fulfilled
after his death, when the lead wherein his body was wrapped, whilst in the
carriage thereof to Winsor, it stood in the ruins of the monastery of Syon
broke, and his blood ran out, which the dogs lick up as a grave writer
reports out of their mouth that saw it, and the second we all now see to be
accomplished.

4. Catholic religion thus maimed in one point by King Henry, was after his
death here turned into Protestancy, First in K. Edwards time and after in
Queen Elizabeth reign. But who considers by what authority by what means,
and whose procurment it was done, A child first and after a woman authors of
Protestancie in England.
may justly think that it was not wrought by God. For Protestancie was set up,
not by the authority of any man but first by the authority of a child of 9.
years old scarce come to the use of reason and not fit to govern himself and
after by the authority of a woman. Mean, only vvil and teror.
The means by which it was set up was nether miracle nor extordinarie virtue
of the first preachers of it or their public confuting by disputation their
adversaries as Catholic religion was set up by S. Austin, Frocurers lay men.
but merely the will of the Protector in King Edwards time, and of the Qeeene
in her time, and the terror of laws. Which means are more seeming as
befitting Turkish than Christian religion. And lastly the procurrers of this
change were not Bishops or Diuins, but either wholly Laymen ignorant of
Scripture and divinity, against the will of all the Bishops as it was in Queen
Elizabeth's time, or principally Laymen against the consent of the best learned
of the Pastors as in K. Edwards time. And how little these men cared for
religion, but even against their conscience sought their own aduancements,
appears by the Duke of Northumberland a principal Doer in the alteration in
K. Edwards time, who stuck not to tell even in that time to M. Anthony Brown
after created Vicount Mountaigue as I have often heard of his honorable and
virtuous Lady lately deceased, D of Northumb. confesses that against his
conscience he set up the new region.
that he knew the Roman religion to be the truth, but yet (said he) since we
have begone with this new, run God run Devil, we will go forward. And that
religion was but a color of his ambitious pretenses is also evident, by what
Stow writes of him. For first he repeateth his Oration to the Lords wherein he
says that Gods cause and the preferment of his (new) word was the original
grownd of proclaming Queen Jane, Sleidan. lib 25. An. 1553.
and after recites his words at his death where he professes the Romans
Catholic faith, and professed that he did not for hope of life, but for
conscience, and acknowledged the evils then happened to England to have comen by
the new religion By this judge of the rest and now let us return to Luther.

CHAP. VII. That Luther was ignorant or meanly learned,
1 Luthers young years.
1. THat Luther was but meanly learned when he first began Protesta^tisme I will
prove many ways. First by his young years for he was but 34. years old when he
began this new doctrine. At what years men have rather the ground of learning,
2 Studied in no famous universe. Fox. p. 770.
than are any way excellently learned. Secondly, he studied in no famous
university nor under any notable Master. For the chefest place where he studied
was Erphord in Germany, a place of no name, and his Masters names are so
obscure as they are not known, unless we reckon his black Master whereof we
shall speack hereafter. I might also add that he was brought up in a monastery
because D. Whitak. cont. Dur. p. 733. says what can we expect out of
Monasteries but Monkish superstitions unlearned? 3 Corporal impediment of
study.
Thirdly, he had a very great impediment of study, For tom. 2. page 22. thus
he writes: I dare not read two whole leaves together nor two or three lines
of a psalm, nor look upon any thing long. For straight I have a noise in my
ears that I am feign to lay down my head to the form.

lib. 4 of the Church c. 24. grants, His ignorant doctrine.
Luther made question of S. James epist. and of others. Wittak. cont. Dur. p.
12. says he vvrote disgracefully of it, p. 20 doubted of it. and p. 22. called
it strawish in respect of S. Peter's and S. Paul's Epistles. And yet as the same
Field says he had but vveak and frivolous reasons to doubt, or as Whitak. p.
19. has, had no just cause of suspicion, or as Fulke adds in 2. Jacob. had
no reason. wherefore either Luther had no judgment or learning to think frivolous
yea no reason, weighty reason or he had less grace to reject a part of Gods
word for no reason at all. Moreover Fox page 1167. sets down these Articles
which I think few will judge to proceed from great learning. To burn Heretics
is against the will of the spirit. To fight against the Turk is to repugne
against God Souls in purgatory do sin without intermissio^, and diverse others
which Fox is feign to file with his exposition, D. Couell in defense of Hooker:
page 42. sets down this Article of Luther: Faith unless it be without eue^
the least good work does not justify. The devil may administer sacrame^te by
Luther. VVeemen may absolve from sins.
And p. 101. says Luther is not afraid to affirm that Sacraments are
effectual though administered by Satan himself. Field also lib. 3. of Church
page 127. grants that Luther taught. That when and where no Presbiter ca^ be
found to perform the office a lay man yea a woman may absolve. which I tink
few learned Protest. will defend Calvin 4. Instit. cap. 17. Parag. 30. says
that the Lutherans opinion of the Eucharist raises up Eutiches heresy. The
God head suffered with Luther.
Luther himself lib. de Council. part. 2. page 276. plainly teaches
Diuinitatem posse pati, that the God head could suffer. And as Zuinglius
respons. ad Confess. Luth. fol. 458. testifies clearly and roundly professed
that he would not acknowledge Christ for his Savior, if his humanity only had
suffered. Himself lib. de Captiu. cap. de Euchar. leaves it free to beliue in
the Eucharist either transubstantiation or impanation and professes that he
firmly beliueth panem esse Corpus Christi, bread to be Christ's body. And c. 3.
Galat. avouches infa^ts to have acts of faith and belief, whils they are
baptized, which S. Austin Ep. ad Dardan. counts most ridiculous.

Protestants censure of Luther.
Fox says p. 488 Luther had blemishes in doctrine, and went awry. Sutclif
Answ. to except. p. 41. Luthers opinion (about the Euchar.) is heretical by
infere^ce of such Co^clusio^s as follovv of it. To which he adds p. 55. that
he is an Heretik who holds any point condemned for heresy, wherpo^ an other
may infer that Luther was an Heretik. Zuing. in his Ep. to Luther Anno 1526.
says we easily see that thou (Luther) art an vnscilfull or very raw divine
Whitak. cont. Dur. p. 22. Zuinglius judges Luther to be ignorant.
It makes not much matter (says he) whether Luther said so or no. p. 27.
what is it to me? Some Protest contemn Luthers books.
I care not what they (Luther and his cheef scholars) misliked. And as Fox
says p. 788. Some Protestants give clean over the reading of Luther, and fall
in utter contempt of his books.

4. Lastly, Luthers confession of his ingnorance. Sleidan Engl. lib. 16. fol.
232. when Luth began first-to preach against pardon he knevv not what that
matter meant as him self confesses.
I prove Luthers ignorance by his own confession. For as Sleidan reports
lib. 13. he said thus. When I began to preach against indulgences I scarce
knew what the name of them meant. And in Fox page 1173. he confesses that he is
not certain, what is done with a soul which departing without actual sin yet
has the original roate of sin, nor whither Fear in a man dying with imperfect
charity let his entrance into heaven or no. In like sort in Colleq. Mensal.
fol. 154. he professes that he knows not how discern, Legem ab euangelio
the law from the Gospel. And other where he says that he knows nether Greek
nor Hebrew. And L. de Captiu. cap de bapt. Here (says he) I confess my
ignorance. And cap. de Matrim. unto this day I am so uncertain about vows as I
know not when they are to be thought to bind. Ib. I dare not define whither
plurality of wives be lauful. And L. co^t. Chatharin. plainly confesses how
ignorant he was in the beginning of his new preaching about Indulgences, the
Pope, Church of Rome, Councels and other matters. And 3. Galat. fol. 170. I
have scarsely learnt the first principles (of the use of the law) See it fol.
12. and 100.

Think of this my dear Countriemen. Neander lib. 8. explitet. orbis terra.
Fox. p 416. Edit. 1563. Iu^l Apolog.
5. And was this the man that controlled all the Fathers? that condemned al
Antiquity of ignorance and blindness? that contemned all the Canonists and
schole divines? was this the God (as some call him) of diuins? was this the
conductor of Israel? was this the man that was given by God to lighten the
world? O wilful blindness of men, who will follow so ignorant and blind a
guide! What must become of both him and them that follow him and forsake the
ancient Fathers and Catholic Church, but what our Savior says of the like. If
the blind lead the blind do they not both fall into the dich. And if Luther
who had (as he says) the first fruits of the spirit, was thus ignorant,
Ignorance of Engl. Ministers.
what may we think of others who succeeded him? Some of our Ministers (says
Collins in his sermon at Paul's Cross 1607.) are enemies to learning. Godwin in
his preface before his Catalog of Bishops writes that the best wits daily
refuse the universities or divinity at least. Decaie of learning in England
with Protesta^cie
And every age (of Protestant) brings les plenty of learned men among us
than other, And it is much (says he) to be feared that our posterity will
truly say.

Aetas parentum peior auis tulit
Nos rudiores, mox daturos
Progeniem ineruditiorem.
The Declaration of discipline printed at Geneua an. 1580. says p. 148. That
now in steed of labor idleness is comen into the universities, contention,
neglect and almost contempt of all religion with dissolute license and
liberty, whereby they give them selves to all riot and wantones. It greueth me
(says that writer) how far they are from Muses and learning. Even the very
temples of religion, the altars the Chapels do wax profane unholy and void
of al true religion. And much more of the like sort ib. I. B. alias Bacster in
his tail of two legged Foxes cap. 11. greatly complains of the decay of
learning* piety and religion; and the contempt and beggarlines of Ministers.
Where he says that some of them have no more knowledge than idols of woad or
stone, and terms them Sir Ihons lack latin lack learning, lack conscience. O
how does learning decay and ignorance increase, when our adversaries thus
openly confess it. And what wilful imprude^ce is it to think that these kind
of fellows can see more tha^ our ancient Prelates and divines. And having thus
seen Luthers small learning* now let us behold his life and manners.

CHAP. VIII. That Luther was a naughty and vicious man. Three kinds of proof
of Luthers vice

1. MY proofs of Luthers vicious and naughty life I will reduce to three
Galat. fol. 37 I endeavored my self to keep the Popes laws as much as was
possible for me to do, Luthers piety for the time of his Cath. religion.
punishing my poor body with fasting, watching, praying and other exercises.
I honored the Pope of mere conscience and unfeignedly and whatsoever I did, I
did it of a single heart of good zeall and for the glory of God. And fol. 38. I
keept chastity poverty and obedience, I was free from the cares of this present
life, I was only given to fasting, watching, praying. Thus Luther for a time,
and happy had he been if he had so continewed. But as he entered into religion
upon fear because he with whom he walked in the feilds was there slain with a
thunderbolt. So fear being an il keeper of continuance, he afterward fell from
this zeall of his own good and Gods glory, and in steed thereof fostered (as
him self writes fol. 38.) cit. continual mistrust doubtfulnes and hatred and
blasphemy against God. Luther confesses that he hated God
And praefat. 1. operum tom. 1. I felt my self (says he) to be before God of a
most trobled conscience, I loved not yea I hated (o horor to hear) God just and
punishing sins, and with secret if not blasphemy yet with great murmuring
I repined at him. Luthers fit disposition to become an Archeretik.
I raged so with a fear and perturbed conscience. Thus Luther of him self
before he began Protestantisme. And I pray the Christian Reader was this change
in Luther from zeall of Gods glory to hatred of God, from God or from the
devil? was a man in this case likely to have particular light from God
touching his truth rather than any in the world besides? Or rather having (as
him self confesses) lost a good conscience, was he not like (as S. Paul
speaks) to make shipwreck also of his faith? was not a man of his disposition
fit to be made of the Devil a broacher of heresies, and an apt instrument to
lead many souls to hell?

2. Of his envy for which he first began Protestantisme you have heard before,
Hic envy.
and likewise of his pride for which he co^tinewed it. Pride.
But his pride was otherwise so notorious as Protestants tax him for it. God
(says Conrad Regius lib. cont. Hessum) for the sin of pride wherewith Luther
exalted him self has taken away his spirit from him, and in steed thereof has
given him a wrathful lying and arrogant spirit. Oecolampad. lib. cont. confess.
Lutheri, writes that, Luther was puffed up with the spirit of pride and
arrogancy. And the Tigurin Ministers in their answer for Zuinglius pronounce
that, Luther is carried away with too much insolency. Wrath. ^lenburg. de
Ca^sis Cath. fidei. cap. 8. ^al vino. turcism. lib^ 3. cap. 6.
Of his wrath and anger D. Field lib. 3. of the Church cap. vlt. confesses
that Luther was of a violent spirit and carried too much with the violent
stream of his passions, and the Tigurins Gesnerus and others dislike his
distemperat passions. Fulk in cap. 3. Philip. gives this verdict of him.
Luther pursued contentions more bitterly than was meet. The Tigurins respons ad
Luther. write, that he followed too much obstinacy and pride and that much of
the malignant spirit was in him. Iesner in his bibliotheca says. He could bear
none but such as agreed with him in all points. God (says he) forbid lest by
his contention and impudency he hurt the Church. Erasmus a Co^fessor with Fox,
and of good judgment and a plain and well meaning man with D. Reinolds lib
cont. epist. non sobr. Lutheri, gives this sentence of him. Luthers epistle
breaths deadly hatred, is all full of impotent if not furious reproaches and
malicious lies. He malepertly rages against Kings and Princes when he list.
Extreme hatred desire of command and firebrands of Incitors drive him out of
the way. He cracketh naught but devils Satan's, Hobgoblins, wiches, Magaeras
and such more than tragical speeches. His mind can be satiated with no
raling, he is besid him self with hatred, he has no sincerity, no sobriety,
no Christian modesty. If you take out of his books hyperbols, railing,
scoffing, repetition, asseuerations, articles of VViclefs and Hus, perhaps
little will remain of his own. Calvin in Schusselburg lib. 2. theol. Calvin.
fol. 126. concludes that. His leacherie. Luther in Sleidan. lib. 3. fol 2^ my
profession is not of life and manners.
Luther multis vitijs scatet, has many faults. As for Luthers fleshly
filthiness him self tom. 1. epist. Latin. fol. 334. says that. I am burnt with
the great flame of my vntaimed flesh. I am fervent in the flesh slothe lust
etc. And as the world knows, contrary to his promise made to God; married a
wife, and her a Nonne.

3. But to leave Luthers carnal vices, and to come to worse, such as by them
we may clearly see that Luthers preaching came not from God. Rejected a part
of Gods word.
First he rejected a good part of Gods word, as not only Catholics say but
most Protestants also confess, to wit the Epistle to the Hebrews, the second
of S. Peter, the epistle of S. James and of S. Jude, the second and third of S.
Ihon, and the Apocalips. And this he did upon frivolous yea upon no reason as
is before showed. Now how hateful a sin it is to reject Gods word every one
sees, and God him self declares by his curse Apoc. 22. Secondly, of that part
of Gods word which he did admit he corrupted diverse places namely Romans 3.
Corrupted the rest.
where he the Apostle says that man is justified by says he added (Alone) And
being asked why de did so he answered so I co^ma^d and so I will, Biblia German.
my will shall stand for reason still to. 5. Germ. fol. 141. And this heinous vice
was so notorius in Luther as Zuinglius his Coapostle L. de Sacrant. Tom. 4.
page 411. 412. thus writes to him. Thou do corrupt the word of God thou art
seen to be a manifest and common corrupter of the holy scriptures. How much
are we ashamed of thee who hitherto esteemed the byond all measure and now prove
the to be a false man. Fulke also in his Preface to his Annotat. says that
Luther in his heat misliked a true translation of the Bible. So far could
passion transport this new Apostle. Went against his conscience.
Thirdly, he impugned that which in his conscience he took to be truth and so
committed that heinous sin against the holy Ghost, which our savior says
shall be forgiven nether in this world nor the next. For as is before declared
he often times offered to suppress his new doctrine if he were not bound to
recant it, wherein he must needs do againsts his own conscience either in
preaching his new doctrine knowing it to be false, or in suppressing it thinking
it to be Gods truth. And in Colloq. Mensal. fol. 158. him self confesses thus.
Luther. wishes he had never begun Protestancie.
I never leaut these thaughts that I wish and desire that I had never begun
this business. And in parua Confessione. I knew (says he) that the elevation of
the Sacrament was idolatrous, yet I kept it in the Church of Wittenberg that I
might spite the devil Carlostadius. o what would not he do or say to spite
Catholics, who to spite his friend and first scholar permitted (as he thaught)
idolatry against God. And shall not we wish woe had never known that religion,
which the Author thereof wishes he had never begun? And albeit both he and all
Protestants account it a thing commanded by God to communicate in both kinds
and forbidden by him to communicate in one only yet as Iuel Art. 2. diuis. 6.
nether does nor can deny, he wrote. If perchance the Council should appoint (to
communicate in both kinds) we would least of all receive both but then first
in despite of the Council we would receive but one or nether and in no case
both kinds. Behold how to spite a Council he would either not communicate at all
or not so as he thinks God commanded. And who will see more of this humor of
Luther may read Vbenberg de Causis Cathol. fidei etc. cap. 15. But was this man
who thus partly rejected, partly corrupted Gods word, and sinned against the
holy Ghost likely to be a man chosen by God to be a new preacher and restorer
of his word, and strangely lightened by the holy Ghost? No Surely.

4. Yea that we may be assured that it was the Prince and spirit of darkness who
sent and lightened him, almighty God so provided that no adversary nor
stranger, but him self should utter, and not utter only, but write and print
for a warning to all posterity, that in the dark night he learnt his doctrine
of the Prince of darkness. For lib. de missa angulari tom. 6. Ienen. fol. 28. b.
and edit. Luthers confession that he learnt his doctrine of the devil.
Wittenberg. 1577. by Thomas Kelug tom. 7. fol. 228. he writes thus. Upon a
certain time I suddenly waked about midnight, then Satan began his disputation
with me saying. Harken right learned Doctor Luther. Thou have said private Mass
these 15. year almost every day, what if private Masses were horrible
idolatry? what if there were not the body and blood of Christ, but thou
wor^hipedst bread and wine and shewedst them to be worshipped of others. To
whom I answered (says Luther) I am an anointed priest, received unction and
consecration of a Bishop and did all things by command and obedience of my
Superiors. How then should I not have consecrated seeing I pronounced the words
of Christ seriously with great earnestnes? Thou hear this. All this said he
(the devil) is true. But the Turks and Heathens do all in their temples upon
obedience, and do their service with devotion. The priests of Hieroboam did
also all things with zeall and with devotion against the priests in Jerusalem.
These words are left out in the edition ofr vvittenberge.
What if their ordination and consecration were false as the Turkish and
Samaritans are false Priests, thy worship is false and impious. Here (says
Luther) I began to sweat and my heart to quake and beat within me. The devil can
place and urge his arguments fitly to oppose and has a great and strong voice.
And these disputations are not long a doing but straight one answer follows
an other. And I well found then how it falls out that men ore found dead in
the morning in their bedds. He can kill the body, he can also by reasoning
drive the soul into such straites that in a moment it is to forsake the body.
Luther confesses that he was caught of the devil in disputation.
Whereto he has almost driven me full often. Surely in the dispute he caught
me, and against my will I would have carried such a heap of blasphemies before
God, but willingly would have defended my innocence. Wherefore I marked what
cause he had against my priesthood and consecration. Hitherto Luther, whose
words whether I have truly alleged or no may be seen in the editions which I
named. And after this Luther sets down five arguments which he learnt of
the devil against priesthood and Mass. O detestable Master! O hateful
scholar! O execrable doctrine! O abominable schole! And, O heavens be amazed
that a Christian would believe the devil rather than Christ's Church, and that
Christians should follow him who professes to follow the Devil! Hov ministers
gloss Luthers confession.


5. Ministers being greatly ashamed at this testimony of Luther against him
self and his doctrine, endeavor to cast many mists before peoples eyes that
they should not perceive the horror thereof. D. Sutlif l. de Eccles. page 298.
says it was a dream. But Luther says plainly that it was after he awaked,
and tells what a voice the devil used, and how he had like to have died for
fear. Field l. 3. of the Church c. vlt. Iuel Art. ^. diuis. 2. and others say
it was but a spiritual conflict and tempting of Luther to despair. But
housoeuer the devil meant also to draw Luther to desperation, it can not be
denied, but that he meant to persuade him to detest his preisthoud and Mass, as
is evident both by the words cited and by the five arguments which the devil
brought against the Mass with which Luther (as he says) was caught, that is
persuaded to reject his priesthoud and Mass which before he greatly esteemed.
It ca^ not therefore but impudently and against Luthers own words be denied,
but that this new doctrine, that Preisthoud and Mass are naught, he learnt of
the devil, housoeuer the devil having persuaded him that, Forther confession of
Luthers familiarity with the devil.
me^t with all to drive him to despair. And howbeit our Ministers be ashamed
of Luthers learning and freindship with the devil yet he him self braggeth
thereof. For to. 2. Ieren. fol. 77. Believe me (says he) well, yea very well I
know the devil. He often times walks with me in the Dorter. When I am in
company he hurts me not, but when he catches me alone then he teaches me
manners. Again. The devil oftener and nearer sleeps with me than my Kate. I
have two marvelous devils, Se^ Feuard. in 4. Iren cap. 32 Vlenberg. Cansa. 21.
Apol of Protestants trac 2. cap. 2 parag. 2. Testimony of other Prottestants
for the same. Erasmus. Fox in Calendar D. Reinol. Confer. page 155. Ministers of
zurich.
who among the devils are great Doctors in divinity. And in his letters to
the Elector of Saxony. The devil some times so passes through my brains as I
can nether write nor read. And in Colloq. latin. fol. 32. I had rather (says
he) be killed by the devil than by the Emperor. And of the forsaid conference
between Luther and the devil Erasmus cont. epist. non Sobr. Lutheri writes
thus. He brings in a disputation of the devil with a man, in his book of
Mass in corners, and ascribes such strong arguments to him (devil) as he
says he could not answer them. And again. The devil did impugn his mind
about Mass with strong weapons. Thus Erasmus a Confessor and plain meaning
man amongst Protestants. And the Ministers of Zurich in their Confession fol:
25. 26. 127. call Luther the Minister of Satan, and say that he wrote his
books impulsu spiritus (Satanae) cum quo disputationem instituit, quique vt
videtur Lutherum disputando superauit, by the motion of that spirit (Satan)
with, whom he disputed, and who as it seems overcame him in disputation.
This same also testify Gesnerus, Gesner and others.
Tossanus Neostadius, Beza, Calvin and others cited by Feuardent in lib. 4.
Iren. cap. 32. Nether was it peculier to Luther to be thus taught of the Devil.
For to Carolstadius appeared a devil whiles he was preaching, as Alberus a
Protestant witnesses to which the Ministers of Basil add that he was killed of
a devil. Zuinglius in his book de Subsid. Euchar. professes that he learnt his
doctrine about the Eucharist of a spirit which I know not (says he) albus an
alter fuerit, whether it were black or white, that is good or bad God or the
Devil. Calvin epist. ad Bucer. confesses he had, Genium a familiar, to whom
he attributes his vain of cursing. And of Knox his conference with the devil
you may see Hamilton Confut. Calvin. page 254. And thus much touching Luthers
deeds.

Luthers wicked doctrine.
6. As for his wicked doctrine some thing has been said already, and here we
will add a little more, referring the cheef to the third part of this Treatise.
In behalf of sin, he teaches l. de Captiu. thus. No sins ca^ damn a
Christian but only incredulity. And against goods works he has these two
Articles in Fox p. 1167. In every good work the just man sins. Every good
work of ours when it is best done is a venial sin. In favor of carnal lust
he writes sermon. de Matrim. If the wife can not or will not, let the maid come
again. As it is not in my power that I should be a man: so it is not in my
power that I should be without a vvoma^. Item. It is not in our power that it
should be either stayed or omitted but it is as necessary as that I should be a
man and more necessary tha^ to eat drink or steep. And l. de Captiu. l. de
Matrim. If a woman's husband be impotent than (says he) I would advise that
with consent of her husband she should by with an other, Epist. ad Albert d
Mogunt. Horribile est si vir in morte inueniatur sine vxore.
or with her husbands brother, yet with secret marriage. If her husband would
not consent I would advise that mariyng to an other she should fly into some
remote and unknown place. Ib. I had rather suffer plurality of wives than
divorce.

7. And as for the effects of Luthers new doctrine Erasmus Epist. ad Vultur.
says thus. Bring me one whom this Gospel (of Luther) has of a glutton made
sober, of feirce, mild, Luthers wicked faith
of covetous liberal, of an ill speaker, well spoken, of unchaste shamefast. I
can show them many who are made worse than they were. Sleidan lib. 6 fol. 83
To this Field lib. 3. of the Church cap. 8. finds no better answer than to
say thus, Erasmus was variable and inconstant. Calvin.
But by his leave otherwise judged Fox of Erasmus when he placed him in his
Calendar for a Co^fessor, otherwise D. Reinolds when in his Confer. p. 152.
Luther.
he terms Erasmus a man of excellent judgment. and p. 155. Men seven times
worse when they are Protestants than before.
a plain and well meaning man. And for his judgment of the Luthera^s manners
Field ca^ not show that Erasmus was various. But what will he say to Calvin who
admonit. vlt. ad VVestphal. writes that Lutherans have not one jot of honest
shamefastnes, are brutish men, and make no account of the judgment of men or
angels? What will he say to Luther him self who 5. Galat. fol. 252. writes that
his followers are seven times worse under the name of Christian liberty than
they were under the Pope. And fol. 285. This (says he ( is the lot of the
(new) Gospel that when it is preached men begin to spoil to rob, By
Protestancie men grow out of kind.
to steal and to beguile. To be brief men seen suddenly to grow out of kind and
to be transformed into cruel beasts And much more he has of the like sort
fol. 27. 286. 39. 252. And who will see more of the wicked effects of Luthers
Gospel may read Schusselb. lib. 2. Calvin. theolog. Iezler. de bello Eucharist.
Feuardent. in 2. Iren. cap. 9. And also Luther postil. supra. dom. 1. aduentus.
Smidelin. Cant. 4. in 21. Luc. wigand de malis German. Bulling. conc. Brent.
Calvin de scand and sermon. 10. and 11. in epist. ad Ephesians. Muscul. L. de
Prophet. and cant. 4 de planetis. Here I will add a little of the increase of
ill life in England since Protestantisme entered.

8. King Henry after he had admitted one point of Protestancie, to wit, the
denial of the Popes supremacy, and permitted the Bible to be read in English,
in his oration to the Parliament in Fox page 1124. tells the effects thereof in
these words I am very sorry to hear and know how irreverently that jewel the
word of God is rymed, Effects of Protestancie in K. Henry 8. days.
sung, and iangled in every alehousse and tavern, contrary to the true
meaning and doctrine of the same. And yet I am as much sorry that the Readers of
the same follow it in doing so faintly and coldly. For of this I am sure that
charity was never so faint amongst you, and virtuous and godly living was
never les used, God never les reverenced than after Protestantisme entered.
Fruits of Protestancie in K. Edward time.
nor God him self amongst Christians was never les reverenced honored and
served. Thus King Henry of the effects of Protestancy in his time. And as for
the effects thereof in King Edward 6. time the Protestant who published Cranners
book against traditions tells us what they were, thus. We were talkers only
and not walkers, lip Gospellers from mouth outward and no further, we were
even such as the Prophet speaks of saying. That people honoreth me with
their lips but are far from me with their heart, we could speak of Gods word
and talk gloriously thereof, but in our hearts we were full of pride, malice,
envy, cou^teousnes, backbiting, Men no whit bettered under protesta^tisme.
rioting, harlot, hounting no whit bettered at all than we were before under
the Popes Kingdom. Nothing was amended in us but only our tongues no nor they
nether if I shall speak rightly and as the truth was in deed. For we used
detraction of our neighbor, filthy talk, with many proud braggs of holiness:
For what end Protestants read scriptures. What Protest. preachers were.
we read not the scriptures nor heard them for any amendment of our own
wicked lives, but only to make a show and brag thereof, to check and to taunt
others yea and to epsy small motes in other men's eyes, but nothing desirous to
see the great beams in our own. This I say to talk and not to walk, to say
and not to do, was not only among the unlearned sort of men, but also among
the grave Cleerks and preachers of Gods word. And much more their of there like
stuff.

Fruits of Protestancie under Q. Elizab.
9. And touching the effects of Protestancy in Queen Elizabeth's time Fox him
self Consid. 3. tells us the^ in these words, God grant (says he) we may
do better for worse I think we cannot do if we English men in these reformed
days walk with monstrous pride pranking up our selves more like plaiers on a
stage than Gods chrildren in his Church. Protest. can not do worse if they
would.
And Considerat. 4. who (says he) follows that he knows. To rip up all our
deformities in particular I mean not here, nether need I, the same being so
evident to all men's eyes, that who can not se our excessive outrage in pompeous
apparel, our carnal desires and unchaste demeaners without fear of God,
Protestants careless security.
our careless security without conscience, as though their were no judgment to
come, our study upon this world as if there were no other heaven. And much
more of the like tune. And in his latin Ep. he complains that every blast of
tentation carries Protestants headleng into pride, avarice, pleasure,
filthiness, reueng and what wickedness not. What present Protestants are.
And as for the present Protestants Collins in his sermon at Paul's cross
1607. says, his eyes gush out with water to see there is no religion amongst
men for the most part, but that which is tainted with a spice of faction.
Protestants churches void of all true religion.
The declarat. of discipline page 148. says their very temples chapels and
alters wax prophan and void of all true religion. the Surueyer cap. 21. says
that men are kept from confession to no conference with their pastor, from
long prayer to two or three words and farewell, from superstition to very great
security and profanation. And cap. vlt. he cites the words of a principal
Ministers in Scotland touching the increase of vice there, Increase of
Protestant knowledge is the disase of conscience.
whereof he gives the cause in these words. The more knowledge (of the new
Gospel) increases, conscience decaieth. If any be desirous to see in
particular what kind of men our Ministers be he may read the danger. Positions
lib. 2. cap. 11. and seq. and lib. 4. cap. 4. the Surueyer cap. 3. 8. 18. I. B.
his tail cap. 11. and others. For my own part I loath to move this dunghill
any further. Quo modo obs^u^atum est au^um^ mutatus est Color optimus. Th^^n. 4.
But O what difference is there between S. Augustine and his follows, and our
ministers, and between our foresaid virtuous Ancestors and the present
Protestants. And thus having showed how unfit Luther was both for learning and
life to be a Preacher, and especially a first Preacher immediately sent of God
to Preach his heavenly truth, let us see what motives he had to preach, and
afterward what Commission.

CHAP. IX. That Luther was moved by humane and naughty motives to preach
Protestantisme.
What can be said of this matter is clear by what has been declared in the
former Chapter, notwithstanding because we will observe the like of Chapters in
discoursing of Luther which we used of S. Austin let us here see what motives
Lut er had of beginning and continuing his Protestants doctrine. The first
motive of beginning his doctrine was as is showed before, envy and emulation
against the Dominicans for having the publishing of the indulgences which was
wont to be given to the Austin Friars. lib. 2. cap. 4.
And his motive of continewing and proceeding in his new Doctrine was his pride
which would not permit him to recant what himself thought so ill of as he
offered to suppress and bury in perpetual silence. Besid these principal
motives others he had which set him forward in his new doctrine. For being
before a Friar under obedience and bound to poverty and chastity, by his new
doctrine he shaked of subjection, and got license to gather riches, to mary, to
enioie the conte^tments of the world. To these motives were added vain glory
the nurse of all Archeretiks, to have followers termed after him Lutherans, the
applause of vulgar and licentious people, and such like.

CHAP. X. That Luther was never sent or called to preach Protestantisme.
1. FOr the better understanding of that which shall be said in this Chapter we
must note, first that it is not denied that Luther was once lawfully sent to
preach to wit to preach Papistrie. For Being made Doctor and Preacher of
Divinity by Catholics he was by them sent to preach their faith and doctrine.
But it is denied that ever he was sent to preach Protestancie, Secondly we must
note that there are two kinds of sending to preach, the one extraordinary by
God alone as the Prophets and Apostles were sent. Discension among Protestants
about Luthers sending. Naz. veru^ est quod vnum est mendacium multiplex est.
Luthe-not sent to preach by his Magistrate.
The other ordinary by man also, but yet such as God has given authority unto
to send others. So were Timothy Titus and all Pastors in Gods Church since the
Apostles. How Luther was sent Protestants can not agree. For some will have him
to have been sent extraordinarily by man also, and of these some will have him
to have been sent by this man, others by that, which variance alone if Daniel
might be judge would descrie the untruth of their tale. But God willing I will
show that Luther was sent no way to teach Protestancie.

2. Amongst those who affirm that Luther was sent ordinarily by man, some say
that he was sent by his Magistrate and Prince the Elector of Saxony. 5 Sleid.
Engl. lib. 1. fol. 10, says the D. was at first displeased with Luther and
fol. 22. the D. professes not to montaine Luhers doctrine See fol, 26,
But this can not be. First because Frederick then Elector at the first nether
encouraged says Fox page 771. nor supported Luther but often represented
heaviness and sorrow, for his procedings. Secondly because the Elector was a
Roman Catholic when Luther began and a whil after. How then cold he first send
Luther to preach that doctrine which before Luther he nether believed nor knew
of? Thirdly because power to preach is supernatural and mere spiritual,
because it pertains to care of souls and their direction to a supernatural
end But the power of Magistrates l. of obed. approved by publik authority p.
296. plainly says that their Bishops have not their authority from the Prince
and that the Prince gives then not Commission to preach, but only liberty and
permission. Bilson.
And 303. The charge (says he) which the Preachers and Bishops of England have
over their flock proceeds not from the Prince. And p. 322. Princes have no
right to call or confirm preachers. which he repeateth p. 323. And Fulke in 1.
Cor. 14. Fulk.
The authority (says he) of civil Magistrates does give Bihops nothing that is
peculier to Ecclesiastical Ministers. Finally howsoever sovereign Princes cold
send men to preach, yet subjects as that Prince Elector was to the Emperor,
cold not against their sovereigns will send any. And therefore Luther nether
was nor cold be sent first, to preach of Duke Frederik.

Luther not sent by any Protestant Church.
3. For this cause, other say that Luther was sent by his Church. So Fulk in
Joan 10. But this is easily disproued by what has been showed before cap. 1.
by the Protestants confession of the nullity, or at least inuisibility of their
Church before Luthers preaching. For howsoever he might be confirmed of a Church
which himself founded, There must be a Protestant preacher before there be a
Protest. Church and no Church can send her first preacher.
yet cold he not be first sent to preach of a Church which before he preached
was not at all, or at least was not visible. Wherefore I demand when the people
sent Luther to preach Protestancy? whiles they were Romans Catholic? But that
can not be for no man will send one to preach opposite doctrine to his. Or after
that Luther by his preaching had made them Protestants? But then had he
preached before he could be sent of them and they could not be his first
senders.

4. Others finding no Protestant people or person who could send Luther to
preach Protestancy before he preached it are feign to fly to their utter
enemies, to wit the Roman Church, and say that she first sent Luther. So D.
Whitaker. cont. Dur. page 820. Sutclif Answer to Except. page 88. Field l. 3.
of the Church c. 6. and 39. Fulk in Rome 10. and English Potestants commonly,
thought some of them be ashamed to affirm it in plain terms. Luther not sent
of the Romans Church.
Their only reason is, because no other can be found to send Luther. But if
they mean of sending to preach Protestancie, it is most false and incredible.
False, because both P. Leo 10, and Emper. Charles 5. then spiritual and
temporal heads of the Romans Catholics forbad Luther to preach Protestancy, and
the one condemned him as an heretik for so doing, the other outlaueth him. And
incredible it is that the Rome Church should send a man to preach a religion so
opposite to hers as Protesta^cy is, this were for her to set one to cut her own
threate. And if they mean of sending to preach Papistrie that avails them
nothing. For I hope they will not say that authority or Commission to preach one
religion is authority to preach the contrary, or that the Roman Church when she
gave Luther authority to preach Papistry meant to give him authority to preach
Protestancy any more than Protest. Bishops when they give their Minister
authority to preach Protestancy mean to give the^ authority to preach
Brownisme or Anabaptisme. Besides that the purer sort as our Ministers teach
that Popish Priests have no calling as you may see in Penry against some page
31. And in truth al Protestants should teach so if they would speak co^seque^tly
to their own doctrine. What Church can send men to preach Gods wore is Gods
Church.
For if she have authority and power to send men to preach the word of God then
is she the Church of God for sure it is that God gave this authority to no
other company but to his own Church only) And Protest. in going out of this
Church and impugning her, went out of Gods Church and impugn her. Moreover if
the To. Church gave Luther his authority to preach she also could take it away,
For as willet says well Synopsis p. 203. authority of preaching in Ministers
may be restrained or suspe^ded by Church gouerners. and we see the practice
hereof toward the sile^ced Ministers. By what authority then preached Luther
after he was fordidden by the Rom, Church. Finally if Luther had his authority
to preach from the Romans What confusion will fall upon Protest: if they say
their first preachers were sent by the Romans Church.
Church (which in the opinion of Protestants is the whoare of Babilo^ the
Church of Antich. the Sinagog of Satan) Luther and his Ministers must needs be
minio^s of the Babilonia^ whore officers of Antich. Ministers of Satan, and in
their preaching execute the function, which he whore, Antichrist, and Satan
bestowed upon them.

5. Herupo^ others utterly despairing to find out any company or person to
whom they might hansomly attribute the sendind of Luther fly to extraordinary
sending by God alone saying that Luther and their first preachers were sent
only of God and thereupon call the^ Apostles or Evangelists. So Call. 4. instit.
c. 3.. 4. the sinod at Rochel An. 1607. art. 32. and others yea the Declaration
of discipline printed at Geneua 1580. page 139. says plainly that in our days
there was no place of ordinary calling and therefore the Lord extraordinarily
stirred up (as it were) certain new Apostles to lighte^ the world again with
the light of the Gospel. Luther not sent extraordinarily.
This is a very miserable and impudent shift, For first it is auo^ched without
al proof or testimony besid their own words. And Erasm. Ep. ad frat. infer
Germ. writes that Mahomet may better chale^g the spirit Thirdly because Luther
himself disclaimeth this kind of sending him. For 1. Gal. fo. 11. he says. God
calls two manner of ways, by means and without means. He calls us to the
Ministry of his word this day not immediately by himself but by man. And adds
that ordinary vocation has endured from the Apostles to our time and shall to
the end of the world. The same has vogel his scholar in Thesaur: Biblico c. de
vocat. Ministror. and others. And who should know how Luther was sent better
than himself. Besides D. Field l. 3. of the Church c. 48. as disclaming
extraordinary calling says we say our calling and our Ministry is not
extraordinary. And D, Fulke in 10. Joan. Luther (says he) had lawful calling
both of God and the Church And the 23. Article of the Protestants faith is
this: These we ought to judge lawfully called and sent which be called and
chosen to the work by men who have public authority given to them in the
Congregation to call and send Ministers. Therefore according to our Protestants
faith Luther cannot be judged to have been lawfully sent unless he had been sent
by men and this of publik authority in the Church. yea Calvin him self after
he had brought diverse proofs out of Scripture that to lawful calling is
necessary the sending by men, says thus 4. instit. cap. 3. Parag. 15. we have
therefore out of Gods word that that is lawful calling of Ministers when they
which are thought fit are made with consent and approbatio^ of the people. And
Muscul. loc. Com. page 394. says Extraordinary calling is not now in use. D.
Serauin in book of degrees of Ministers terms extraordinary calling an
unknown coost. See D. Couell in his defense of Hooker, page 86.

there be a Protestant Church which (as Calvin says loc. cit.) can never want
Pastors and Doctors. and as Field faith lib. 2. of Church cap. 6. The Ministry
is an enssentiall note of the Church. Yea as Whitaker says cont. Dur. p. 274.
the soul of the Church. If any say, that there were Protest. Pastors before
Luther but they were invisible, and therefore he was not sent of them. I reply
that Field l. cit. c. 10. says that the Ministry is always visible to the
world. and the same says Calvin 4. instit. cap. 2. Parag. 2. and 11. etc. 1.
Parag. 11. And in truth it implies co^ radictio^ that there should have been
Pastors preaching the word and administering the sacraments, and yet invisible,
especially to such faithful men (forsooth) as Luther was. In like sort I
dema^d whither there were Churchs rightly settled before Luther or no. If no
then Luther was the setler of the Protestant Church. If yea, then was not he
sent extraordinarily. For as Calvin teaches 4. Instit. c. 3. Parag. 3. that
calling has no place in Churches rightly settled. or as Fulke says in 10. Romans
it is not necessary but where either there is no Church or the Church is no
member of Christ. If then Luther were extraordinarly sent either, there was no
protestant Church before him, or it was no member of Christ. Fifthly, Calvin 4.
instit c. 2. parag. 14 no wise man will deny that it is altogether requisite
to lawful vocation that Bishops be appointed of me^, seeing there are so many
testimonies of scripture to this end. And the^ shows that though god had
extraordinarily called S. Paul, yet he kept (says Call. disciplinia^
Ecclesiasticae vocationis the discipline of Ecclesiastical vocation, in
apointing the Church to segregate him and Barnabas, and lay hands upon the^,
to the end that the Churches discipline in apointing Ministers by men might be
co^serued. Luther vvil have a more extraordinary calling than S. Paul.
If therefore God had called Luther or Calu. as extraordinarily as ever he
called S. Paul. and more I hope of their modesty they will not chale^g) yet to
conserve Ecclesiast. discipline he would have bidden the^ go to some Church, to
be segregated by her, and have hands laid upon the^. unless these new Apostles
will chaleng more priuiledg and exemption from all Churches approbatio^ of their
calling tha^ S. Paul had 7. Sixthly extraordinary and miraculous missio^ of his
Father yet says If I had not done (miraculous) works in them which no other
has done they should have no sin. And shall we sin it not believing Luther who
makes no one miracle? or will he desire to be believed without miracles more
than Christ did? 2ly, I prove it by the authority of Tertullia^ who l. de
praescrit. bids certain Heretics who pleaded extraordinary sending to
proferre virtutes to show their miracles. 3ly, I prove it by Calvin. 4. instit
c. 2. parag. 13.
For Calu. says Because the Ministry of the Apostles was extraordinary,
Calvin.
that it might be made notable with some more markable note it was to be called
and appointed by our Lords own mouth. Luther
And if some external note needed to the calling of the Apostles, I hope it
needed more to the calling of Luther, Luther.
Luther also loc. Com. clas. 4. cap. 20. says, God sent not any but either
called by man or declared by miracles, no not his son. And to. 5. Germ. fol.
491. he asks a Preacher whence come thou who sent the? where are the
miracles that witness thy sensending from God? Patere legem quam ipse tuleris.
And to. 2. fol. 455. If he say that he was sent of God and his spirit as the
Apostles, let him prove this by signs and miracles, or suffer him not to
preach for whensoever God will change the ordinary course there he alvvaies
works miracles. And 1. Galat. fol. 40. It was necessary for S. Paul to have
the outvvard testimony of his calling. And shall not we think it necessary for
Luther? If any (says the Declarat. of discipline printed at Geneua 1580.)
please themselves in this gadding abroad throughout the Churches, and will
contend that they may do so, let them show us the signs of their Apostleship
as S. Paul did to the Corinthians, let the^ prove that they are endued with
those Apostolical gifts of tongues, healing, doing of miracles* let the^ prove
that they are immediately called thereunto of God. Finally I prove that Luther
was not extraordinarily sent of God, because he was not extraordinarily
assisted by him from teaching false doctrine. For as our English Protest.
confess he tought false doctrine in many points. But they can produce no other
assuredly sent extraordinarily of God who taught false doctrine. And in my
judgment English Protestants much condemn their own doctrine in defending
that Luther was sent extraordinarily from God. English Protestants condemn
them selves in defending Luthers calling.
For seeing he has condemned much of their doctrine for heresy, they must
thereby confess that their doctrine has been condemned of a man especially
lightened of God, and extraordinarily sent of him to teach his truth. Wherefore I
would they took better advise and followed the counsel of the forsaid
Declarator in these words page 30. Let inquiry be made into every ones
calling, Good advise of a Protestant from Geneua.
let them show how they were chosen and ordained as the letters and seall of
their calling. Let them rehearse their genealogies and the race of their
descent. Let them bring their rodds and set them before the Ark of God. And
who can not show the marks and tokens of their election and Creation, they that
can not fetch their pedigree from Aaron, and whose rodds remain dead before
the Arc, let them be by the most just authority of Gods word displaced. Thus
he, whose advise if it be followed, I doubt not but Luther will be displaced as a
false Prophet.

8. The forsaid sixth agument touching miracles much trobleth Protestants, and
therefore they answer it diversely. Some by granting that miracles are necessary
for the attestation of extraordinary mission, and say as Field does lib. 3.
of the Church c. 48. and Fox p. 789. that Luther wrought miracles. But these we
shall disproofe of purpose herafter. Wherefore others despairing to make any
probable pretense of miracles, B^^^.
deny that they are necessary to assecure us of extraordnarie missio^.
Because Isaies, Daniel, Zacharias, wrought none, and because S. Paul proved his
missio^ rather by the efficacy of his doctrine than by miracles. And Calvin l.
de scandal. says that howsoever miracles were necessary to the extraordinary
vocation of others yet not of the^, because they teach no new doctrine but the
same which before has been confirmed with miracles, and because their doctrine
is evident and needs no miracles to prove it. But these their reasons are
manifestly false. For Isaias miraculously cured K. Ezechias prolonging his life
15. years, and caused the shadow of his dial to return back 10. lines. Daniel
miraculously told both what the K had dreamed, and what his dream signified
Dan. 2. and 4. which is one of the greatest tokens of Gods assistance that is.
And in like sort Zacharias c. 1. and 4. fortold diverse things which soon
after were fulfilled. S. Paul and Barnabas prove their doctrine by miracles Act
15. where they tell what great signs and miracles God had wrought by them among
Gentiles in testimony thereof. And 2. Cor. 11. S. Paul proves his Apostleship
because says he the signs of my Apostleship were wrought upon you in miracles
prodiges and powers.

9. That which Calu. says, besid that every Sectmaister says it and with as
much color as he, is evidently falfe. Though Luthers doctrine were good yet he
needed miracles to prove his extraordinary calling.
For as for the newnes of his doctrine it partly appears by what has been
said sup. c. 1, and shall evidently be showed in the 2. part of this Treatise.
And how ancient and evident soever his and Luthers doctrine wete and therefore
that it needed no miracles; yet if their mission to preach their doctrine be
extraordinary, it ca^ not be denied but their missio^ is both new and
vneuide^t, and they needed miracles at least to approve their mission unto us.
For God having no where avouched by word that he would send Luther to preach,
Protestants believe that Luther was extraordinarily sent without all proof,
testimony or reason. All right beleuers have not authority to preach.
if he avouch not by deeds nether, what certainty have we either from God or
man (besides Luthers own word) that Luther came from God nether let any man
answer that Luther proves his doctrine by the word. For now the question is
not about his doctrine, but about his authority to preach, which a man may
want, and yet teach true doct. Wherefore absurd is that which Bilson affirms l.
of obedience p. 300. As long as we teach the faith of the Apostles we have For
so every right beleuer should have Apostlick authority to preach: al should be
Apostles or doctors contrary to S. Paul 1. Cor. 12. all should be Pastors and
none sheep, all lay men yea women and children might administer the word and
sacraments, None could be prohibited or suspended from preaching. Finally this
cap. 9. writes that they have no part of Apostolik Commission, that have no
show of Apostolik succession. And that Pastors do receive by succession power
and charge of the word and Sacraments from and in the first Apostles. And I
would he would show to whom Luther succeeded in his new doctrine, or else confess
that he had no part in Apostolik Commission. Certain therefore it is that though
every right beleuer may confess his faith and also teach it privately when
necessity requires, yet none but Pastors who are lawfully sent can preach it
of authority, take care of souls, and administer the Sacraments. And how I
pray you should we be assured that Luther was sent of God to do this, rather
than any other right beleuer? This I would gladly know, Tell me this o
Ministers.
and every one should know before he commit his soul to his guiding whom he
knows not to have any charge or commission to direct him.

10. But diverse learned Protestants finding no colorable answer to make to this
demand, Protestants confess that their Ministers want laufull sending and
authority
do plainly confess (as Sadeel a Minister of Geneua testifies in a book
written against such) that their ministers are legitima vocatione destituti,
destitute of lavvfull calling. Others though not so plainly do grant the same
in saying that such as ate fit may teach the word without sending. Which Calvin
insinuates in cap. 13. Actor. where he says that we need no testimony from
heaven that God sends some. Because (says he) whom God has endued with
sufficient gift seeing they are framed and fashioned by his hand we receive them
given to us of him no otherwise than as the proverb is from hand to hand. Whom
Calvin allows to preach unsent.
And to this same end tended Bilsons complaint l. of obed. page 300. that the
wicked (says he) always asked the godly for their authority as the Jews
asked S Ihon Baptist and Christ. Bilson.
And Ib. So long as we teach (says he) the same doctrine which the Apostles
did we have the same power which they had. And page 301. He that defends
truth is armed with authority sufficient though all the world were against
him. And that a man may preach without commission he brings a similitude that
when a city is on fire or entered by enemies every one may cry Alarm though
he be no officer, and page 310. and 311. he produces the example of Frumentius
and Aedesius who taught infidels the Christian faith having no sending to that
purpose.

11. Here thou see Gentle Reader that confessed by learned Protestants which
I intended in this chapter, to wit, that Luther and his first partners were not
sent to preach either of God or man, but seeing (forsooth) the Church al on fire
with idolatry, See Bal. Cent. 6. c. 85 Cent. 8. cap. 100. Many principal
Ministers preached unsent. The vva^t of sending in Luther, Calvin and such like
would alone convince them to be false Prophets.
and entered by enemies and thinking the^ selves fit for that purpose came
running of their own accord crying Alarm which Luther did not stick to bost of
saying as Calvin reports l. de reformat. p. 463. Behold I call my self
Preacher and with this title have I adorned my self. And who reads the lives
of our first Protestant preachers either in, Bale or Fox, shall see that every
one of them fell to preach unsent of any. And the forsaid Declaration of
discipline p. 141. says plainly that many of their worthy me^ for the love
they had to the Gospel thaught it lawful for the^ in these times to take upon
the^ this Apostolical office.

12. But this alone, that Luther Calvin and such like did preach and administer
sacraments as Pastors, being not sent, nor having authority given them thereto,
would suffice to convince them to have been false prophets, usurpers, and
thieves, though no other exception cold be taken against them. For to preach,
that is, as Pastor to teach, without lauful sending or Commission, is flatly
against Scripture, against the example of Christ, his Apostles and all the
Pastors, of Gods Church, against reason, and Finally against the doctrine and
practice now observed of Protestants. It is flat against Romans 10. S. Paul
asks how shall they preach unless they be sent? Want of sending the very
brand of false prophets.
In so much as both the Prophets Christ and the Apostles do bra^d false
Prophets with this mark of coming unsent. I sent not says God Hierem. 23.
Prophets and they ran. As many (says Christ Joan. 10. as came (of them
selves) are theeus and robers. Some going out of us (say the Apostles Actor.
15.) have trobled you with words whom we commanded not. Lo how the holy ghost
has branded false Prophets with this note of coming vnse^t. It is also against
Hebr. 5. Nether does any take honor to him self but who is called of God as
Aaron. So Christ did not clarify him self to be made a Bishop. And Joan. 17.
and 20. Christ him self avouches his sending by his Father. And of the
Apostles it is manifest that they preached not before they were sent of Christ.
To preach unsent is to imitate Core Dathan ande Abiron.
Nether can Protestants produce any Pastor of Gods Church since the Apostles
time, which preached before he was sent. And to do the contrary is not to
imitate Christ and his Apostles, but that schismatic crew of Core Datha^ and
Abiro^ whom the earth therefore swallowed and hell devoured. See S. Cipr. lib.
de simplic. Prelat. Tertul. de prascrip.
It is also against reason. For, as Pastor to preach and administer Gods
Sacraments, is an act of spiritual and supernatural authority, which none
can have unless it be given unto him, and learning virtue or other talents what
soever wherewith a man is fit to execute such authority are things far
different from it, as is both evident by it self, and appears in women who
may have as much learning virtue and other habilities as some men, and yet none
of them can as Pastors preach or administer the Sacraments, because they are
incapable of Pastoral authority. Moreover to be a Preacher and Pastor is to
be Gods Ambassador and steward or dispenser of his spiritual goods and
mysteries. And if none can be Ambassador of an earthly Prince unless he be sent,
none steward of his house unless he be appointed, none officer over his people
unless he be constituted. How can any be Ambassador to God without sending,
steward of his goods without apointing, governor of his people without his
authority? And I marvel how Protestants can call Luther, Latimer and such like
their Apostles, and either confess that they were not sent at all but came of
their own good wills, or can not show of whom they were sent, seeing that the
very name of an Apostle signifies one sent.

13. Finally Protestants them selves condemn l. cit we detest says he) these
that invade the pastoral function without lavvfull vocation and election. It
is not lavvfull (says the English Clergy in the 23. Article of their faith)
for any man to take upon him the office of publik preaching or administering the
Sacraments. No man (says their Synod in Haga Art. 3.) ought to take upon him
to preach or administer the Sacraments without a lavvfull calling although he
be a Doctor or a Deacon or an Elder. And their Synod at Rochel 1607. Art. 32.
none must intrude him self into the government of the Church. Thus teach all
Heretics after they have gotten possession. But before their own aptnes and
talents, the glory of God, and the salvation of souls, and truth of their
doctrine was warrant and authority enough for them to preach, as appears by
what has been cited out of Bilson, Calvin and others. But to conclude this
matter with Luther words. He 1. Galat. fol. 11. says. Luther.
Let the Preacher of the Gospel be sure that his calling is from God, and he
calls fantastical spirits, who intrude them selves. He that preaches
unsent comes to kill.
And fol 12. It is not (says he) enough to have the word and pure doctrine,
but also he must be assured of his calling, and he that enters without this
assurance enters to no other end but to kill and destroy. People need be
assured of Preachers sending.
Ibid. the people have great need to be assured of our calling that they may
know our word to be the word of God. And in the same chapter. There are many
(says Luther) who complain that they have the talent of the Lord and therefore
are urged by commandment of the Gospel to teach, otherwise with a most foolish
conscience they believe that they hide the Lords money and are guilty of
damnation. The devil (says he ( does this that he may make them instable in
their vocation! O good brother let Christ quitt the of this The Gospel (says
he) gave his goods to servants called. Note^.
Expect his calling, in the mea^ time be secure yea if thou were wiser than
Solomon or Daniel yet if thou be not called fly more tha^ hell to preach.
If God need the he will call the. And again. The devil uses to stir up his
Ministers that they run uncalled and pretend this most burning zeal that they
are sorry that men are so miserably seduced that they would teach the truth and
deliver the seduced from the snares of the devil. Thus Luther. and likewise Beza
epist 5. and others, which I would they had followed in their first preaching
Protestancie.

Aptnes to preach far short of authority to preach.
14. As for Caluins reason before cited, I say that ability to preach comes
far more short of that spiritual and supernatural power to preach and
administer sacraments which Gods Pastor has, than ability to govern men's
bodies and goods in a kingdom comes short of temporal power to govern such
matters. And therefore if none (how able soever he be or think him self) may
take upon him to be an officer in the common wealth, unless he be appointed, much
les may one take upon him to be a Pastor in the Church and govern souls unless
he have authority thereto given which the Declarer of the discipline noted p.
32. When he said. How fit soever a man seems to be for any charge, yet
nothing is to be taken in hand without the authority of God, who will use in
his affairs whom him pleases. Why the Ieues did ill to ask Christ for his
commission.
As for the example of the Jews brought by Bilson, I grant they did ill in
asking Christ and S. Ihon for their commission, because their preaching was
both plainly fortold before by God, and then confirmed by the daily miracles of
Christ, and others wrought for authorizing of Saint Ihon both in his conception
and Nativity. If Luther were Christ, or Calvin S. Ihon, and their preaching as
plainly fortold by God, and confirmed by present miracles, we should do like to
Jews in asking them for their Commission; But seeing they produce nether
extraordinary holiness, nor miracles, Why we do well to ask Luther for his*
nor prophetie, not any thing else to testify their se^ding, we should show
great lightness of heart yea madness to believe them to be Gods messengers without
all Commission. The similitudes which Bilson brings make nothing against as
and may be returned against him self. For us any man (or woman too) when the
house is on fire or the city in danger, Gteat difference betuen-teahhing of
private men and ptoaching as Pastors.
may cry fire and alarm if officers do not perceive the danger. So we say
that when a man (or woman also) perceaueth heresy to be taught which the
Pastor does not, he (or she either) may give notice or warning thereof. But yet,
as not withstanding this none can, in what danger soever, take upon him to be
Captain and command others of authority, but he only who has such
authority given him. So none in what danger of heresy soever can take upon
him to be a Pastor and guider of souls preaching tanquam authoritatem habens,
but only he who is lawfully called thereto. But Bilsons error is, in that he
distinguishes not between the aduertising or teaching of private me^, and the
preaching of Pastors, which is an act of spiritual function and authority,
and therefore must suppose that authority. From the same proceeds his bringing
of the example of Frumentius and Aedesius who (as private men yea as women may
in case of necessity when no others is to be had) being captives amongst
infideles taught them the Christian faith. Socrat. lib. 1. c. 19. Raffin. lib.
1. cap 9. Theodoret. lib. 1. c. 23.
But nether of them took upon him to be Pastor to the Infidels or as such to
administer to them the word and Sacraments, Theodoret. lib. 1. c. 24.
before Frumentius came to S. Athanasius and was by him made Bishop and
lawfully sent. And by as good example might Bilson have proved that women may
preach even without sending, because a woman being in like sort captive among
infidels taught them the Christian faith, and was cause of their conversion.

15. And thus thou see (Gentle Reader) evidently proved both by manifest
proofs and open confession of Protestants, What the Protesta^te and their
doctrine be, if Luther were not sent to preach.
that Luther preached Protestancie without sending and so without all
authority, and consequently that the Protestants Church, is a company without
a Pastor, their doctrine a message without an Ambassador, and their Bishops and
Ministers without prelacie or pastoral authority, but such as S. Cipria^
describes l. de unit Eccles. who amongst straggling companions of them selves
take authority without Gods giving, make them selves prelates without any
orderly course, and no body giving them a Bishopric chaleng the name of
Bishops. English Ministers condemn^ the calling of the English Clergy.
And not Catholics only thus think but even the purer sort of our English
Clergy. For the dangerous Positioner lib. 3. cap, 6. tells how it was
concluded by them in a Synod at Couentrie An. 1588. That the calling of Bishops
is unlawful. That it is not lawful by them to be ordained into the
Ministry. That Bishops are not to be acknowledged for Doctors, Elders, or
Deacons, as having no ordinary calling. And cap. 14. he recounteth how some
Ministers renounce the calling which they had of Bishops and account there
orders only a civil thing necessary for them to keep the ministry. And c.
16. that, the English Prelates have no authority to make Ministers. And thus
much of Luthers want of Mission. Now let us see his orders.

CHAP. XI. That Luther was never ordered to preach the Protestants word, or
administer their sacraments.
1. AS in the former chapter I did not deny that Luther was once sent to
preach the Catholic word or doctrine. So Nether in this do I deny that he was
rightly ordered to preach the same word, to say Mass and to administer the
Catholic sacraments. But as he brought a new word, so he brought also a new
sacrament, consisting both of Christ's body and bread also; for preaching and
administration of which new word and sacrament I say he was never ordered. And
that his Catholic preisthood could be no sufficient Ministry of the
Protestant word and sacraments is manifest many ways. First, by reason.
Luthers preishood could be no Protestant order.
For preisthood chiefly consists in authority to offer sacrifice for the
quick and the dead, Take power to offer sacrifice to God, and to say Mass for
the quick and the dead. And Calvin 4. instit. c 5. para. 5 says we order none
but to sacrifice. D. Sutlif in his Chaleng pap. 34. and in his answer to the
Cath. Supplicat. sec. 19. writes that our priesthood is appointed only to
offer sacrifice for the quick and the dead. The like says the Declar. of
discipline p. 20. and it is manifest. But the Protestant Ministry detesteth
all authority of saying Mass, of offering sacrifice, and praying for the
dead* order to sacrifice (says the said Declarer l. cit. is to abolish the
sacrifice of Christ ib. hands are laid upon priests to an end most contrary to
the Gospel. How then can preisthood become protesta^tish Ministry, unless one
contrary become the other? or as the said declarer says well, how ca^ one and
the same ordering serve to give one man at the same time offices so diverse and
contrary one to the other?

2. Reinolds
Secondly I prove it by the judgment epist. before his Confer. calls our
priesthood impious. D. Whitaker cont. Dur. p. 821. bids us keep our orders
to our selves. Whitaker.
And page 653. we judge (says he) no otherwise of your priests than of
Christ's adversaries, and enemies of his priesthood. And page 662. you have
nether lavvfull Bishops, nor priests nor Deacons. Powel in his Considerations
upon Catholics reasons. Povvel.
The popish ordination (says he) is nothing else but a mere profanation. D.
Fulk Answ. to a Counterf. Catholic page 50. you are highly deceived if you
think we esteem your offices of Bishops, Fulke.
Priests or Deacons any better than lay men, and you presume too much to
think that we receive your ordering to be lawful. Penrie.
Penrie against Some p. 8. Of this I am assured that Popish Priests are no
Ministers. Declarer.
The forsaid Declarer p. 20. says. Priests oil and power of sacrificing is no
sufficient warrant for them to be Ministers it is a profane oil, and can give
no men authority to dispose of the Mysteries of God. Shameless boldness for
Luther to play the Minister without new orders. Some. Sutlif,
which he proves their at long, and calls it a shameless boldness of Popish
Priests to take in hand to be Ministers of the Gospel without any new calling
or apointing thereunto and terms their orders horrible orders. D. Some also as
Penrie says p. 20. calls Popish preisthood sacriledg. D. Sutlif Answ. to
Exceptions p. 82. The Pope is nether true Bishop nor priest for he was ordained
priest but to offer sacrifice and to say Mass for the quick and the dead. But
this ordination does not (says he) make a Priest, nor had true priests and
elders ever any such ordination. And p 87. The Romish Church is not the true
Church, having no Bishop nor Priests at all, but only in name. Divines of
Geneua.
The like he has in his Chaleng p. 33. and seq. Finally the Divines of Geneua
in the Proposions page 245. conclude that in the Romish Church there is no holy
order or Ministry indeed no lawful calling but a mere usurpation. Thus thou
see by the judgment of learned Protestants, that Luthers priesthood was so
far from right orders and lawful Ministry, as it was impious, opposite to
Christ priesthood, a mere profanation nothing better than lay men have, makes
no Minister, horrible, secrilegious, Luther either a lay, prophan impious
sacrilegious and horrible Minister, or no Ministers at all.
and what not, And he having no other orders (as is certain) what an impious,
enemy to Christ, profane, lay, horrible and sacrilegious Minister must he have
been if he were any.

3. Thirdly I prove it by practice of Protestants that Popish preisthood is no
Ministry. For at Geneua when two Bishops, Lanoyrapliqua Christius. 2. Chapter 17.
and took upon them the Ministry with out all more ordering, the Consistory
upon mature deliberation thereupon, concluded that they could not do so. And in
England every one knows that it is made treason to receive popish preisthood
and above one hundred have been executed therefore which they would never do, if
they thought it to be Protesta^tish Ministry, what a disorderly religion then
must that be, which was begun by a man who was never ordered to preach it or
admininister the sacraments or service thereof. But what he did therein did only
by virtue of impious profane, Lib. de missa angulari.
horrible, sacrilegious and treasonable orders, with which before he had said
(as himself confesses (Mass 15. years together, And what orders has our
Protestant English Clergy, Note.
whereof the greater number (as every one knows and both the Answer to an
Examination printed at Geneua page 33. and others in Dange: Posit lib. 2. cap.
13. confess) in the beginning of Queen Elizab. time were Popish Priests,
never ordered to say the Communion, but the Mass quite opposite thereto? And
albeit some of the^ were ordered to say Protest. service, yet they were made of
such Bishops, as either were Popish Priests themselves, as Couendale and Skorey
were, or had been made of such Bishops And so all their orders were either Popish
or come originally from Popish Priests, See Survey. cap. 16.
who not being able to give other orders than they received them selves, did
either give Popish orders, or none at all, And our English either have them or
none. Wherefore since English Ministers orders, came from Parker who was first
Archb. of Canterbury under Queen Elizabeth, and that he was made Bishop. (as
Sutlif faith Answ. to Except. page 88.) of Couendall and Skorey who received
their orders of Cranmer, English Ministers have only such orders as they
account sacrilegious or no orders at all.
and he his of P. Clement, 7. I would know what orders, and what authority to
give orders, the Pope gave to Cra^mer? Surely no othere did the Pope give or
mean to give then Popish, and if Cranmer received no other; he could give no
other to Couendall and Skorey, nor they any other to Parker, nor he other to
Ministers. Judge then good Reader what kind of orders they have (if they have
any) by their own verdit, Ministers utterly shame their religion.
to wit impious profane, horrible. and sacrilegious. Judge also what is to be
thought of them and their religion, who hitherto have, and yet do permit
Popish Priests that is as they account slaves and shauelings of Antichrist, and
enemies to Christ, profane, and mere lay men, yea impious and sacrilegious,
no way degraded or new ordered of them, but but by virtue only (as they speak)
of their greasing of the Romish Antichrist, the mortal enemy of Protestancy, by
power of their profane, impious, and sacrilegious orders to be sufficient
Ministers of their word and sacram. O impious and Antich. word which can be
sufficiently ministered by virtue of impious and Antichristian orders. Note
ministers.
Can Antich. order Christ's lawful Ministers? Shall his orders become Christ's
orders? shall Antichrists shaueling slaves be sufficient Pastors for Christ?
Shall Christ be served by no other officers the^ such as either mediatly or
immediately were made by Antichrist? See Dove of Recusancie Luth. cont Anabapt.
Is Christ comen to beg orders at Antichrists hands, to receive pastors of his
making? Can Antichrist give spiritual and supernatural authority? And have
Christ's pastors no other then what came from Antichrist. o shameful Christian
religion if this be christian religion which has no bible or word of God but
what came from Antichrist, no sacrament but from Antichrist, no preacher but
from Antichrist, no orders but from Antichrist, no spiritual authority or
jurisdiction but from Antichrist! S^e Survey cap. 8 3. 1^. Dangor. Posit. lib.
2. cap. 13.
what then may we conclude but the religion is Antichristian. And why should
Protestants maruail to hear their own brethren call their Bishops and
Ministers, Bishops and Ministers of the devil, enemies of God petty
Antichrists. and such like, since all the orders they pretend they must derive
from the pope whom they all account the true Antichrist. No true religion
without true calling and right orders.
God open the eyes of my dear Countrymen that as they partly see that their
Ministers have nether right calling nor lawful orders, so they may also see
that they have no true religion, which without pastors both rightly called and
lawfully ordered can not stand. And thus having showed how unfit Luther was to
be Preacher both for his life learning, calling and orders: now let us come to
his doctrine to see whether that be any whit better.

CHAP. XII. That Luthers doctrine was contrary to the universal faith of
Christendom in his time.
1. THat Luthers doctrine was contrary to the universal faith of Christendom
at that time, I prove by many ways. First. by the condemnation thereof by the
chief heads spiritual and te^porall of the Christian people of that time.
For, Luthers doctrine condemned by P. Leo. 10.
as Protestants confess, Leo 10. than Pope, and spiritual head of Christian
people condemned it An. 1520. whose Bull thereof is extant in Fox p. 1166. And
not long after Hieremie Patriarch of Constantinople, and head (as he
accounts him self) of the Greek or East Church condemned their doctrine in a
book which is called Censura Orientalis, By Heremie Patriarch of
Constantinople.
wherein he says there doctrine was altogether new and directly both against
the Gospel of Christ, By charles. 5 Emper. Sleid. also lib. 1 fol. 3. sets
down Emper, Maxmil. letters against Luther. Sleid. lib. 3. fol. 30. 33. 50.
51. By K. Henry 8 Sleid. lib 3. fol. 34.
and right reason, and calls them Heretics. And in the year 1521. Charles
5. then Eemperor of Germany, King of Spain, Naples, Sicilie, and Sardinia, and
Lord of all the low Countries, first writ a letter to the States of Germany
which is set down in Fox page 778. in which he professed to pursue Luther and
all his adherents by all means that can be devised for to extinguish his
doctrine. And sone after directed a solemn writ of outlawrie against Luther,
and all them that took his part, commanding the said Luther to be apprehended
and his books burnt: Likewise the same year 1521. King Henry 8. of England
wrote a book against Luther, in which (says Fox page 780. By the French King
Sleidan lib. 6. fol. 68. lib. 8. fol. 120.
) First he reproves Luthers opinion about pardons. 2. He defends the
supremacy of the Bishop of Rome. 3. Laboreth to refel Luthers doctrine of the
sacraments. And again in the year 1523. writ (says Cooper in Chron.) to the
Princes of Germany against Luther. And in the year 1525. (as the same Cooper
writes he entered league with the French King to suppress the sect of the
Lutherans which they thought to be no less dangerous than the Turks power.
And Anno 1535. he writes that six were burnt in Paris for Lutherans before the
French King his sight And Anno t543. that the French King made strait
proclamation against the Lutherans, By James. 5, King of Scotland.
And as for James 5. King of Scotland and Grandfather to his Majesty, Hamilton
Confut. Calvin.
a Scottish writer testifies that when King Henry 8. having fallen into one
point of Lutheranisme promised to make K. James his heir if he would do the
like, he rather refused so great a profer than consent to his desire. And
behold the different reward from God of the two Kings King Henry 8. issue is
quite extinguished, Note.
and James his royal progeny we behold not only flourishing, but possessing
King Henry's crowme and Kingdom. So has God even in thie life recompensed, By
the States of Suizerland. Sleidan. ib. 3 fol. 54* 55. By the learned men of all
parts of Christendom.
the religious zeal of that most Catholic King. And as for Swizerland Fox p.
792. writeh that Anno 1524. the States of that country in their assembly
Decreed that no opinion of Luthers should be tought privately nor openly and
wrote to the men of Zurich, and do much lament (says Fox) and complain of
this new broached doctrine which has set all men together by the ears
through the occasion of certain rash and new fangled heads, and will bring
destruction both to body and soul. And as for the learned men of that age in
all Christian Countries their detestation of Luthers doctrine is evident. By
universities.
For first the Universities of Louain, and Colen, condemned Luthers books as
heretical in the year 1520. And in the next year the University of Paris did
the like. Sleid. Engl. lib. 1. fol. 14. lib. 3 fol. 32.
And in all Christian Contries almost the cheifest learned men wrote against
him, as Eckius Cocleus, Gropperus in Germany; Silueuester, Caietan, Catherin
in Italy. Petrus a Soto, Alfonsus a Castro, Canus, Turrianus in Spain.
Clictoneus and others in France. By a general Council.
Bishop Fishe^and, Sir Thomas More in England. Driedo, Tapper, Erasmus, in
Flanders. Hosius in Polonie, and others otherwhere. Of the Prelates. legates. 4.
Cardinals. 2 Patriarchs. 3. Acchb. 25. Bishops. 168. Abbots. 7. Procurators.
39. Generals. 7 besides a great number of famous divines. Luthers doctrine
condemned by all manner of ways.
And after in the Counsel of Trent (where the flower of all Christe^dom was
gathered to gether from all parts of the Christian world) his doctrine was
condemned by the subscription of 255. Prelates. Whereby you may see the
universal hatred of Christendom both in the Clergy and laytie, learned and
unlearned, both in the East and West; Latin and Grecke Church against Luthers
doctrine. Herevpo^ Erasmus says Luther was condemned with, so many judgments,
confuted with so many bo^kes, strooken with so many thunderboults.

2. Secondly I prove it by the testimony of diverse Protest. For, Fox page 789.
accounts it a miracle, that Luther (says he) one man should sustain (for his
doctrine) the hatred (...) whole world being set against him, Luther had the
Prelates and all Kings of the earth against him. Iuel. Luthers Gospel almost
against all men. Luthers Gospel against consent of all men. Sleidan prafat.
Histor The beginning (of Protestancie) was full small and one man alone
sustained the malice of all the world.
and stand openly against the Pope Cardinals and Prelates of the Church, having
the Emperors and all the Kings (says he) of the earth against him. Iuel in his
Apology p. 13. speaking of the Protestants matters, says, they increased
inuitis prope omnibus, almost against all men's wills. And page 201. The Gospel
(of Luther) was at this time spread into the world inuitis prope omnibus
against almost all men's wills. Luther him self L. de Captiu. cap. de
Eucharistia speaking of his enterprise, says I begin a hard matter as which
being confirmed by the use of so many ages, and approved by all men's consents,
is so settled as it is necessary to change and alter all the face of Churches.
And 4. Galat. fol. 187. The world judges us to be most pernicious Heretics
destroyers of religion etc. fol. 210. This day the name of Luther is most
odious to the world. 6. Galat fol. 291. The whole world most cruelly
persecuteth and condemns us. But because this matter is evident enough out of
that which has been said in the first Chapter of this book, I omit further
proof, and will add a word or twoe to show what kind of fellows they were
who began first to favor Protestancie.

What Kind of fellows those Germans were who first favored Protestants
somewhat has been said before. As for the French men Calvin Prefat. in Iustit.
says they were beggarly and abject, What kind of men they were who against
the worlds consent favored Luther. What Dutrh. What french. What kind of
fellous our first Engl. preachers of Protestacie were Bilney. How perverted.
wretches, miserable sinners before God and in sight of all men, most
contemptuous the excrements and outcasts of the world, and if any thing can be
named more vilde. Yea of their holy City of Geneua he says as the Surueyer
cap. 2. writes his words. That the people were, a disordered Dunghill of
rifraffe. That the Senate of 200. were a tumultuou^ faction of rakhells and cast
awayes: and that the cheifest Magistrates of the City yea even the Syndiks
were ringleaders of sactions and dissentions. And will English men forsake their
worthy virtuous and renowned Ancestors, and follow this scumme of the world?
And as for England, what kind of followers they were that first embraced
Protestancie, has been in part touched before. Wherefore I will here, add
only a word of the first Preachers thereof in this Kingdom.

3. Bilney (whom Fox page 922. calls the first framer of the University of
Cambridg in the knowlegd of Christ, and was burnt An. 1531. as he says page
920.) This man (I say) was as him self testifies in Fox page 915. converted
by privy inspiration of the spirit, in reading Erasmus Testament, and was so
ignorant as being apprehended An. 1527. he writes of him self in Fox p. 918.
thus, VVhither Christ have been a long time heard I know not, for that I have
not heard all the Preachers of England. And if I heard them, How ignorant How
often times he abiured Protestancie.
yet till it was within this year or two I could not sufficiently judge of
them. Lo this fellow but a year bebefore he was apprehended, could not judge of
Preachers whither they taught Christ or not. So unconstant also he was in his
religion, as first he took his oath that he should not teach, preach, nor
defend page 910. And being again apprehended and condemned for Prostancie
abiured it, subscribed to his abiuration, went before the procession in Paul's
bare headed with a faggot on his shoulder, and stood before the Preachers at
Paul's Cross all the sermon An. 1529. ex Fox page 919. And yet not
withstanding Anno 1531. again fell to Latimer.
as Sir Thomas More, then Chanceller of England, How perverted. How ignorant
How often times recanted
testifies and Tindal plainly insinuates in Fox page 986. though Fox deny it.

4. Latimer the Apostle (as Fox and Bale term him) of England, was perverted
by this ignorant and inconstant Bilney, and before (as him self says in Fox
page 919.) Was as obstinat a Papist as any in England. Whose learning you may
gather by his Master, and his inconstancy by his own deeds. For he twice
recanted Protesta^cie, p. 1575. and an other time before diverse Bishops as you
may read in Fox. p. 1577. which Fox there says was no great matter nor marvel.
So little matter he makes of his religion or his Apostles denying it. No
marvel or matter for the Apostles of Protestants, to abjure their faith.
Tindal. How often times repents.
After this he was vnbishoped by King Henry. 8. and by him cast into the Tower
where he lay all his time after, and at his own death used gunpowder to shorten
his life p. 1606. Of Tindal an other Apostle, Fox tells page 981. how he was
a schol Master, but mentions not how he came to Protestancie. And after
this, weary p. 982. Chaplin to Bishop Tunstal a Notorious Papist p. 987. He
would have the real presence accounted an indifferent thing. And p. 985. he
tells that he was strangled before he was burnt, which manifestly shows
that he recanted at his death, which also I have read other where. Thus you may
see what dubble and triple turncotes, what perjured and abiured persons were
the Apostles and first preachers of Protestancie in England. The Foundations
and chief Pillars (as Fox terms them) of their Church. O what comparison can
there be, between such, and Saint Austin, S. Laurence, Saint Paulin? What madness
were it to leave these to follow those?

CHAP. XIII. That Luthers doctrine was never confessed by Catholics to be
sufficient to salvation.
1. You heard before that the adversaries of S. Austins doctrine, as well the
Britons then as the Protestants now, confessed that he brought the true way to
salvation, and that many and great learned men have followed him, and come to
heaven by the way which he taught; which testimony proceeding from adversaries
mouths must needs seem to be the confession of most evident and manifest
truth. Here now it comes in place to show, that no one Catholic ever
acknowledged that Luthers doctrine was the way to salvation or that any have
commen to heaven by following him which I show. First, That no Cath. allowed
Luthers doctrine as Protest. do S. Austins.
because not only Pope Leo, but also the general Council of Trent confirmed
by can err) has condemned and accursed his doctrine. And his books are
forbidden to be read under pain of excommunication Secondly, because every
Catholic believes and professes that who keeps not the Catholic faith
wholly and unviolated shall without all doubt perish everlastingly. Thirdly,
because no Catholics words can be produced wherein hope of salvation is
afforded to Luther and his followers. But on the contrary as many Catholics
as write or preach condemn his doctrine for flat heresy, Luthers doctrine
condemned by all Kind of Christians. By Grecia^s By Anabaptists. By Caluinists.
By Engl. Protestants. By how many our Engl. Protest. religion is condemned.
See Ihonson against Jacob.
and him self and all his obstinat followers for heretics, out of Noah's Ark,
out of Christ's fould, out of Gods Church, out of al hope of salvation so long
as they follow Luther.

2. Nay, not only Catholics allow not Luthers doctrine but even all other
Christians besides condemn it. The Grecians, as is said, condemn Protestants
for Heretics. The Anabaptists, as Luther says, account them worse than
Catholics: him self affirms his followers to be seven times worse than
Papists Calvin judges Luthers opinion of the Eucharist less tolerable than
the Papists. Sutclif adds that it is heretical, by inference of such
conclusions as may be gathered thereof. The Brownists esteem our Protestant
religion a meddle or mode religion. A thousand Ministers in their petition
exhibited to his Majesty 1603. affim that it contains abuses and enormities
which they can show not to be agreeable to Gods word. Others propose some
hundred of doubts against it as you may see in the book of Quaeres and the
late silenced Ministers in their solemn printed Challeng made to the Bish.
protestants say that if that be truth which the Bishops maintain against them
that then that is false which they both maintain against Catholics, and that,
The silenced preachers prefer the Cath. faith before the Protestant. The
foundation of Engl Protest. faith condemned, by Protestants. Confor. at
Hampton. Court. p. 6.
their departure from the Pope can not be justified, but that he, yea Christ
Jesus and his hauenly truth in him, have had great wrong. Finally his Majesty
with the tacit consent of the Bishops condemned all the English Bibles (the
very foundation of our Protestants faith) as ill translated, and gave order to
translate the Bible a new.

CHAP. XIIII. That Luther never confirmed his doctrine by miracles.
1. SOme Protestants say that Luther needed no miracles for confirmation of his
Doctrine, because (says Field lib. 3. of the Church c. 48. we teach nothing
contrary to the confirmed and received doctrine of the Church of God then in
the world when these differences between us and our adversaries began. This
impudent saying of his may be joined to an other which he has L. cit. cap. 42.
That there is no material difference amongst the Protestants, See Sleid. lib.
5. fol. 65.
no not between Luther and Zuinglius in matter of the Sacrament, nor between
Illyricus and others about original sin, nor between Osiander and others
about Justification as shall be justified (says he) against the prowdest Papist
of them all. But as for the strangnes of Luthers doctrine to all the Church of
his time that has appeared sufficiently here to fore, and shall yet more
hereafter. Wherefore Protestants ascribe two kind of miracles to Luther, the one
invisible, which Luther him self challenges to. 4. in Isaiam c. What miracles
Luther challenged. Luthers allegation of his miracles disproued.
35. where having told that Catholics object unto him that he could not cure
a lame horse, but was altogether destitute of miracles, replieth that by his
preaching the spiritual blind began to see the truth, the deaf heard the
Gospel The lame that sat in superstition and Idolatry walk. But great fondnes
it is to alleadg such miracles for confirmation Luther (says he) wrought those
supernatural effects, but no man sees them. Thirdly, Because every
Sectmaister can say so. Fourthly, Because the question is idem per idem, or,
ignotum per ignotius. For it is all one to say Luthers doctrine works those
spiritual effects, and to say that it is true, One poor friar creeping out of
a blind cloister began Protestancie. See Bre^tius answering the like miracle
wrought by zuinglius in recognit. cont. Bullenger.
or at least it is as doubtful. Fox Acts p. 789. and others aleadg this for a
notable miracle, that one man and a pore Friar creeping out of a blind Cloister
should be set up against the Pope and almost the whole world, and work that
which all the learned men before him could never compass. Mark good Reader how
he confesses his religion to have begun of one man, and of one Friar creeping
out of a blind Cloister, against almost the whole world, and not compassed
before of all the learned men that were.

2. But as I said before this is as great a miracle as to see stones roll from
a hill: such a one as that notable strumpet bragged of to Socrates saying that
her doctrine and p rswasion was more potent than his, because she with a few
words could draw cause she with a few words could draw his scollers to follow
her. But Socrates rightly answered that it was no marvel, because he lead them
up the hill to virtue she drew them down the hill to pleasure Pleasure of
marrying, having money, and living at command drew so many Friars and Nonnes
after Luther. Pleasure of eating flesh at all times, never fasting, never
confessing, never satisfying drew so many lay people after him Pleasure of
living out of all spituall subjection, and getting of Church goods and livings,
drew so many Princes after him. And great marvel it is that more did not run
together (as S. Peter speaks Epist. 1. cap. 4.) into the same confusion of
leacherie. And that we may speak to Luther as S. Hierom lib. 2. did to
Iouinian, Glory not that thou have many disciples, that many favor they
opinion, that is a sign of pleasure. For they favor not so much thy speech as
their own vice. For always false Prophets promis pleasing things, and sooth
much: virtue is bitter and who preach it are replenished with bitterness. And
that I may not speak of others Did not Airus draw the whole world? Thus Saint
Hierome. And what Iouinian, what Epicur what Libertin, has taught more
licentious and voluptuous doctrine tha^ Luther? Of which I will give the Reader
a taste by some points which I have gathered out of of two little books which
he wrote in the beginning of his Protestancy. By which the reader may imagine
what store he uttered after, A taste of Luthers licentious doctrine,
when he had more abandoned shame. It will profit the soul (says he l. de
Libert Christiana) nothing if the body pray and do what work soever can be
done, in and by the body. Yea meditations and whatsoever can be done by the
mind profit nothing. It will not hurt the soul if the body eat, Epist. ad
Albert. Mogunt. Horrible est si vir sine vxore in morte inueniatur
drink commonly, pray not and omit all things which may be done by hypocrites.
No works whatsoever belong to the inward man. By only impiety and incredulity
of the heart is he made guilty and slave of sin to be damned and not by any
external sin or work. All the commandments are equally impossible. Good
works make not a good man, nor ill works an ill man. No ill work makes man ill
and damned, but incredulity And l. de captiu. There is no hope of remedy unless
recalling the Gospel of liberty and all laws of all men extinguished at once,
we judge and govern all things according to it If we have Gods law and natural
wisdom it is superfluous yea hurt full to have written laws no law can be put
upon Christians either by men or Angels, but as much as they us ill them selves.
By only faith although there want other works thou shall be saved. A Christian
is so rich that though he would he can not leese salvation with what sins so
ever, unless he will not believe. For no sins can damn but incredulity Thus
Luther, and much more in two little books. By which thou may see good cause
why diverse did follow him. And how temporal interest makes now diverse to
follow the Puritan Ministers in England, the Surueier tells p. 246. And cap.
2. how the like bayte drew the Geneuians to harken to Calvin and his mates. And
the Dangerous Positioner tells the like motive in Scotland to follow Knox and
his companions. Thus carnal pleasure, liberty, and profit were the miracles
wherewith Luther persuaded his doctrine.

3. Wherefore Field lib. 3. of the Church p. 48. insinuates other kind of
miracles of Luther, but refers us for them to Illyricus and Fox. Luthers
miracles out of Fox.
And in Fox page 789. I find these. First that Luther having had warning
before, and the pictur of a Jew who meant to poison him sent unto him,
miraculously skaped poisoning. That a stone fell not from the top of a vaute
before Luther rose from under it. 3. That they who stood under Luthers window
where he stood praying, might see him shed reares. Fourthly, That by prayers
he had obtained that so long as he lived, the Bishop of Rome should not
prevail in his Contrie. The Fifth was that Luther compelled by prayer the Devil
to throw into the Church an obligation wherewith a man had bound him self body
and soul to the Devil. Sixthly, That when he preached they that heard him
thought every one their own tentations to be touched. These are the miracles
which Fox attributes to Luther. Against which I might except (as they do
against miracles done these days by Catholics) that they are avouched only
by Protestants. I might also object that Fox names no eye witness of any of
these miracles. This also the devil could do by collusion to grace his scholar.
But I need not. For besides the fifth (which Fox him self dare not avouch but
refers it to report saying, if it be true as it is certainly reported.) What
is there in any of the rest which might not be done naturally? Was it a miracle
to escape poisoning by a man of whom he was warned before, and who was
pictured unto him. Might not the stone naturally have stood till that time when
Luther rose? May not an Hypocrit standing praying in a Window to be seen shed
tears? May not Luther fain that he obtained that of God which he saw was not
lykly to be otherwise. And finally might not he who knew the disposition of his
scollers and audients, hit on that wherewith they were tempted. Surely these
miracles we liken to those ridiculous miracles which the Fathers report of the
Montanists.

Luthers miracles refuted.
4. But against these or whatsoever miracles are ascribed to Luther, I oppose,
lib. cit. in Esai; when it was objected him that he wrought no miracles, never
mentioned any visible miracles, yea he adds that miracula nostro tempore
corporaliter amplius non fiunt Quia Christus (says he) ad finem mundi infirmus
That himself says Loc. Com. Clas. 4. page 39. Nullas appariiiones Angelorum
habeo. And page 40. pactum feci cum Domino meo ne vel visiones vel somnia vel
etiam Angelos mihi mittat 3. That Fox himself says p. 1040. The time of
miracles is expired, we having the scriptures to guide us. And Calvin 4.
Instit. page 9. Temporale fuit donum miraculorum, and aliqua ex part 4. Doctor
Fulke. Anot in Joan. 15. Luther and Calvin work no miracles. Protestants deny
that Luther ever wrought miracle.
And in Apoc. 13. you know (says he) that Calvin and the rest whom you call
Archereticks work no miracles. Erasmus also said that Luther could not cure a
Lame horse.

CHAP. XV. That Luther has had no succession and continuance of his doctrine
here in England.
THe last point wherein S. Austin and Luther are to be compared, is succession
and continuance of doctrine In which least of all is to be said. For albeit
Cra^mer were for a while and that secretly in King Henry 8. time a Lutheran,
as Fox terms him page 1115. tyet shortly after King Edwards entrance, he
revolted from that and fell to Zuinglius, denying with him the real presence
in the Eucharist, and for that chiefly was burnt, as you may see in Fox. After
whom nether Archbishop nor Bishop was a Lutheran in all England, but followed
rather Zuinglius or Calvin, albeit also they differ from them in diverse points
of doctrine as well appears by the Puritans who profess to be the pure
Caluinists. And for continuance of Luthers doctrine himself had so small hope
thereof, as he could not forbear words of despair. For in 3. Galat. fol. 154.
I fear (says he) the proper and true use of the law will be after our time
trodden under foot, and utterly abolished by the enemies of the truth. For even
now whiles we are yet living and employ all diligence to set forth the office
and use both of the law and the Gospel, there be very few, yea even among those
that will be accounted Christians and make a profession of the Gospel with us,
Luther forseeth that he shall be forsaken
that understand these things rightly. What think ye then shall come to pass
when we are dead and gone. And fol. 201. Which thing (that Protestants should
not acknowledge Luther for there Pastor) shall one day come to pass, if not
whilst we live, yet when we are dead and gone. Sectaries when we be dead
shall possess those Churches which we have won and planted by our Ministry.
So Engl. Minister.
And the like small hope our English Ministers have of the continuance of their
religion, as appears by the Declarat. of Discipline printed at Geneua 1580. I
am afraid (says that Author) lest God be come into England as into some
Castle, in the way of his progress for a small time. Calvin in his preface
before his Cathechisme did so despair of posterity of succession in his
religion as says he, And Calvin.
I dare scarce think thereof. Their consciences telling them all that their
doctrine is not built upon that rock on which Christ built his Church and
Doctrine, but upon the sands of their human inventions.

Libri Secundi Finis.
THE THIRD BOOK, IN WHICH S. Austin and Luther, and their doctrins are
weighed together according to their qualities.
Set down and proved in the two former books. PREFACE.
HItherto (Gentle reader have we showed out of authentical and sufficient
witnesses that S Austin and Mar. Luther were. the first Founders of the Roman
Catholic and Protestant religion in our English Nation; and we have put each
of them with his qualities in his several scale. Now it remains that with
an even hand we lift up the Balance, and vveighing them together, judge
according to those qualities and enduements which natural reason and true
prudence teach us, ought to be in a first Preacher and founder of Gods religion
in a Nation, whither is more likly to come from God and bring his religion,
vvhither the contrary?

CHAP. I. S. Austin and Luther weighed according to their learning.
How great a help learning is to discover errors, and to find out truth, and
contrary wise how great a hinderance ignorance is to attain to truth, and an
aid to lies; as a thing evident by it self need no proof. Herevpo^ it has
been usual to the Sectmaisters of all times, as they are the beginners of new
doctrins unknown to their Ancestors, so to impute to them ignonora^ce, and to
arrogat to them selves especial knowledge and learning, by help whereof
(forsooth) ^hey could discover that truth which for ignorance their Forfathers
could not find out. It was (says S. Bernard sermon. 65. in Cant.) always the
trick of Heretics to boast of singularity of knowledge. Thus the Donatists
accused the rest of the world of ignorance. At whom S. Austin lib. 1. cont.
Gaudent. cap. 19. iesteth thus. O dolor fraudata sunt tali magisterio tempora
antiqua! O sorrow that the ancient times wanted such Masters. And when the
Pelagians in like sort condemned the ancient Fathers of ignorance, he exclamed
lib. 2. cont. Julian. cap. 10. in these words. And dare thou call those
blind? And has long days so confounded the highest with the lowest, and shall
darkness be so accounted light and light darkness, that Julian Pelagius Celestius
shall see and Hilarie Ambr. Greg. be blind.

Yea in the time of Tertullian in the primitive Church, there were heretics,
who doubted not to impute ignorance to the Apostles them selves, whom Tertul.
l. de praescript. refuteth thus, what man well in his wits can thinck that
they were ignorant of any thing whom our Lord gave for teachers, had always
in his company, to whom he expounded aparte all obscure matters? And when they
bragged of their new light he merrily iesteth at them thus: To these alone, and
to these first was the truth revealed, Forsooth they obtained greater savor and
fuller grace of the Devil. And how usual it is with Luther and Protestants to
boast of their especial knowledge, and new light, and to impute blindness
ignorance and errors to the former ages and ancient Fathers, no man that either
conuerseth with them or reads their books can be ignorant. Audemus etc.
(says Luther) we dare glory that Christ was first published of us VVigand l.
de Bonis and Malis Germ. ascribes to Luther such a lightening of the Articles
of faith as was not known in the world since the Apostles time. Neander. lib. 8
explicat. orbis te^^a. Fox p 416. edit. 1563. Iuel Apolog
Others call him the mouth of Christ, Chariot of Israel. Finally some prefer him
before all the Apostles but Paul, as Cyriacus Spangenbergius who will justify
these verses. Christus habet primas habeas tibi ^aule secundas
At loca post illos proxima Luther habet.
Let Christ be first and after him S. Paul be best
But next to the Luth. deserus to go before the rest.
And as Luther challenges more light and learning than the ancient, Fathers,
so Zuinglius challenges more light than he, and Calvin than they both. And in
England the Protestants of King Edwards time challenged more light than those
of King Henry's, and those of Queen Elizabeth more than they both, and the
Puritans challeng more light than the Protestant, the Brownists than the
Puritan till at last (as his majesty said of the Scottish Ministers) they run
madd with their light, Confer. at Hampt. Court.
or r^ther turn all into darkness of infidelity and Atheism, as daily,
experience shows. Wherefore to see whither indeed Luther were like to be
better learned tha^ S Austin Let us compare them together according to that
which has been told of them.

S. Austin was an Italian, Luther a Duch man: See all these points proved
before. l. 1. c. 4. l, 2. c. 7.
S. Austin studied in Rome when there was there a famous University, Luther in
Wi^te^berg and places of no fame. S. Austins Master was S. Gregory one of the
four Doctors of the Church, Luthers Master was a nameles fellow, and for
Protestancy he had no Master at all, unless you will reckon his black Master
S. Austin is not known to have had any corporal impediment of study, Luther
is known to have had so great a one as he could scarce read three leaves
together. S. Austin had testimony of S. Gregory that he wa^ repletus scientia
scriptuarum: full of the knowledge of scripture, Luther had testimony of h^s
^^other Zuinglius that he was imperitus vel nimis rudis Theologus an unskillful
or too too rude a Divine. S. Austin rejected no part of Gods word, Luther
rejected diverse. S. Austin taught no absurd doctrins, Luther by the judgment of
Protestants taught many. S. Austin overcame the Britons amongst whom were
plures viri doctissimi Luther (as Catholics write) was overcome in public
disputatio^s of one Eckius. S. Austin taught no heresies, Luther as Protestants
confess taught diverse. Finally S. Austin revoked none of the doctrine which he
once taught Luther revoked and confessed his ignorance in many and weighty
points. Besides all this S. Austin was nearer to Christ's time by 900. years
and more, than Lu^her, and therefore more likly to learn what Christ taught tha^
Luther who was so long after. Now therefore (gentle reader) lift up the Balance
of thy judgment with an even hand, and considering that upon this choice goes
thie eternal salvation or damnation: weigh these two men equally, and judge
whether is more full, not of words, or braggs, but of learning. Whether is
liklier to know what Christ taught, or to have erred of ignorance. Whether
were likly to have been blind, whether to have seen.

CHAP. II. S. Austin and Luther weighed according to their virtue or vice.
1. THe due consideration of the virtuous life of the first Preacher or founder
of Religion in any Country, may give to prudent men great light to descern
whether his Religion be good or bad, come from God or from the Devil. For
albeit vicious men do often times preach and continue the religion which
virtuous men first founded, as we see that the Scribes and Pharisees in Christ's
time taught the Doctrine of Moses, Whereupon he bad the people to do what they
taught, and in the day of judgment there will be reprobats who have prophesied in
Christ's name; yet notwithstanding if we look into the scriptures or
Ecclesiastical Histories we shall not find but that those whom God sent to be
first founders of his religion in any Nation or Contrie, were when he sent
them, virtuous and godly men. Such a one was Moses by whom he founded his
religion amongst the Ie^es: Mitissimus hominum qui sunt super terram. The most
mildest man that was on earth. Such a one was S. John Baptist whom he chose to
first sound out the happy tidings of Christian religion to the world. Such were
his Apostles who forsook all and followed him, even Judas when he chose him
for an Apostle, as S. Cyril in 6. Joan. Hierom l. 3. cont. Pelag. and others
teach. S. Hierom proves it inuincibly out of these words Joan. 17. Father
whom thou have given to me I have kept and none has perished but the son of
perdition. For if God the Father gave Judas to Christ, surely he was then good.
And it may be proved out of the 54. Psalm, where he is prophetically called a
man of one mind, and said to have walked in Gods house with consent. And before
Christ would license the Apostles to preach to Nations, he bid them abide in
Jerusalem til they were endued with virtue from above, and made them as S. Paul
speaks Idoneos Ministros Noui Testamenti. Fit Ministers of the new Testament.
Such also were those whom we call the Apostles of certain Nations, as to omit
others S. Patrick of Ireland. S. Ninian of Pictland, S. Palladius the first
Bishop of Scotland. And the cause of this proceeding of God in choosing virtuous
men to be the first promulgators of his law in any Contrie is manifould. First
because it is more honorable for him to choose for instruments of so notable a
work of his, as is the conversion of a Nation from infidelity to disponit
omnia suauiter disposes al things sweetly. he uses these outward helps
wherewith he knows men to be most draune to embrace his religion, which are
virtue and miracles. Of which twoe though miracles be very potent, yet virtue
is more poureful, as S. Chrisostom shows by the comparison of S. John Baptist
and Appollonius Tyaneus. Of whom the one wrought no miracles as the scriptur
says, and yet by his virtue stroke the Jews into such admiration of him, as
they doubted whether he were not the Messiah of the world. And the other though
he wrought many wonders, yet had few or no followers. And S. Chrisost. dout^th
not to say, that if the Apostles had not lived vertuosly, notwitstanding their
great miracles, the world would have counted them but seducers. And in the
conversion of our English Nation, albeit the miracles of S. Austin and his
fellows did cooperat thereto, yet S. Beda l. 1. cap. 26. attributes it chiefly
and almost wholly to the virtue and holiness of their life. Thirdly this course
is most proportionable and agreeable to the end for which God sends Preachers
to any Contry. For as the end of his se^ding is virtue to be engrafted in that
Nation, so the mean most agrea^^, and suitable thereto is virtue in the first
preacher. Wherefore howsoever the Successors or as S. Paul terms them the
Pedagogs in Christ be yet the first Preachers or Fathers of a Nation who
(according to Saint Paul's phrase) had begotten them in Christ, ought to be very
holy and virtuous men.

2. And the contrary course of sending wicked and vicious men for first
preachers of doctrine is usual to the Devil, and well be seeming him. For
albeit virtuous men may upon ignorance fall into some one or more errors, yet
c^n they not, (so long as they keep their xertue (be enticed by the Devil to
forsake their true faith and worship of God, upon which all virtue is grounded.
But those who (as Saint Paul speaks of the Heretics Hymeneus and Philetus)
have already made shipwreck of a good conscience, and aba^doned virtue, those
the Devil puffs up with a proud conceit of their own learning, and picketh
out for Sectmaisters, and for teachers of new doctrines. And therefore howsoever
Archereticks may for a time dissemble virtue, as S. Austin writes of Pelagius,
yet mendacia (as S. Cyprian writes) non diu fallunt. Their Hypocrisy will not
diu proficere, sed insipientia eorum manifesta fiet. Simon Magus before he
became an Archereticke would have bought Gods grace for money. Arius before he
became an Archeretick was noted to be ambitious. Berengarius before he broched
his heresy was noted of envy at other men's glory. Wicklef, before he began
his doctrine was noted of anger, as writes Godwin in the life of Archb. Simon
Langhorn, and is evident in Stow Chron. Anno 1376. Finally Luther before he
published his new doctrine was noted of envy against the dominica^ Friars (as
is before showed) and singularity. In so much as Fox page 770. writes that his
friends did thinck even before he fell from the Church, Luthers singularity.
that he would alter and abolish that manner of teaching which then was used.
Thus all Archereticks are branded with some notorious vice or other. And
perhaps these Archereticks are the false Prophets whom our Savior gave a
mark to know by their life. For which cause also both the scriptures and
Fathers have recorded the notorious vices of diverse Archereticks as a sure
token that such men were not they whom God first sends as preachers of a new
doctrine, or Apostles to convert a Nation to him. Wherefore let us compare the
qualities of S. Austin and Luth. that thereby we may see whether was the more
likly man to be chose^ of God to be he that was first sent by him to convert
our Country to his faith and religion. All this was proved before l. 1. c. 5.
l. 2. c ^.


3. S. Austin forsook the world from his youth and entered into religious life,
Luther, not before he was 20. years old and then upon fear that his
companion with whom he walked, was slain with a thunderboult. S. Austin was
brought up under S. Gregory, who as S. Beda says lib. 1. cap. 23. was a man
of greatest virtue and learning of his time, Luther under no man of fame. S.
austin profited so in virtue as he was made by S. Gregory Praepositus
Monasterij: of Luthers like profit no such proof. S. Augustine kept his
religious life, Luther soon shook it of. S. Austin came a thousand miles to
preach to Barbarous people Luther never went out of his Contrie ^t such
purpose, and lived alwaie^ ^er sure protection of the Prince Fe^^c^^r of
Saxony. S. Austin lived in continu^ll prayer (says Beda lib. 1. cap. 26.
VVatc^i^ ^^ng, preaching, despising the commodities (...) w^^ld, and single
li^e, (...) ^h^t al^ (...) ^a^e a Protes^a^t, Wiued, fea^^ (...) his ^ase and
enjoyed the ple^sures of the w rld. S. Austin went commonly b^^^foot about
England preaching, and had hard knees like a Camel by frequent ^^eling in
prayer. No such matter of Luther. S. Austin made English men incomparable more
virtuous tha^ they were before, Luther made them much worse. S. Austin God
approved by many miracles both alive and dead, no such news of Luther S.
Austin is highly commended for his virtue by S. Greg Beda and other writers to
our age, Contrariewise Luther greatly discomme^ded eue^ of his own brethren.
Finally no great vice can be proved against S. Austin, Many and heinous vice
are proved against Luth. Judge therefore gentle Readee, God being determined to
reduce our Nation to Christ's faith, whether of these two me^ it is most likely
he would make choice of, for to effect so notable and so pious a work.

CHAP. III. S. Austin and Luther weighed according to their motives of
preaching.
1. MVch it avails to try the sincerity of any man's cou^se^ or actio^ to
examine whether the Cou^seller or Actor be like to reap any pleasure o^
commodity thereby. For if he can not, most likly it is that he gives such
advice upon sincerity and judgment and otherwise the contrary may be su^pected,
i^ it be not evident. Whereupon ^assius gave that prudent note, which al w^se
me^ in that case do observe, that we shall mark Cui bonum, To whom was the advice good? To whom was there any commodity pleasure or preferment like to
r^dound. And if this course he observed in trial of S. Austin and Luthers
religion, we shall clearly perceive that S. Austin is to be prefered before
Luthers. For S. Austin left his Co^try, forsook his friends and acquaintance,
left his headship of a Monastery, left his quiet abode at home for to come to
preach his religion to our Nation Luther left none of all these to preach his
S. Augustine came a thousand miles, and adventured his life her amongst a people
of a different religion, Luther never went out of his Contrie to preach his
doctrine, nor ever came amongst his own Contry men of contrary religion, These
points proved before l 1. c. 7 l. 2 c. 9.
without a safe conduct S. August got nothing but the title of an Archbishop
whereof he had little or no hope at all when he came hither. Luth. got liberty,
wife, riches and preferment of the world. Whetfore evident it is that S. Austin
was more likly to preach his doctrine upon sincerity and judgment, and for the
good of them to whom he preached, because he lost much, got little, and hoped
for less than Luther, who by his preaching lost nothing, and got much.

CHAP. IIII. S. Austin and Luther weighed according to their mission or sending
to preach.
SO sure a mark it is of false Prophets to preach without sending as God
almighty gave it as a certain note of them in the old law Hierem. 23. I sent
them not and they did run. And our Savior in the new law Joan 10. Who
enters not by the door into the sheepfould, but climbeth up otherways, he is
a thief and a robber ib. All who so ever have come^ (without send^ng) are
thieves and robbers. And he Apostles likewise Act. 15. Some going out of us have
trobled you with words, whom we commanded not. And so absurd withal, as
nothing can be more. For if none dare take upon him to be the messe^ger or
Ambassador of a Prince, unless he be sent, nor to govern his people unless he be
appointed, how absurd is it for any to take upon him to be Ambassador and
Messenger of the Prince of Princes, and be disposer of his mysteries and Stuard
of his household, and guider of his flock, unless he be lawfully sent? Wherefore
let us compare the missions of S. Austin and Luther together, that thereby we
may see whether was the true, whether the false Prophet.

S. Austin was sent to preach of S. Greg. successor to S. Peter, All these
differences proved before l 1. c 8 9 l. 2. c. 10.
and first Patriarch of Christendom, Luther when he first preached
Protestancie, was sent nether of Patriarch nor Bishop nor any man else. S.
Austin was sent by the said authority by the which the first preachers of the
most part in Christendom were sent, Luther by no authority at all. S. Austin
came to preach upon obedience, Luther upon disobedience. S. Austin came of
purpose to preach that faith which he did preach, Luther at first me^t only to
spite others for a time, and not to found any new faith. S. Austin never meant
to suppress the faith which he began to preach, Luther oftentimes offered to
suppress his, if he had not been bound to recant it. S. Austins sending was
co^tested by S. Peter's miraculous testimony from heaven, Luther had no such.
Finally S. Austins sending was by God confirmed in the same sort that the
sending of the Apostles was, that is. God contesting with signs and wonders,
Luthers wanted all such co^firmatio^. Judge the^ indifferent Reader whether of
these two men's sending was more likly to be good.

CAAP. V. S. Austin and Luther weighed according to their orders of preaching
and administering the Sacraments.
CErtain it is that none ca^ lawfully administer the Sacraments of God but he
that has power and order thereto from God. For ar S. Paul says he b^. 5 Nec
quisquam sibi facit honorem sed qui vocatur a Deotanquam Aaron Sic nec Christus
semetipsum clarificauit vt Pontifex fieret sed qui locutus ^st ad eum, tu es
sacerdos in aeternum secundum ordinem Melchisedech. And if Christ could not
offer sacrifice before he was made Priest, how shall man take upon him to
administer Gods sacraments, Wherefore according to that which has been said,
let us weigh both their orders. Saint Austins orders were such as S. Gregoryes
were, and consequently such as all as Christendom at that time both approved
and used Luthers Ministry (for of his Roman Priesthood we speak not) was such
as the Christian world never heard of before. S. Austin was made Priest at Rome
by S, Gregory or his predecessors authority, and Bishop in France by his
appointement Luther was made a Minister of no man at all. And such orders as he
had (he says) he received from Antichrist, and in the Sinagog of Satan. S.
Austins administering the word and Sacraments was confirmed of God by miracles,
of Luthers doings no such mention. S. Austins orders are disliked by none of
his fellows Luthers orders are rejected even by many great Ptotestants, Judge
then good Reader whether thou think best.

CHAP. VI. S. Austin and Luther weighed according to the universality or
singularity of their doctrine.
THe word Heretic is origina^y a Greek word signifying as much in English as a
chooser. And an heretic is nothing else but he who houldeth not the universal
and general faith of Christians, but makes choice of some points thereof that
he will believe, and denies the rest. And Catholic likewise is originally a
Greek wotd signifying as much as universal or General. So that a Catholic
Christian is he who professes the uniuersall faith of all Christendom.
Wherefore if we weigh S. Austin and Luther according to this balance we shall
soon see which of them was the Catholic, Sup. l. r. c. 11. l 2. cap. 12.
which the heretic. For S. Aust. (as is before showed) preached the universal
faith of Christendom, making no singular choice of his own of any points of
faith. But Luther as is before declared swarued from the vniuetsall faith of
Christendom and followed that which either none or invisible persons held, whom
he never knew where or how many they were or rather none indeed knew it no not
himself before he invented it.

CHAP. VII. S. Austin and Luther. weighed according to their adversaries
alowance of their Doctrine
IT must needs be evident truth which the Adversaries confess. For if it might
justly be doubted of surely they would never admit it. Wherefore this kind of
weapon have all men much esteemed, and used as the sword of Golias to cut of
his own head. This argument Moises used Deuteronomy. 32 when he said For our God is
not as their Gods are and let our enemies be judges. This argument used our
Savior when being accused of the Jews for casting out Devils in Belsibub, he
appealed to the verdict of their children. The same used S. Paul when against
the Gentiles he brought the testimony of their poets. The same used the holy
Fathers when out of the heretics own Principles they overthrew their
Religion. The same now use Catholics against Protestants, and Protestants
likewise endeavor to use the same against us, as you may see in Morton in his
Treatise of equivocation, Bell in his downfall and others. And Archb. Bancroft
in his Survey cap. 8. arguing against the Purita^s out of their own confession
says you may be hold to build upon it for a truth that they are so
constrained to yield unto. Wherefore by the light of reason and example of all,
that Religion must needs be thought to have a great advantage of the other,
which is by the Adversaries thereof accounted good and the other is not. But in
this there is no comparison betwixt S. Austins and Luthers religion. See l. 1.
c. 12 l 2. cap. 13.
For whereas not only the Britons then, confessed S. Austins doctrine to be the
true way of righteousness, but also diverse Protestants now, have acknowledged it
to be the right belief, the perfect faith of Christ, the true religion of
Christ, pure and incorrupte Christianity, as has been declared before, No one
Roman Catholic can be named that ever since Lurher began, afforded ever any
hope of salvation to those that wittingly and willingly follow his doctrine.

CHAP. VIII. S. Austin and Luther weighed according to their Miracles.
What a certain and infallible way of truth Gods miracles are, has been
showed before. And what can be said for S. Austins or Luthers miracles is
already set down. Here it remains that according to the rules of wisdom we
weigh and give judgment whether of their miracles were more likly to be true
miracles, wrought by God as set by him as it were his seals to either of their
doctrine. See these proved before. l. 1. c. 13. l, 2. cap. 14.
By S. Aust. means you have diverse things done which could not be done
naturaly. As the curing of a blind man, and the healing of all lame, diseased,
and deformed persons, which were cured by baptism at his apointme^t. Of Luther
you have not heard one thing which could not have been done naturally. As the
bewraying of a Jew of whom he was admonished to take heed. Of rising before
a stone fell. Of shedding tears at his prayers, Of touching the tentations of
his hearers. Yea the casting in of the obligation by the Devil (which yet Fox
dare not avouch) might well have been done of the Devils own accord. Of S. Aust.
miracles there were many eye witnesses and diverse of these enemies. Of Luthers
wonderments not so much as friends alleged for the witnesses. S. Austins
miracles are testified by great Doctors and famous Saints, as S. Gregory, S.
Beda and others, who by their learning could know the miracles, and for their
holiness would relate no uncertain fables for certain miracles. Luthers
wonderments have no such testimony S. Austins miracles were then confessed by
his enemies the Britons, and now by diverse his adversaries the Protestants. No
one past or present adversary ever confessed Luther to have wrought a miracle.
Finally no Catholic ever denied S. Austin to have wrought miracles, Diverse
Protestants have denied Luther ever to have wrought any. What man then is there
that judging things according to rules of wisdom, will not thinck S. Austins
miracles to have been true miracles. For (besides the testimony of the word of
God which testified the miracles which we read in scripture) what want they to
be accounted true miracles that any other miracles had? The Deeds were
supernatural, The effect of them was supernatural and divine vz: the
conversion of Infidells, The means of doing them holy, to wit prayer to God,
The doers of them were Saints, The testimony of these Deeds are of many, eye
witnesses, friends, and foes, learned, and unlearned, holy, and Wicked, foreign
and domestical, and confessed of diverse which refuse S. Austins religion, Than
the which greater testimony for miracles can not be required, unless we would
have God to speak from heaven. And on the other side, what prudent man is he
that will not judge Luthers wonderments to be frivolous. The things reported o
him were natural, The testimonies for them are nether of eyewitnesses; nor of
enemies, nor of Saints, nor of great learned men, nor are they confessed of any
who refuse Luthers doctrine. Yea they are denied by such as were both friends
and great scollers of Luthers. Why then should we believe them? Nay why
should we not deny them?

CHAP. IX. S. Austin and Luther weighed according to the Succession or
continuance of their doctrine.
TRuly said Gamaliel Acts. 5. of the Christian religion then preached by the
Apostles, Si ex hominibus est consilium hoc aut opus dissoluetur, Si vero ex
Deo est no^ poteritis dissoluere. And in like sort of heretics said S. Paul
2. Timoth 3. Vltro non proficient. And S. Austin in ps. 57. compares the
Catholic faith to a River, which having a continual spring ever flows and
never waxes dry, and heresy to a brook rising up on rain, which while the
rain falls, runs boisterously, and they who know not that it wa^teth a
spring would judge that it would last longer than the quiet river, See this
proved. l. 1. c. 14. and seq. ad fin. l. 2. c. 1^
but as soon as it leaves raining they see the water gone and the brook
dried. Wherefore let us see whither S. Aust. or Luthers doctrine has co^tinewed
longer in Engl. in their followers or rather we have seen it already. For. S.
Aust. has had 69. successors in his Archbishopric successiuly all of the same
religion with him. 53. kings of England besides diverse others as is before
declared, and that when the Crown and kingdom was twice violently taken from
the Englishe-men by Danes and Normans, yet his faith was not taken from his
successors Nor by so many so long desolations of the Danes and many severe
laws, first by King Henry 8. and then by Queen Elizabeth, and so many
bitter torments hard banishme^ts, straight confinments, deep Dongeons could
Iorns great ^ines, Taxes, and payme^ts, and bluddy deaths, could it be rooted
these thousand years out of this land, but that this day God be thancked and
S. Aust.) there are both noble and ignoble clerks seculer and religious, men,
weeme^, and Children, who not withstanding all laws, threats, and dangers,
will profess to hold the faith of their Apostle S, Aust. to agree with him in
all points of religion to honor that See from whence he came, Much more would
S. Austin have forborne the Protest. Church.
and to refuse (as he did) to join in religion with them who observe not the
manner (as he said to the Brito^s) of the holy Roman, and Apostolik Church. In
so much, as not withstanding all the laws, terrors, Proclamatio^s searches, or
payme^ts, Torturs, Banishme^ts, and executions which have been made these 50.
years, I B in his Tail of Two leg. Foxes. c. 11
yet Ministers in their printed books daily complain of increase of Priests
and Catholics And one lately in his sermon at Paul's Cross dedicated to the
pretented Archb. of Canterbury and lyked of him says page 79. Some. Collins.
that no bondage or hard measure can ever be thought able to suppress or
reclame us. This, this, shows S. Austins work to have been of God and the
water wherewith he watered the plants of his religion to have an everlasting
flowing fountain from Heaven, and the Church which he founded to be built upon
such a Rock as the gates of hell shall not preuail against it. And that they
which spurn against it do (as S. Paul once did) spurn against the prick.
And on the other side Cranmer, if he were (as Fox says) a Lutheran in King
Henry's time, it was but secretly; And if he professed it in King Edwards time,
it was but for a very short space, And long since was there not one true
Lutheran Protestant to be found in all England. So soon was Luthers work
dissolved, so soon was his brook grown dry. And in steed of it runs now
Zuinglius or Caluins brook, which though it see me for the present to be full,
and run strongly, yet if the Prince (whose heart is in Gods hands) would but
either disfancy it, or at least withould his severe hand from Catholics. you
should quickly see this full brook brought to a low ebb, and quickly dreaned,
and wax as dry as either the brook of Luther, or the brooks of 300.
Archereticks more, whereof diverse have run far fuller and longer than either
Luthers or Caluins has, and now no sign of them is left, Luther epist. ad
Albert, Mogunt. An 1525. forte doctrina mea iterum supprimetur.
yea scarce their names are known. This Luther him self both forsawe and
fourtould, as is before declared. l. 2. c. vlt. And Calvin also in his Preface
before his Cathechisme in these words Of Posterity I am so doutful as I dare
scarce thinck thereof. For unless God miraculously help from heaven me thinks I
see extreme barbarousnes hang over the world. And I pray God that a while hence
our children feel not this to have been rather a true prophecy than a
conjecture. And if we mark we shall see, that as Vipers brood kills their
Mother of whom they came. So new haeresies destroy the old from whence they
sprange. Thus the Puritan impugneth the Protestant, and the Brownist
undermines the Puritan. Wherefore let all men that be careful of their salvation
harken to S. Hieroms advise saying to a Luciferian Haeretick, I will tell thee
my mind breefly and plainly. That we should abide in that Church, which founded
of the Apostles, contineweth to this day. For shall we doubt (says S. Austin
l. de vtil. Cred.) to put our selves in the lap of the Church which from the Sea Apoostolick by succession of Bishops (in vain Haereticks barking about yt)
has gotten the hight of authority.

Epilog.
1. THus we see most deerly beloved Contrimen, that if we compare according to
the true rules of prudence and wisdom, the Roman Catholic and Protest.
religion in their first founders here in our English Nation, other for learning
or virtue, for missio^ or orders for motives to preach, for universality of
religion or confession of Adversaries, for miracles or succession and
continuance, the Catholic religion is incomparably to be preferred and chosen
before the Protestant. For if learning do help to epsy truth S. Austin was
liklier to find it than Luther, If virtue deserve to have truth revealed, S.
Austin was more likely to have deserved it tha^ Luther, If holy motives entice
men to deliver sincerly what they know to be truth, S. Austin was liklier to
deal so than Luther. If laufull Mission and true orders testify a true
preacher, S. Austin was more likly to be such than Luther. Or if consent of
Christianity, Confession of Adversaries. Miracles and Continuance make any
thing for proof of true religion, S. Austins religion is incomparably before
Luthers. And what I say of S, Austin in respect of Luther, may also be said (as
appears by what has been written) of S. Austins followers in our English
Nation in respect of Luthers followers in the same Nation. And contrariewise if
ignorance lead to lies, if vice hinder the revelation of Gods truth, or cause
the taking of it away, Luther is more like to err than S. Austin. If worldly
and naughty motives draw men to deceive others, Luther was more like to
deceive tha^ S. Austin. If want of lawful mission and right orders discrie a
false Prophet, Luther is more like to be such than S. Austin. And finally if
want of consent of Christianity, want of acknovvledgme^t of Adversaries, want
of miracles and continuance, show any thing the untruth of of religion, Luthers
religion is more like to be untrue than S. Austins. And if any shall say that
albeit Luther and the Protest. religion be inferior to S. Austin and the Roman
religion in all these points above mentioned, yet are they superior in the word
of God, which is to be preferred before all other considerations whatsoever. If
(I say) any shall thus object. I request him to consider that one truth is not
contrary to an other, nor Gods word to right reason nor his spiritual light
to the light of nature, nor faith opposite to true prudence. And if therefore
right reason light of nature, true prudence stand for S. Austin and his
religion, and give sentence against Luther and his Protestancie; surely Gods
word (howsoever it may seem to some in show of words) yet indeed and in
sense stands likewise on S. Austins side, and condemns Luther and the
Protestant faith. For it can not but seem strange that any wise man should
imagine that Gods word should stand on the one side post alone, or accompained
only with ignorance. vice naughty motives want of lawful Mission, and right
orders, want of approbation of Christianity, of confession of enemies, of
continuance. and of miracles, And on the otherside with the Devils word should
stand learning, virtue, lawfully mission, right orders, consent of
Christianity, confession of Adversaries, continuance and Miracles. Would God
discredit his word with such disgraceful mates, and countenance the devils
word with so many and so importa^t titles of commendation? Or can it sink into
any man's head that a man should be lawfully sent, have the approbatio^ of
Christianity, the confession of Adversaries and Gods testimony by assured
miracles (as S. Austin is plainly showed to have had) to preach lies? Or if I
ca^ not obtain so much of such a man, I request him yet this, that he will
please to suspend his judgment till he see the second part of this Treatice,
VVherin (God willing) he shall s^e the Catholic religion to go so far beyond
the Protestant for right claim of scripture and true sense thereof and other
true grounds of religion, as he sees it exceed protesta^cy touching the first
founder thereof in England in all the points above mentioned. God for his
mercies sake open the eyes of my dear Contryme^, that they may see that which
is truth. and move their hearts to embrace and follow that which they see to be
his ever sting truth, and their own aeternall happiness.

2. Here I would have made an end, An admonition to those that think men may be
saved in both religions.
but that I feared that some though persuaded by what has been showed in this
book, that the Catholic religion is in all reason and wisdom to be preferred
and followed before the Protestant, may notwithstanding persuade them selves,
that the Protestant religion is good enough and sufficient to salvation, whom I
beseech for God and their own souls sake to consider these points following.
First, that howsoever by which we are sure that diverse are safely arrived on
the other side; rather than a new way which of late some inexpert and iangling
fellows have imagined them selves to have found out, but we are not sure that
any one that has gone that way has escaped drowning and is landed in
safety on the otherside? And love we our souls, desire we heaven, fear we
hell, and will we make the contrary choice in religion.

3. Secondly I would have them to consider, that it is See l 2 c. 1. 7 8. 9. 10.
and seq.
but that Protesta^cie is indeed no religion, but a humane devise lately
invented of one man, and him meanly learned, vicious, and for naughty motives,
disliked of him self, and at the first condemned of all Christendom, and
wanting all authority of lawful Mission, See l. 2 c. 1
of right orders, and Miracles to approve it. Which kind of superstition rather
than religion no man of wisdom can think sufficient and able to save him. For
nether can Gods religion be an invention of man, but an institution of God him
self, nether if it could, were it reason to think that to be a good religion
which a naughty and unlearned man, upon naughty motives had devised, and
wanted all authority of lawful mission, and right orders to use it, yea which
not only all Christendom at the first condemned. but even the inuentor him
self for many years disliked and offered to suppress.

4. Thirdly I would have them to consider that the Catholic and Protestant
religion are not one and the same religion in substance, differing only in
some small points, but are indeed two religions in substance. quite opposite in
many most substa^tiall parts of reliigon, namely; In the very worship of God:
For Gatholiks believe that they ought to worship God with external sacrifice
which Protestants account sacriledg: In the very word of God. For Catholics
believe many books to be divine as Tobie Ecclesiasticus Machabees etc. which
Protestants reject as fabulous. They are also opposite in the exposition of Gods
word almost in every chapter and verse. They are opposite in Gods Sacraments,
the catholics believing seven whereof the Protestant rejects five. See l. 1.
c. 21.
Finally to omit many more great oppositions they are opposite in the
foundation it self. For the foundation head and soul. of Protestant religion as
them selves account, is justification by only faith, which foundation
Catholics utterly condemn. How then can any reason which judges the
Catholic religion to be good and to come from God, think that a religion so
opposite to it as the Protestant is can also be good and come from the same God:
What argreement can there be between Christ and Beli all, between light and
darkness, between faith and heresy. truth and lies.

5. Finally I would have them to consider that not only infidelity in utterly
rejecting Christ and If any (says Christ Apoc. 22.) shall diminish of the
words of the book of this prophetie God will take his part out of the book of
life. S. Athenasius*
Unless a man (says the Creed of S, Athanasius) keep the Catholic faith entire
and inuiolate without doubt he shall perish everlastingly. For as it little
helps a man to be sound in all other members if he be deadly wounded in one.
So it little avails one to be sound in all other points of faith if he be
heretically infected in one. S. Austin.
And S. Austin also l. de here is. pronounces them to be Heretics qui singulis
aut non multo amplius dogmatibus oppugnant regulam veritatis; who by one or not
many more opinions impugn the rule of truth. To which doctrine also
Protestants agree as you may see in D. Sutlif against Exceptions p, 55. and
others. And the reason is manifest because the definition of Heresy is
pertinatious error in faith, See S. Thomas. 2. 2. q. 5. art. 3.
to which it is indifferent whither the error be but in one or in many points
of faith' And can any Christian think that Heresy ca^ be a way to heaven,
that an Heretik (whom Tertullian* S. Ciprian and all the ancient Eathers
account no Christian) shall be coheir with Christ, That haeresie, Si Hareticus
est, Christianus non est. Tert l. de praiscript. Cipria l de unit. Eccles.
which as opposite to faith a theological virtue, is one of the greatest sins
that is, shall enter into heaven when no sin shall enter. That he who deserves
to be excluded out of the militant Church shall be admitted into the triumphant,
who is condemned (as S. Paul speaks) by his own judgment shall not be
condemned by God, finally who gives God the lie in one or many points of his
sacred truth can be in Gods favor and come to his kingdom, No surely, wherefore
assuring our selves that as their is but one God and one faith, so if the Cath.
faith be Christ's faith Protestancie is heresy if that be the way to heaune,
this is to hell if that be the path to salvation this is to damnation, let us
rei^ecting Protestancie embrace the Catholic. faith. Amen.

FINIS.

