A Sea Grammar, WITH ^HE PLAIN EXPOSITION of SMITHS Accidence for young
Seamen, enlarged.

^^^ided into fifteen Chapters: what they are you may partly conceive by the
Contents.

^^^tten by Captain JOHN SMITH, sometimes Governor of VIRGINIA, and Admiral
of NEW ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN HAVILAND, 1627.

TO ALL THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND most generous Lords in England, especially
those of his Majesty's Privy Council, and Council of War.
Great LORDS,
IVlius Caesar wrote his own Commentaries, holding it no less honor to
write, than fight; much has bin writ concerning the art of war by land, yet
nothing concerning the same at Sea. Many others might better than my self have
done this, but since I found none endeuourd it, I have adventured, encouraged
by the good ent^^tainment of my late printed Accidence. This I suppose will be
much bettered by men in these things better experienced, others ignorance may
fault it: I have been a miserable Practitioner in this School of War by Sea
and Land more than thirty years, howeuer chance or occasion have kept me from
your Lordships knowledge or employment. Yet I humbly entreat your Lordships to
accept and patronize this little Pamphlet, as the best testimony I can present
your Honors, of my true duty to my King and Country. Thus humbly craving your
Honors pardons, and favorable construction of my good intent, I remain

Your Honors in all duty to be commanded, JOHN SMITH.

TO THE READER AND ALL WORTHY Adventurers by Sea, and well wishers to
NAVIGATION.
Honest Readers,
IF my desire to do good has transported me beyond my self, I entreat you
excuse me, and take for requital this rude bundle of many ages observations;
although they be not so punctually compiled as I could wish, and it may be you
expect; At this present I cannot much amend them; if any will bestow that
pains, I shall think him my friend, and honor his endeavors. In the interim
accept them as they are, and ponder errors in the balance of good will,

Your friend, JOHN SMITH.

TO HIS WELL Deserving friend Captain JOHN SMITH.
REader within this little work thou have
The view of things present, to come, and past,
Of consequence and benefit to such
As know but little, thinking they know much;
And in thy quiet chamber safely read,
The Experience of the living and the dead,
Who with great pain and peril often have tried
When they on angry Neptunes back did ride.
He having with his Trident struck the maine,
To hoise them up and throw them down again
Dear friend I Will cease and leave it to thy Book.
To praise thy labor. Reader ouer-looke.
Edw. Ingham.

To the much deserving Captain, John Smith.
I Hate to flatter thee, but in my heart
I honor thy fair worth and high desert;
And thus much I must say, thy merits claim
Much praise and honor, both from Truth and Fame.
What Judge so ^'re thy Actions ouer-looke,
Thou need'st not fear a trial by thy Book.
Geor. Bucke.

TO HIS VVORTHILY deserving friend Captain JOHN SMITH.
THe Lighter Hippias of Troy disclosed,
Germans in India Cannowes now in trade,
The Barge by grave Amocles was composed,
The Argozees first the Illyrians made,
The Galley I^son built that Grecian spark,
The Cyprians first did cross the Seas with Bark.
The Keele by the Phaenician^ first was named,
The Tyrrhens first made anchors, Plateans oars;
The Rhodians for the Brigandine are famed,
Cyrenians found the Craer, and Creet adores
Daedalus for Masts, and Saile-yards; Typhis wise
(With triple honor) did the stern devise.
The Tackle famous Anacharsis wrought,
Noble Pyseus did the Stem first frame,
To light the Copians first the Rudder brought,
Young Icarus for Sails acquired great fame,
Thou, with the best of these mai'st glory share,
That have devised, compiled a work so rare.
For what long travels observations true
On Seas, (where waves do seem to wash the skies)
Have made thee know, thou (willing) do vnscrew
To those that want like knowledge; each man cries
Live worthy Smith; England for this endeavor
Will (if not stupid) give thee thanks for ever.
Nicolas Burley.

In laudem Nobilissimi viri Johannis Smith.
MOney, the worlds soul, that both forms and fames her,
Is her bad Genius to, it damnes, and shames her.
If merit and desert were truly weighed
In Justice Scales, not all by money swey'd;
Smith should not want reward, with many more,
Whom sad oblivion now does ouer-flow.
For now no good things gotten without money,
Except it is got, as Bears from thorns lick honey,
With danger to themselves. For poor men's words
Are wind, and air: Great men's are pickes, and swords*
Greatness more safe may act lust, theft, or treason;
Than poor John Smith or I may steal two peason,
Or drink a harmless cup, to chase away
Sad cares and griefs that haunt us every day.
Who saw thy Virgin limbd by thee so truly,
Would swear thou had been one that saw her newly,
One of her latest lovers. But to tell
The truth, I think they know her not so well.
And this Sea Grammar learned long since by thee,
Thou now have formed so artificially,
That many abeardlesse boy, and Artlesse fool,
Preferred before thee, may come to thy school.
John Hagthorpe.

TO HIS FRIEND Captain Smith, on his GRAMMAR.
MV^h traueld Captain, I have heard thy worth
By Indians, in America set forth:
Me silence best seems to keep, and then
Thy better praise be sung by better men,
Who feel thy virtues worthiness: Who can
Derive thy words, is more Grammarian,
Than Camden, Clenard, Ramus, Lilly were;
Here Is language would have non-plust Scaliger.
These and thy travels may in time be seen
By those which stand at Helm, and prime ones been.
Edw. Jorden.

In Authorem.
EAch Science terms of Art has where withal
To express themselves, called Technologicall. Technologicall, a Greek word
compounded of two Greek words, (...), signifies words of Art.

Logic does teach what Pradicables be,
Genus and Species, Pr. 5.
Genus. Species. Diffe^e^tia Propriam. Accidens.

with the other three.
Philosophy, purblind in the first Creation,
Talks of first Matters form, and void Privation.
Geographie teaches how for to define
Tropicks, Meridians, and the Aequators line.
So words of Art belong to Navigations
And ships, which here from thee receive translation;
That now the vntraueld land-man may with ease
Here know the language both of ships and Seas.
I have no Art of words due praise to impart
To thee that thus expound'st these words of Art.
W. S.

In Authorem.
THou which in Sea-learning would Clerk commence,
First learn to read, and after read to learn,
For words to sound, and not to know their sense,
Is for to sail a ship without a Stern.
By this Sea Grammar thou may distinguish
And understand the Lattine by the English.
Here may thou learn the names of all ships geere,
And with their names, their natures, and their use;
To hoise the Sails, and at the Helm to steer;
To know each Shroud, each Rope, each Knot, each Noose,
And by their names to call them every one,
It Is such a Book as may be called Such none.
And yet a Smith thereof the Author is,
And from his Forge alone we have the same,
Who, for his skill in such a work as this,
Does far excel all others of his name:
He Is neither Lock-Smith, Goldsmiths, nor Blacksmith,
But (to give him his right name) he is Iack-Smith.
S.S.

The CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. OF Dockes and their definitions, and what belongs to them. fol. 1
CHAP. II. How to build a Ship, with the definition of all the principal names
of every part of her, and her principal timbers, also how they are fixed one
to another, and the reasons of their use. 2 CHAP. III. How to proportion the
Masts and Yards for a Ship, by her Beam and Keele. 15 CHAP. IIII. The names of
all the Masts, Tops, and Yards belonging to a Ship. 17 CHAP. V. How all the
Tackling and Rigging of a Ship is made fast one to another, with the names and
reasons of their use. 18 CHAP. VI. What does belong to the Boats and Skiffe,
with the definition of all those thirteen Ropes which are only properly called
Ropes belonging to a Ship or a Boat, and their use. 26 CHAP. VII. The names of
all sorts of Anchors, Cables, and Sails, and how they bear their proportions,
with their use. Also how the Ordnance should be placed, and the goods stowed a
Ship. 29 CHAP. VIII. The charge and duty of the Captain of a Ship, and every
office and officer in a man of war. 34 CHAP. IX. Proper Sea terms for
dividing the Company at Sea, and stearing, sailing, and moring a Ship in fair
weather or in a storm. 37 CHAP. X. Proper Sea terms for the Winds, Ebbes,
Floods, and Eddies, with their definitions, and an estimate of the depth of the
Sea, by the height of the Hills and largeness of the Earth. 46 CHAP. XI. Proper
Sea terms belonging to the good or bad condition of Ships, how to find them
and amend them. 52 CHAP. XII. Considerations for a Sea Captain in the choice
of his Ship, and inplacing his Ordnance. In giving Chase, Boording, and entering
a man of war like himself, or a defending Merchant man. 54 CHAP. XIII. How to
manage a fight at Sea, with the proper terms in a fight largely expressed,
and the ordering a Navy at Sea. 59 CHAP. XIV. The names of all sorts of great
Ordnance, and their appurtenances, with their proper terms and expositions,
also diverse observations concerning their shooting, with a Table of proportion
for their weight of metal, weight of powder, weight of shot, and there best at
random and point blanke enlarged. 64 CHAP. XV. How they divide their shares in
a man of War; what Books and Instruments are fit for a Sea man, with diverse
aduertisements for young Gentlemen that intend to follow the Sea, and the use
of the petty Tally. 72
THe Expositions of all the most difficult words seldom used but amongst sea
men: where you find the word in the Margent in that break against it: you
shall find the exposition so plainly and briefly, that any willing capacity may
easily understand them.

A Sea Grammar.
Chap. I. Of Dockes, and their definitions.
A Docke is a great pit or pond, A dry Docke.
or creek by a harbor side, made convenient to work in, with two great
floud-gates built so strong and close, that the Docke may be dry till the ship
be built or repaired, and then being opened, let in the water to float and
lanch her; and this is called a dry Docke. A wet Docke.
A wet Docke is any place, where you may hale in a ship into the oze out of the
tides way, where she may docke her self. A Cradle.
A cradel is a frame of timber, made along a ship, or the side of a gally by
her billidge, for the more ease and safty in lanching, much used in Turkey,
Spain, and Italy. The stocks.
And the stocks are certain framed posts, much of the same nature upon the
shore to build a Pinnace, a Catch, a Frigot, or Boat, etc. To those Dockes for
building belongs their wood-yards, with saw-pits, and all sorts of timber; but
the masts and yards are chained together in some great water to keep them from
rotting, A Crab.
and in season; Also a crab is necessary, which is an engine of wood of three
claws, placed on the ground in the nature of a Capsterne, for the lanching of
ships, or heauing them into the Docke.

CHAP. II. How to build a ship with the definitions of all the principal names
of every part of her principal timbers, also how they are fixed one to
another, and the reasons of their use.
THe first and lowest timber in a ship is the keele, The Keele.
to which is fastened all the rest; this is a great tree or more, hewn to the
proportion of her burden, laid by a right line in the bottom of the docke, or
stocks. At the one end is skarfed into it, The Stem.
the Stem, which is a great timber wrought compassing, and all the butt-ends of
the planks forwards are fixed to it. The Stern.
The Stern post is another great timber, which is let into the keele at the
other end somewhat sloping, The fashion pieces.
and from it does rise the two fashion pieces, like a pair of great horns, to
those are fastened all the plankes that reach to the after end of the ship, but
before you use any plankes, The Rungs.
they lay the Rungs, called floor timbers, or ground timbers, thwart the
keele; through those you cut your Limberholes to bring the water to the well for
the pumpe, The Limberholes
the use of them is when the ship is built to draw in them a long hair rope,
by pulling it from stern to stem, to scowre them, and keep them clean from
choking.

The Floor.
Those ground timbers do give the floor of the ship, being straight, saving at
the ends they begin to compass, and there they are called the Rungheads,
Rungheads.
and does direct the Sweep or Mould of the Foot-hookes and Navel timbers,
Sweep. Mould. Skarfing.
for there does begin the compass and bearing of the ship, those are skarfed
into the ground timbers, which is one piece of wood let into another, or so
much wood cut away from the one as from the other, for when any of those
timbers are not long enough of themselves, they are skarfed in this manner, to
make two or three as one: those next the keele are called the ground
Foot-hookes, Foot-hookes. Keeleson.
the other the upper Foot-hookes; but first lay your keeleson over your floor
timbers, which is another long tree like the keele, and this lying within as
the other without, must be fast bound together with strong iron bolts through
the timber^ and all, and on those are all the upper works raised, when the
Foot-hookes are skarfed, as is said, and well bolted, when they are planked up
to the Orlop they make the ships Howl, and those timbers in general are
called the ships ribs, Howl. Ribs. Sleepers.
because they represent the carcass of any thing has ribs. The sleepers run
before and after on each side the keeleson, on the floor well bolted to the
Foot-hookes, which being thus bound do strengthen each other. Spurkits.
The Spurkits are the spaces betwixt the timbers along the ship side in all
parts, but them in Howl below the Sleepers, are broad boords, which they take
up to clear the Spurkits, if any thing get betwixt the timbers.

The Garbord is the first planke next the keele on the outside, The Garbord.
Garbord struck. Rising timbers.
the Garbord struck is the first seame next the keele, your rising timbers are
the hooks, or ground timbers and foot-hookes placed on the keele, and as they
rise by little and little, so does the run of the ship from the floor, The Run.
which is that part of the ship under water which comes narrower by degrees
from the floor timbers along to the stern post, called the ships way aftward,
for according to her run she will steare well or ill, by reason of the
quickness or slownesse of the water coming to the rudder: now all those
plankes under water, Plankes.
as they rise and are joined one end to another, the fore end is called the
Butt-end in all ships, Butt-ends.
b^t in great ships they are commonly most carefully bolted, for if one of
those ends should spring, or give way it would be a great troublesome danger to
stop such a leake, the other parts of those plankes are made fast which good
Treenailes and Trunnions of well seasoned timber, Treenailes. Tiunnions.
through the timbers or ribs, but those plankes that are fastened into the ships
stem are called whoodings. Whoodings.


The gathering of those works upon the ships quarter under water is called the
Tucke, The Tucke.
if it lie too low it makes her have a fat quarter, and hinders the quick
passage of the water to the rudder; if too high she must be laid out in that
part, else she will want bearing for her after works. The Transome is a timber
lies thwart the stern, Transome.
betwixt the two fashion pieces, and does lay out the breadth of the ship at
the buttockes, Buttocks.
which is her breadth from the Tucke upwards, and according there to her
breadth or narrowness, we say she has a narrow or broad buttocke, the fashion
pieces, before spoke of, are the two outmost timbers, on either side the
stern, excepting the counters. Rake. The Hull.
The ships Rake is so much of her hull as hangs over both ends of the keele, so
much as is forward is said, she rakes so much forward, and so in like manner
aftward: by the hull is meant, the full bulk or body of a ship without masts
or any rigging from the stem to the stern: The Rake forward is near half the
length of the keele, and for the Rake aftward about the forepart of her Rake
forward, but the fore Rake is that which gives the ship good way, and makes her
keep a good wind, but if she have not a full Bow, it will make her pitch her
head much into the Sea, if but a small Rake forward, the sea will meet her so
fast upon the Bows, she will make small way, and if her stern be upright as
it were, she is called Bluffe, Bluffe. Bluffeheaded. Billage.
or Bluffe-headed. A ships Billage is the breadth of the floor when she does
lie aground, and Billage water is that which cannot come to the pumpe, we say
also she is bilged, when she strikes on a rock, an anchors flooke or any thing
that breaks her plankes or timbers, to spring a leake.

When you have berthed or brought her up to the planks, Plankes.
which are those thick timbers which goes fore and aft on each side, whereon
does lie the beams of the first Orlop, Beams. Orlop.
which is the first floor to support the plankes does cover the Howl, those
are great cross timbers, that keeps the ship sides asunder, the maine beam
is ever next the maine mast, where is the ships greatest breadth, the rest from
this is called the first, second, third, fourth, etc. forward or aftward
beams. Great ships have a tier of beams under the Orlop whereon lies no
deck, and great posts and binders called Riders from them to the keele in
howl only to strengthen all. Riders.
But the beams of the Orlop is to be bound at each end with sufficient Knees,
Knees.
which is a crooked piece of wood bowed like a knee, that binds the beams and
foot-hookes, being bolted together, some stand right up and down, some a long
the ship, and are used about all the deckes, some sawed or hewed to that
proportion, but them which grow naturally to that fashion are the best.

Lay the Orlop with good planke according to her proportion* so level as may
be is the best in a man of War, Ports.
because all the Ports may be of such equal height, so that every piece may
serve any Port, Beds.
without making any beds or platformes to raise them, but first bring up your
work as before to the second deck or Orlop, and by the way you may cut your
number of port holes according to the greatness of your ship; Ringbolts.
by them fasten your Ringbolts for the tackles of your Ordnances, you use
Ringbolts also for bringing the plankes and wail^s to the ship side, Set bolts.
and Set bolts for forcing the works and plankes together, Clinch bolts.
Clinch bolts are clinched with a riueting hammer for drawing out. But Rag
bolts are so iaggered that they cannot be drawn out. Rag bolts.
Fore lock bolts has an eye at the end, Fore lock bolts.
whereinto a fore lock of iron is driven to keep it from starting back. Fend
bolts.
Fend bolts are beat into the outside of a ship with the long head to save her
sides from galling against other ships, Drive bolts.
Drive bolts is a long piece of iron to drive out a treenaile, or any such
thing, besides diverse others so useful that without them and long iron spikes
and nails, She was built of Cedar.
nothing can be well done; yet I have known a ship built, has sailed to and
again over the maine Ocean, which had not so much as a nail of iron in her
but only one bolt in her keele.

Clamps.
Now your risings are above the first Orlop as the Clamps are under it, which is
long thick plankes like them, fore and aft on both sides, under the ends of
the Beams and timbers of the second Deck or Orlop, or the third Deck or
Orlop, or the third Deck which is never called by the name of Orlop, Decks. A
half Deck. A quarter Deck. A Flush Deck.
and yet they are all but Decks; also the half Deck and quarter Deck,
whereon the beams, and timbers bear are called risings. A Flush Deck is when
from stem to stern, it lies upon a right line fore and aft which is the best
for a man of War, both for the men to help and succor one another, as for
the using of their arms, or remounting any dismounted piece, because all the
Ports on that Deck are on equal height, which cannot be without beds and much
trouble, A cambered Deck. To sink a Deck. To raise a Deck.
where the Deck does camber or lie compassing. To sink a Deck is to lay it
lower, to raise a Deck to put it higher, but have a care you so cut your Port
holes, one piece lie not right over another for the better bringing them to
your mark.

The half Deck is from the maine mast to the steareage, and the quarter Deck
from that to the Masters Cabin called the round house, which is the utmost of
all, but you must understand all those works are brought up together, as near
equally as may be from bend to bend, Bend, or wail.
or wail to wail, which are the outmost timbers on the ship sides, and are
the chief strength of her sides, to which the foot-hookes, beams, Chain
wail.
and knees, are bolted, and are called the first, second, and third Bend; but
the chain wail is a broad timber set out amongst them, a little above where
the chains and shrouds are fastened together to spread the shrouds the wider
the better to succor the masts. Thus the sides and Deckes are wrought till you
come at the Gunwaile, Gun wail.
which is the vpmost wail goes about the vpmost struck or or seame of the
vpmost Deck about the ships waste, and the ships quarter is from the maine
mast aftward. The ships quarters. Culuertailed. Carlings.


Culuertailed is letting one timber into another in such sort that they cannot
slip out, as the Carling ends are fixed in the beams, and Carlings are
certain timbers lies along the ship from beam to beam, on those the ledges
doerest whereunto the plankes of the Deckes are fastened. Carling knees.
The Carling knees are also timbers comes thwart the ship from the sides of the
Hatches way, betwixt the two masts, and bears up the Deck on both sides, and
on their ends lies the commings of the hatches, Commings.
which are those timbers and plankes which bears them up higher than the
Deckes, to keep the water from running down at the hatches; also they fit
Loopholes in them for the close fights, Loopholes.
and they are likewise a great ease for men to stand upright if the Deckes
below. Hatches way.
The Hatches way is when they are open where the goods are lowered that way
right down into the howl, and the hatches are like trap doors in the midst
of the Deckes, before the maine mast, by certain rings, to take up or lay
down at your pleasure.

A scuttle-hatch is a little hatch does cover a little square hole we call the
Scuttle, A Scuttle.
where but one man alone can go down into the ship, there are in diverse
places of the ship whereby men pass from Deck to Deck, and there is also
small Scuttles grated, to give light to them betwixt Deckes, and for the smoke
of Ordnances to pass away by. The Ramshead is a great block wherein is three
shiuers into which are passed the halyards, Ramshead.
and at the end of it in a hole is reued the ties, and this is only belonging
to the fore and and maine halyards; to this belong the fore Knight, The fore
Knight.
and the maine Knight, The main Knight
upon the second Deck fast bolted to the Beams. They are two short thick
pieces of wood, commonly carved with the head of a man upon them, in those are
four shiuers apeece, three for the halyards and one for the top rope to run
in, and Kneuels are small pieces of wood nailed to the inside of the ship,
Kneuels.
to belay the sheats and rackes unto. Capstaine.


The Capstaine is a great piece of wood stands upright upon the Deck, abaft
the maine mast, the foot standing in a step upon the lower deck, and is in the
nature of a windis, to wind, or weigh up the anchors, sails, top masts,
ordnances, or any thing it is framed in diverse squares, with holes through them,
Capstaine bars.
through which you put your Capstaine bars, for as many men as can stand at
them to thrust it about, and is called manning the Capstaine. The maine body of
it is called the Spindle. The Spindle. Whelps.
The Whelps are short pieces of wood made fast to it, to keep the Cable from
coming too high in the turning about; Paul.
The Paul is a short piece of iron made fast to the Deck, resting upon the
whelps to keep the Capstaine from recoiling which is dangerous, but in great
ships they have two, the other standing in the same manner betwixt the fore
mast and the maine, to heave upon the Ieare rope, Ieare Capstaine.
and is called the Ieare Capstaine, to strain any rope, or hold off by, when
we way Anchor, to heave a head, or upon the violl, which is when an Anchor is
in stiff ground we cannot weigh it, or the Sea goes so high the maine
Capstaine cannot purchase in the Cable, then we take a Hawser opening one end,
and so puts into it Nippers some seven or eight sadome distant from each other
wherewith we bind the Hawser to the Cable, and so brings it to the Ieare
Capstaine to heave upon it, and this will purchase more than the maine
Capstaine can. The violl.
The violl is fastened together at both ends with an eye or two, with a wall
knot and seized together. A windas.
A windas is a square piece of timber, like a Role before the fore Castle in
small ships, and forced about with handspikes for the same use as is the
Capstaine.

The Pumpe.
What are the parts of a pumpe you may see in every place, The Brake.
the handle we call the brake, the pumpes can, is a great can we power water
into pumps to make it pumpe. The Can. The Daile.
The daile is a trough wherein the water does run over the Deckes; Chained
Pumps.
But in great ships they use chained pumps which will go with more ease, and
deliver more water. A Bur Pump.
The Dutch men use a Burre pumpe by the ship side, wherein is only a long
staff with a Burre at the end, like a Gunners sponge, to pumpe up the Billage
water that by reason of the breadth of the ships floor cannot come to the well:
In pumping they use to take spells, that is, fresh men to relieve them, and
count how many strokes they pumpe each watch, whereby they know if the ship be
stanch, or thite, or how her leakes increase. The Pumpe sucks, The Pumpe sucks
is when the water being out, it draws up nothing but froth and wind. They
have also a little Pumpe made of a Cane, a little piece of hollow wood or
Latten like an Elder gun, A bear Pumpe.
to pumpe the Beer or Water out of the Caske, for at Sea we use no Taps, and
then staue the Caske to make more room, and packeth the Pipe-staues or boords
up as close as may be in other Caske till they use them.

The Skuppers are little holes close to all the Decks through the Ships sides,
The Skuppers.
whereat the water does run out when you pumpe or wash the Decks;
Skupper-leathers.
the Skupper-leathers are nailed over those holes upon the lower Deck to keep
out the Sea from coming in, yet give they way for it to run out:
Skupper-nailes.
Skupper nails are little short ones with broad heads, made purposely to nail
the Skupper-leathers, The Waist.
and the cotes of Masts and Pumps. The Waist is that part of the Ship betwixt
the maine Mast and the fore-castle, and the Waist boords are set up in the
Ships waist, Waist boords.
betwixt the Gun-waile and the waist trees, Waist trees.
but they are most used in Boats, set up along their sides to keep the Sea
from breaking in.

There are usually three Ladders in a Ship; The entering Ladder.
the entering Ladder is in the Waist, made formally of wood, and another out of
the Gallery made of Ropes to go into the boat by in foul weather, Gallery
Ladder.
and the third at the Beak-head, made fast over the Boulspret to get upon it,
Boultspret Ladder.
only used in great Ships.

It were not amiss now to remember the Fore-castle, The Fore-castle.
being as useful a place as the rest, this is the forepart of the Ship above
the Decks over the Bow; Bow.
there is a broad Bow and a narrow Bow, so called according to the broadnes or
the thinness: the Bow is the broadest part of the Ship before, compassing the
Stem to the Loufe, Loufe.
which reaches so far as the Bulk-head of the Fore-castle extends. Against
the Bow is the first breach of the Sea, if the Bow be too broad, she will
seldom carry a Bone in her mouth or cut a feather, Cut a feather.
that is, to make a foam before her: where a well bowed Ship so swiftly
presses the water, as that it foameth, and in the dark night sparkleth like
fire. If the Bow be too narrow, as before is said, she pitcheth her head into
the Sea, so that the mean is the best if her after way be answerable. The
Hauses are those great round holes before, Hauses.
under the Beak-head, where commonly is used the Cables when you come to an
Anchor, the bold or high Hause is the best, for when they lie low in any great
sea, they will take in very much water, the which to keep out, they build a
circle of planke either abaft or before the maine Mast called the Manger:
Manger.
and a Hause-plug at Sea, now the Fore-castle does cover all those being built
up like a half deck, to which is fixed the Beake-head, Prow.
and the Prow is the Deck abaft the Fore-castle, whereon lies the Prow pieces.

The Beak-head.
The Beak-head is without the ship before the fore Castle, supported by the
maine knee, fastened into the stem, all painted and carved as the stern, and
of great use, as well for the grace and countenance of the ship, as a place for
men to ease themselves in. To it is fastened the collar of the maine stay, and
the fore tacks there brought aboard; also the standing for rigging and trimming
the spretesaile gear, Comb.
under the midest of it is the Comb, which is a little piece of wood with two
holes in it to bring the fore tacks aboard. Bits.
The Bits are two great pieces of timber, and the Crospeece goes through them,
Crospeece.
they are ordinarily placed abaft the Manger in the ships loose, to belay the
Cable thereto when you ride at Anchor: Their lower parts are fastened to the
Riders, but the middle part in great ships are bolted to two great beams
cross to the Bows, and yet in extraordinary storms we are glad to make fast
the Cable to the maine M^st for strengthening of the Bits and safety of the
Bows, which have in great storms been torn from the ships. David.
The David is a short piece of timber, at the end whereof in a notch they hang
a block in a strap called the Fish-block, Fish-block.
by which they hale up the flook of the Anchor to the Ships bow, Cat.
it is put out betwixt the Cat and the Loufe, and to be removed when you
please. The Cat is also a short piece of timber aloft right over the Hawse; in
the end it has two shiuers in a bloc^e, wherein is reeued a Rope, to which is
fastened a great hook of Iron, to trice up the Anchor from the Hawse to the top
of the fore-castle.

A Bulks head is like a seeling or a wall of boords thwart the Ship, as the
Gunroome, the great Cabin, the bread room, A Bulkes head.
the quarter Deck, or any other such division: but them which does make close
the fore-castle, and the half Deck, the Mariners call the Cubbridge heads,
Cubbridge head.
wherein are placed murderers, and abaft Falcons, Falconets, or Rabinits to
clear the Decks fore and aft so well as upon the ships sides, to defend the
ship and offend an enemy. Sockets.
Sockets are the holes wherein the pintels of the murderers or fowlers go
into. The hollow arching betwixt the lower part of the Gallery and the
Transome, is called the lower Counter; Low Counter. Upper Counter.
the upper Counter is from the Gallery to the arch of the round house, Brackets.
and the Brackets are little carved knees to support the Galleries.

The Stearage room, is before the great Cabin, The Stearage. Great Cabin.
where he that steareth the Ship does always stand, before him is a square box
nailed together with wooden pinnes, called a Bittacle, because iron nails
would attract the Compass; Bittacle.
this is built so close, The Compass.
that the Lamp or Candle only shows light to the stearage, and in it always
stands the Compass, which every one knows is a round box, and in the midst of
the bottom a sharp pin called a Center whereon the Fly does play, which is a
round piece of pace-boord, with a small wire under it touched with the
Lodestone, in the midst of it is a little brass Cap that does keep it level
upon the Center. On the upper part is painted 32. points of the Compass
covered with glass to keep it from dust, breaking, or the wind; this Box does
hang in two or three brass circles, so fixed they give such way to the moving
of the Ship that still the Box will stand steady: there is also a dark
Compass, A dark Compass. A Compass for Variation.
and a Compass for the variation, yet they are but as the other, only the
dark Compass has the points black and white, and the other only touched
for the true North and South. Upon the Bittacle is also the Trauas, The Trauas.
which is a little round board full of holes upon lines like the Compass, upon
which by the removing of a little stick they keep an account, how many
glasses (which are but half hours) they steare upon every point. The
Whip-staffe is that piece of wood like a strong staff the Stearsman or
Helmesman has always in his hand, The Whip-staffe
going through the Roll, The Roll.
and then made fast to the Tiller with a Ring.

The Tiller.
The Tiller is a strong piece of wood made fast to the Rudder, Rudder.
which is a great timber somewhat like a Planke, made according to the burden
of the ship, and hung at the stern upon hooks and hinges, Pintels. Gudgions
or Rudder-Irons. The Gun-roome.
they call Pintels and Gudgions, or Rudder-irons. The Tiller plays in the
Gun-roome over the Ordnances by the Whip-staffe; whereby the Rudder is so
turned to and fro as the Helmesman pleases, and the Cat holes are over the
Ports, Catholes.
right with the Capstaine as they can, to heave the Ship a stern by a Cable or
a Hauser called a sterne-fast. On each side the Stearage room are diverse
Cabins, as also in the great Cabin, the quarter Deck, and the round house,
with many convenient seats or Lockers to put any thing in, Lockers.
as in little Cupberts.

The bread-roome.
The Bread-roome is commonly under the Gun-roome, well dried or plated. The
Cook-roome where they dress their victual may be placed in diverse places of
the Ship, Cooke-roome.
as sometimes in the Hold, but that often spoileth the victual by reason of the
heat, but commonly in Merchantmen it is in the Fore-castle, especially being
contrived in Fornaces; besides in a chase their Stern is that part of the ship
they most use in fight, but in a man of war they fight most with their Prow,
and it is very troublesome to the use of his Ordnance, and very dangerous lying
over the Powder-roome, some do place it over the Hatches way, but that as the
Stewards room are ever to be contrived according to the Ships imploiment, etc.
Calking.
Calking is beating Okum into every seame or betwixt planke and planke, Okum.
and Okum is old Ropes torn in pieces like Towze Match, or Hurds of Flax,
which being close beat into every seame with a calking Iron and a Maller,
Calking-Iron.
which is a hammer of wood and an iron chissell, Paying.
being well paid over with hot pitch, does make her more thight than it is
possible; by joining Planke to Planke. Grauing is only under water, Grauing.
a white mix ure of Tallow, Soap and Brimstone; or Trainoile, Rosin, and
Brimstone boiled together, is the best to preserve her calking and make her
glib or slippery to pass the water; and when it is decayed by weeds, or
Barnacles, Barnacles, or Worms.
which is a kind of fish like a long red worm, will eat through all the
Plankes if she be not sheathed, which is as casing the Hull under water with
Tar, and Hair, close covered over with thin boords fast nailed to the Hull,
which though the Worm pierce, Brooming or Breaming.
she cannot endure the Tar. Breaming her, is but washing or burning of all the
filth with reeds or broom, either in a dry dock or upon her Careene, which is,
Careene.
to make her so light as you may bring her to lie on the one side so much as
may be in the calmest water you can, but take head you ouerset her not; and
this is the best way to Breame Ships of great burden, or ^liose have but 4.
sharp Flores for fear of brusing or ouersetting. Parsling.
Parsling is most used upon the Decks and half Decks; which is, to take a list
of Canuas so long as the seame is you would parsell, being first well calked,
then power hot pitch upon it, and it will keep out the water from passing the
seames. There remains nothing now as I can remember to the building the Hull
of a Ship, nor the definition of her most proper terms, but only s^eling the
Cabins and such other parts as you please, and to bind an end with all things
fitting for the Sea, as you may read in the Covenants betwixt the Carpenter
and the Owner, which are thus.

Notes for a Covenant between the Carpenter and the Owner.
If you would have a Ship built of 400. Tuns, she requires a planke of 4.
inches: if 300. Tuns, 3. inches: small Ships 2. inches, but none less. For
clamps, middle bands and sleepers, they be all of six inch planke for binding
within. The rest for the sparring up of the works of square three inch planke.
Lay the beams of the Orlope, if she be 400. Tuns at ten foot deep in howl,
and all the beams to be bound with two knees at each end, and a stardard knee
at every beams end upon the Orlope, all the Orlope to be laid with square
three inch planke, and all the plankes to be treenailed to the beams.

Six foot would be between the beams of the Deck and Orlope, and ten ports on
each side upon the lower Orlope, all the binding between them should be with
three inch or two inch planke, and the upper Deck should be laid with so many
beams as are fitting with knees to bind them; laying that Deck with spruce
Deal of thirty foot long, the sap cut off, and two inches thick, for it is
better than any other.

Then for the Captains Cabben or great Cabben, the Stearage, the half Deck,
the Round house, the Fore-castle, and to bind an end with the Capsterne and
all things fitting for the Sea, the Smiths work, the caruing, joining, and
painting excepted, are the principal things I remember to be observed, for a
Charter-party betwixt the Merchant, the Master, and the Owner, you have
Presidents of all sorts in most Scriueners shops.

CHAP. III. How to proportion the Masts and Yards for a Ship, by her Beam and
Keele.
WHen a ship is built, she should be masted, A Ship ouermasted.
wherein is a great deal of experience to be used so well as art; for if you
ouermast her, either in length or bigness, she will lie too much down by a
wind, and labor too much a hull, and that is called a Taunt-mast, but if
either too small or too short, Taunt-masted.
she is under masted or low masted, Vnder-masted.
and cannot bear so great a sail as should give her her true way. For a man
of war, a well ordered Taunt-mast is best, but for a long voyage, a short
Mast will bear more Canuasse, and is less subject to bear by the board:
Their Rules are diverse, because no Artist can build a Ship so truly to
proportion, neither set her Masts, but by the trial of her condition, they may
be impaired or amended: suppose a Ship of 300. An example.
Tons be 29. foot at the Beam, if her maine Mast be 24. inches diameter, the
length of it must be 24. yards, for every inch in thickness is allowed a yard
in length, and the fore Mast 22. inches in thickness, must be 22. yards in
length; your Bowl spret both in length and thickness must be equal to the
^ore Mast, the Misen 17. yards in length, and 17. inches diameter.

But the Rule most used is to take the parts of the breadth of the Ship, and
multiply that by three, The rule most used.
will give you so many foot as your maine Mast should be in length, the
bigness or thickness will bear it also, allowing an inch for a yard; but if
it be a made Mast, A made Mast, or an arm Mast.
that is greater than one Tree, it must be more: for example, suppose the Ships
breadth 30. foot, four fifts of 30. foot are 24. foot, so you find the maine
Mast must be 24. yards long, for every yard is 3. foot and 24. inches through,
allowing an inch to every yard. The fore Mast is to be in length of the maine
Mast, which will be 20. yards wanting one part of a yard, and 20. inches
through. The Boulspret must ever be equal with the fore Mast. The misen Mast
half the length of the maine Mast, which will be 12. yards long, and 12.
inches diameter. Now as you take the proportion of the Masts from the Beam or
breadth of the Ships, so do you the length of the yards from the Keele.

The Steps.
These Masts have each their steps in the Ship, and their partners at every
Deck where through they pass to the Keele, Partners.
being strong timbers bolted to the Beams in circling the Masts, to keep them
steady in their steps fast wedged for rolling; yet some ships will not sail so
well as when it does play a little, but that is very dangerous in foul weather.
Their Cotes are p^eces of torred Canuas, Cotes. Tarpawling.
or a Tarpawling put about them and the Rudder to keep the water out. At the
top of the fore Mast and maine Mast are spliced cheeks, Cheeks.
or thick clamps of wood, through which are in each two holes called the
Hounds, The Hounds.
wherein the Ties do run to hoise the yards, but the top Mast has but one
hole or hound, The Cap.
and one tie. Every Mast also has a Cap if a top; which is a piece of square
timber with a round hole in it to receive the top Masts or Flag-staffe, to
keep them steady and strong, left they be borne by the board in a stiff gale.
The Crosse-trees are also at the head of the Masts, Cross-trees.
one let into another cross, Tressel-trees.
and strongly bolted with the Tressell trees, to keep up the top Masts which
are fastened in them, and those are at the tops of each Mast; all the Masts
stand upright but the Boulspret which lies along over the Beak-head, and that
timber it rests on is called the Pillow. Pillow.


An example of the Yards by the Keele.
Now for the yards, suppose the ship be 76. foot at the Keele, her maine yard
must be 21. yards in length, and in thickness but 17. inches. The fore Yard
19. yards long, and 15. inches diameter or thick. The spret-saile Yard 16.
yards long, and but nine inches thick, and your Misen-yard so long as the
Mast, the top yards bears half proportion to the maine, and fore yard, and
the top gallants, the half to them, but this rule is not absolute; for if your
Masts be taunt, your yards must be the shorter; if a low Mast, the longer, but
this is supposed the best. To have the maine Yard ^ parts of her Keele in
length: the top Yard of the maine Yard, and the maine Yard for bigness parts
of an inch, for a yard in length. The length of the fore Yard ^ of the maine
Yard; the Crosse^acke Yard and Spretsaile Yard to be of a length; but you must
allow the Misen Yard and Spretsaile Yard inch of thickness to a yard in
length. But to give a true Arithmeticall and Geometrical proportion for the
building of all sorts of Ships, were they all built after one mould, as also of
their Masts, Yards, Cables, Cordage, and Sails, were all the stuff of like
goodness, a methodicall rule as you see might be proiected: but their
lengths, bredths, depths, rakes and burdens are so variable and different,
that nothing but experience can possibly teach it.

CHAP. IIII. The names of all the Masts, Tops, and Yards belonging to a Ship.
THe Boul-spret, the Spretsaile yard, the Spretsaile topmast; the Spretsaile
top sail yard; the fore Mast, the fore yard, the fore topmast, the fore
top-saile yard, the fore top gallant Mast, the fore top gallant sail yard,
Cores, Wouldings, Gromits, and, Staples for all yards. The maine Mast, the
maine Yard, the Maine Top. The maine top Mast; the maine top-saile Yard. The
top gallant Mast, the maine top gallant sail Yard. The Trucke is a square
piece of wood at the top wherein you put the Flag-staffe. The Misen, the Misen
Yard, the Misen top mast, the Misen top sail yard. The Cross Jack. In great
ships they have two Misens, the latter is called the Bonauenture Misen. A Jury
Mast, that is, when a Mast is borne by the board, with Yards, Roofes, Trees, or
what they can, spliced or fished together they make a Iury-mast, woulding or
binding them with ropes fast triced together with handspikes, as they use to
would or bind any Mast or Yard.

CHAP. V. How all the Tackling and Rigging of a Ship is made fast one to
another, with their names, and the reasons of their use.
Riggage or Cordage.
THe rigging a Ship, is all the Ropes or Cordage belonging to the Masts and
Yards; A Mast well rigged.

A Yard well rigged.


and it is proper to say, The Mast is well rigged, or the Yard is well rigged,
that is, when all the Ropes are well sised to a true proportion of her burden.
We say also, when they are too many or too great, Over rigged.
she is ouer-rigged, and does much wrong a Ship in her sailing; for a small
weight aloft, is much more in that nature than a much greater below, and the
more upright any Ship goes, the better she saileth.

All Masts have stays except one.

A Collar. A Lannier.


All the Masts, Top-masts, and Flag-staues have stays, excepting the Spret
saile-top Mast, the Maine Masts stay is made fast by a Lannier to a Collar,
which is a great Rope that comes about the head and Boulspret, the other end to
the head of the maine Mast. The maine top-Masts stay is fastened to the head of
the fore Mast by a strop and a dead man's eye. Dead men's eyes.
The maine top-gallant Masts stay in like manner to the head of the fore
Topmast. The fore Masts and stays belonging to them in like manner are
fastened to the Boulspret, and Spretsaile Topmast, and those stays do help
to stay the Boulspret. The Misen stays do come to the maine Mast, and the
Misen Topmast stays to the shrouds with Crowes-feet: Crowes-feet.
the use of those stays are to keep the Masts from falling aftwards, or too
much forwards. Those Lanniers are many small Ropes recued into the dead men's
eyes of all shrouds, either to slaken them or set them taught; also all the
stays have their blocks, and dead men's eyes have Lanniers. Dead men's eyes are
blocks, some small, some great, with many holes but no shiuers, the Crowes-feet
re^ued ^horow them are a many of small lines, sometimes 6.8. or 10. but of
small use more than for fashion to make the Ship show full of small Ropes.
Blocks or Pullies are thick pieces of wood having shiuers in them, Blocks or
Pullies. Shiuers.
which is a little Wheel fixed in the midst with a Cock or Pin, A Cock.
some are Brass, but the most of Wood, whereon all the running Ropes do
run, some are little, some great, Running ropes.
with 3.4. or 5. shiuers in them, and are called by the names of the Ropes
whereto they serve. There are also double blocks, Double blocks.
that where there is use of much strength will purchase with much ease, but not
so fast as the other, and when we hale any Tackle or Haleyard to which two
blocks do belong, when they meet, we call that block and block. Block and
block.


The Shrouds are great Ropes which go up either sides of all Masts. All Masts
have Shrouds, etc.
The Misen maine Mast fore Mast shrouds have as their lower ends dead men's eyes
seized into them, and are set up taught by Lanniers to the chains; at the
other end, over the heads of those Masts are pendants, for Tackels and Swifters
under them. The top-Masts shrouds in like manner are fastened with Lanniers and
dead men's eyes to the Puttocks or plats of iron belonging to them, aloft over
the head of the Mast as the other: Chains.
and the Chains are strong plates of iron fast bolted into the Ships side by
the Chaine-waile. When the Shrouds are too stiff, we say, ease them, To Ease.
Taught.
when too slack, we say, set Taught the Shrouds, but the Boulspret has no
Shrouds, and all those small ropes do cross the Shrouds like steps are called
Ratlings. Ratlings. Puttocks.
The Puttocks go from the Shrouds of the fore Mast, maine Mast or Misen, to
go off from the Shrouds into the Top, Cap, or Bowl, which is a round thing at
the head of either Mast for men to stand in, for when the Shrouds come near
the top of the Mast, they fall in so much, that without the Puttocks you could
not get into the Top, and in a manner they are a kind of a Shroud. Pendants.
A Pendant is a short rope made fast at one end to the head of the Mast or the
Yards arm, having at the other end a block with a shiuer to reeue some
running rope in, as the Pendants of the back stays and Tackles hang a little
down on the inside of the Shrouds: all Yards-armes have them but the Misen,
into which the Braces are reeued, and also there are Pendants or Streamers hang
from the yards arms, made of Taffa^y, or colored flanell cloth to beautify
the Ship only: Parrels.
Parrels are little round Balls called Trucks, and little pieces of wood called
ribs, Ribs.
and ropes which do incircle the Masts, and so made fast to the Yards, that
the Yards may slip up and down easily upon the Masts, and with the help of
the Brest-rope does keep the Yard close to the Mast. Brest-ropes. Standing
ropes.
The standing ropes are the shrouds and stays, because they are not removed,
except it be to be eased or set taughter.

The Tackles or ropes run in three parts, The Tackles are of diverse sorts,
etc.
having a Pendant with a block at the one end, and a block with a hook at
the other, to heave any thing in or out of the ship; they are of diverse sorts,
as the Botes tackles made fast the one to the fore shrouds, the other to the
maine, to hoise the Boat in or out: also the tackles that keep firm the Masts
from straying. The Gunners tackles for haling in or out the Ordnances: but the
winding tackle is the greatest, which is a great double block with three
shiuers to the end of a small Cable about the head of the Mast, and serves as
a Pendant. To which is made fast a Guy, A Guy.
which is a rope brought to it from the fore mast, to keep the weight upon it
steady, or from swinging to and again* Into the block is reeued a hawser,
which is also reeued through another double block, having a strop at the end of
it; which put through the eye of the slings is locked into it with a fid, and so
hoise the goods in or out by the help of the Snap-blocke.

Cat harpings are small ropes run in little blocks from one side of the ship
to the other, Cat harpings.
near the upper deck to keep the shrouds tight for the more safety of the
mast from rolling. The Halyards belong to all masts, Halyards.
for by them we hoise the yards to their height, The Ties.
and the Ties are the ropes by which the yards do hang, and do carry up the
yards when we strain the Halyards; the maine yard and fore yard ties are
first reeued through the Rams head, then through the Hounds, with a turn in the
eye of the slings which are made fast to the yard; the missen yard and top yard
have but single Ties, that is, one does but run in one part, but the Spretsaile
yard has none, for it is made fast with a pair of slings to the boltspret. A
Horse.
A Horse is a rope made fast to the fore mast shrouds, and the Spretsaile
sheats, to keep those sheats clear of the anchor flookes.

To sling is to make fast any caske, yard, ordnances, To Sling. Slings.
or the like in a pair of Slings, and Slings are made of a rope spliced at
either end into it self with one eye at either end, so long as to be
sufficient to receive the caske, the middle part of the rope also they seize
together, and so makes another eye to hitch the hook of the tackle, another
sort are made much longer for the hoising of ordnances, another is a chain of
iron to Sling or bind the yards fast aloft to the crossetre^s in a ^ight, left
the ties should be cut, and so the mast must fall. Canhookes.
The Canhookes are two hooks fastened to the end of a rope with a noose, like
this the Brewers use to ^^^^g or carry their barrels on, and those serve also
to take in or out hog heads, or any other commodities. A Parbunkell.
A Parbunkel is two ropes that have at each end a noose or lump that being
crossed, you may set any vessel that has but one head upon them, bringing but
the loopes over the upper end of the caske, fix but the tackle to them, and
then the vessel will stand strait in the midst to heave out, or take in
without spilling.

Puddings.
Puddings are ropes nailed round to the yards arms close to the end, a pretty
distance one from another, to save the Robbins from galling upon the yards, or
to serve the anchors ring to save the clinch of the cable from galling. Robbins.
And the Robbins are little lines reeued into the eylet holes of the sail
under the head ropes, to make fast the sail to the yard, for in stead of
tying, sea men always say, Headlines.
make fast. Head lines, are the ropes that make all the sails fast to the yard.

Furling lines.
Furling lines are small lines made fast to the top sail, top gallant sail, A
smiting line.
and the missen yards arms. The missen has but one called the smiting line,
the other on each side one, and by these we farthell or bind up the sails.
Brales.
The Brales are small ropes reeued through Blocks seized on each side the ties,
and come down before the sail, and at the very skirt are fastened to the
Creengles, with them we furle or farthell our sails acrosse, and they belong
only to the two courses and the missen: to hale up the Brales, or brale up the
sail, Creengles.
is all one; Creengles are little ropes spliced into the Bolt-ropes of all
sails belonging to the maine and fore mast, to which the bolings bridles are
made fast, and to hold by when we shake off a Bonnet.

Bolt ropes.
Boltropes is that rope is sowed about every sail, soft and gently twisted, for
the better sowing and handling the sails. Bunt lines.
Bunt lines is but a small rope made fast to the midst of the Boltrope to a
creengle reeued through a small block which is seized to the yard, to trice or
draw up the Bunt of the sail, Clew Garnet.
when you farthell or make it up. The Clew garnet is a rope made fast to the
clew of the sail, and from thence runs in a block seized to the middle of
the yard, which in furling does hale up the clew of the sail close to the
middle of the yard, Clew line.
and the clew line is the same to the top s^iles top gallant and spret sails,
as the Clew garnet is to the maine and foresailes. The Clew of a sail is the
lowest corner next the Sheat and Tackes, A Clew.
and stretches somewhat goaring or sloping from the square of the sail, and
according to the Goaring she is said to spread a great or a little clew.
Goaring. Tackes.
Tackes are great ropes which having a wall-knot at one end seized into the
clew of the sail, and so reeued first through the chestres, and then comes in
at a hole in the ships sides, this does carry forward the clew of the sail to
make it stand close by a wind. Sheats.
The Sheats are bent to the clews of all sails, in the low sails they hale
aft the clew of the sails, but in top sails they serve to hale them home,
that is, to bring the clew close to the yards arm. The Braces belong to all
yards but the missen, every yard has two reeued at their ends through two
pendants, Braces.
and those are to square the yards, or trauasse them as you please. The Boling
is made fast to the leech of the sail about the midst to make it stand the
sharper or closer by a wind, Boling.
it is fastened by two, three, or four ropes like a crows foot to as many
parts of the sail which is called the Boling bridles, Boling bridles.
only the missen Boling is fastened to the lower end of the yard, this rope
belongs to all sails except the Spretsaile, and Spret-saile Top-saile, which
not having any place to hale it forward by, they cannot use those sails by a
wind: sharp the maine Boling is to hall it taught: Sharp the Boling.

Ch^cke the Boling.

Lee fanng.


hale up the Boling is to pull it harder forward on: check or ease the Boling
is to let it be more slicke.

Lee fanngs is a rope reeued into the creengles of the courses, when we would
hale in the bottom of the sail, to lash on a bonnet or take in the sail;
Reeuing.
and Reeuing is but drawing a rope through a block or oylet to run up and
down. Leech lines.
Leech lines are small ropes made fast to the Leech of the top-sailes, for they
belong to no other; and are reeued into a block at the yard close by the
top-saile ties, to hale in the Leech of the sail when you take them in. Leech
of a sail.
The Leech of a sail is the outward side of a skirt of a sail, from the
earing to the clew; Earings.
and the Earing is that part of the bunt rope which at all the four corners of
the sail is left open as it were a ring. The two vpmost parts are put over the
ends of the yards arms, and so made fast to the yards, and the lowermost are
seized or Bent to the sheats, Bent.
and tackes into the clew. Lifts.
The Lifts are two ropes which belong to all yards arms, to top the yards;
that is, to make them hang higher or lower at your pleasure. But the top-saile
Lifts do serve for sheats to the top gallant yards, the haling them is called
the Topping the Lifts, Topping the Lifts. Legs.
as top a starboard, or top a port.

Legs.
Legs are small ropes put through the bolt ropes of the maine and fore sail,
near to a foot in length, spliced each end into the other in the leech of the
sail, having a little eye whereunto the martnets are fastened by two hitches,
Martnet.
and the end seized into the standing parts of the martners, which are also
small lines like crow feet reeued through a block at the top mast head, and so
comes down by the mast to the deck; but the top-saile martnets are made fast
to the head of the top gallant mast, and comes but to the top, where it is
haled and called the top marnets, they serve to bring that part of the leech
next the yards arm up close to the yard, Latchets.
Latchets are small lines sowed in the Bonnets and Drablers like loops to lash
or make fast the Bonnet to the course, Lashing.

The Loose hook.


or the course to the Drabler, which we call lashing the Bonnet to the course,
or the Drabler to the Bonnet. The Loose hook is a tackle with two hooks, one
to hitch into a chingle of the maine, or fore sail, in the bolt rope in the
leech of the sail by the cl^w, Bouse.
and the other to strap spliced to the chestres to bouse or pull down the
sail to succor the tackes in a stiff gale of wind, A Bonnet.

A Drabler.

A Course.


or take off or put on a Bonnet or a Drabler, which are two short sails to
take off or put to the fore course or the maine, which is the fore sail, or
maine sail.

A Knaue-line.
The Knaue-line is a rope has one end fastened to the cross trees, and so
comes down by the ties to the R^ms head, to which is seized a small piece of
wood some two foot long with a hole in the end, whereunto the line is reeued,
and brought to the ships side, and h^led taught to the Railes to keep the ties
and Halyards from turning about one another when they are new. Knettels are two
rope yarnes twisted together, and a knot at each end, Knettels.
whereunto to sease a block, a rope, or the like. Rope yarnes.
Rope yarnes are the yarnes of any rope untwisted, they serve to sarue small
ropes, or make Sinnet, Mats, Plats, or Caburnes, and make up the sails at the
yards arms.

Sinnet is a string made of rope yarne commonly of two, four, six, Sinnet.
eight or nine strings platted in three parts, which being beat flat they use
it to sarue ropes or Mats. That which we call a Panch, are broad clouts, Mats
or Panch.
wouen of Thrums and Sinnet together, to save things from galling about the
maine and fore yards at the ties, and also from the masts, and upon the
Boltspret, Louse, Beakehead or Gunwaile to save the clewes of the sails from
galling or fretting. Caburne.
Caburne is a small line made of spun yarne to make a bend of two Cables, or to
sease the Tackels, Seasing.
or the like. Seasing is to bind fast any ropes together, with some small rope
yarne. Marline is any line, to a block, or any tackell, Pendant, Garnet, or
the like. There is also a rope by which the Boat does ride by the ships side,
Seasen.

Sarue or Siruis.


which we call a Seasen. To sarue any rope with plats or Sinnet, is but to lay
Sinnet, Spun yarne, Rope yarne, or a piece of Canuas upon the rope, and then
roll it fast to keep the rope from galling about the shrowds at the head of
the masts, the Cable in the Hawse, the flooke of the Anchor, Spunyarne.
the Boat rope or any thing. Spunyarne is nothing but rope yarne made small at
the ends, Caskets.
and so spun one to another so long as you will with a winch. Also Caskets are
but small ropes of Sinnet made fast to the gromits or rings upon the yards, the
longest are in the midst of the yards betwixt the ties, and are called the
breast Caskets, hanging on each side the yard in small lengths, only to bind up
the sail when it is furled.

Marling is a small line of untwisted hemp, Marling.
very pliant and well tarred, to sease the ends of Ropes from raueling out, or
the sides of the blocks at their arses, or if the sail r^ntout of the
Boltrope, they will make it fast with marlin till they have leisure to mend it.
Marling spike.
The marling spike, is but a small piece of iron to splice ropes together, or
open the bolt rope when you sew the sail. Splicing.
Splicing is so to let one ropes end into another they shall be as fitme as if
they were but one rope, A round Splice.

A cut Splice.


and this is called a round Splice; but the cut Splice is to let one into
another with as much distance as you will, and yet be strong, and undo when
you will. Now to make an end of this discourse with a knot, A Knot.
you are to know, A Wall knot.
Seamen use three, the first is called the Wall knot, which is a round knob,
so made with the strouds or lays of a rope, it cannot slip; the Sheates,
Takes, and Stoppers use this knot. A Boling knot.
The Boling knot is also so firmly made and fastened by the bridles into the
creengles of the sails, they will break, or the sail split before it will
slip. The last is the Shepshanke, which is a knot they cast upon a Runner or
Tackle when it is too long to take in the goods, Sheepshanks Knot.
and by this knot they can shorten a rope without cutting it, as much as they
lift, and presently undo it again, and yet never the worse.

CHAP. VI. What does belong to the Boats and Skiffe with the definition of all
those thirteen Ropes which are only properly called Ropes belonging to a ship
and the Boat and their use.
OF Boats there are diverse sorts, but those belonging to ships, A long Boat.
are called either the long Boat or ships Boat, which should be able to weigh
her sheat anchor, those will live in any reasonable sea, especially the long
Boat; A Shallop.

A Skiffe.


great ships have also other small Boats called Shallops and Skiffes, which are
with more ease and less trouble rowed to and again upon any small occasion.
To a Boat belongs a mast and sail, a stay sheat and Halyard, Rudder and Rudder
irons, as to a ship, also in any discovery they use a Tarpawling, Tarpawling.

Bailes.


which ia a good piece of Canuas washed over with Tar, to cover the Bailes or
hoopes over the stern of their Boat, where they lodge in an harbor which is
that you call a Tilt covered with wadmall in your Wherries; or else an Awning,
Awning.
which is but the bo^s sail, or some piece of an old sail brought over the
yard and stay, and boumed out with the boat hook, so spread over their heads,
which is also much used, as well a shore as in a ship, especially in hot
countries to keep men from the extremity of heat or wet which is very often
infectious. Thoughts are the sea^s whereon the Rowers fit; Thoughts.

Thowles.


and Thowles small pins put into little holes in the Gunwaile or upon the Boats
side, against which they bear the oars when they row, they have also a Daued,
and also in long Boats a windlesse to weigh the anchor by, which is with more
ease than the ship can. The two arching timbers against the Boat head are
called Carlings. Man the Boat is to put a Gang of men, which is a company into
her, A Gang.
they are commonly called the Coxswaine Gang who has the charge of her. Free
the Boat is to bail or cast out the water. Free or Bail.
Trim the Boat is to keep her stright. Trim Boat.

Wind Boat.

Hold water.

Forbear.

A Spell.


Wind the Boat is to bring her head the other way. Hold water is to stay her.
Forbear is to hold still any oar you are commanded, or on the broad, or whole
side. A fresh Spell is to relieve the Rowers with another Gang, give the Boat
more way for a dram of the bottell, who says Amends, one and all, Vea, vea,
vea, Vea, vea, vea.
vea, vea, that is, they pull all strongly together.

The Entering rope is tied by the ships side, The Entering rope.
to hold by as you go up the Entering ladder, cleats, or wailes.

The Bucket rope that is tied to the Bucket by which you hale and draw water up
by the ships side. Bucket rope.


The Bolt ropes are those wherein the sails are sowed. Bolt ropes.


The Port ropes hale up the Ports of the Ordnances. Port ropes.


The Ieare rope is a piece of a hawser made fast to the ^eare rope.
maine yard, another to the fore yard close to the ties, reeued through a block
which is seized close to the top, and to comes down by the mast, and is reeued
through another block at the bottom of the mast close by the deck; great
ships have on each side the ties one, but small ships none: the use is to help
to hoise up the yard to succor the ties, which though they break yet they
would hold up the mast.

Preuenter rope.
The Preuenter rope is a little one seized cross over the ^ies, that if one
part of them should break, yet the other should not run through the Rams head
to endanger the yard.

Top ropes.
The Top ropes are those wherewith we set or strike the maine or fore Top masts,
it is reeued through a great block seized under the Cap, reeued through the
heel of the Top mast thwart ships, and then made fast to a ring with a clinch
on the other side the Cap, the other part comes down by the ties, reeued into
the Knights, and so brought to the Capstaine when they set the Top masts.

Keele ropes.
The Keele rope, you have read in the building, is of hair in the Keele to
scower the Limber holes.

Rudder rope.
The Rudder rope is reeued through the stem post, and goes through the head of
the Rudder, and then both ends spliced together, serves to save the Rudder if
it should be struck off the irons.

Cat rope.
The Cat rope is to hale up the Cat.

Boy rope.
The Boy rope is that which is tied to the boy by the one end, and the anchors
flooke by the other.

Boat rope.
The Boat rope is that which the ship does tow her Boat by, at her stern.

Ghest rope. Shearing.
The Ghest rope is added to the Boat rope when she is towed at the ships
stern, to keep her from shearing, that is, from swinging to and again; for
in a stiff gale she will make such yawes, and have such girds, it would
endanger her to be torn in pieces, Swifting.
but that they use to swift her, that is, to incircle the Gunwaile with a good
rope, and to that make fast the Ghest rope.

Chap. VII. The names of all sorts of Anchors, Cables, and Sails, and how they
bear their proportions, with their use. Also how the Ordnances should be
placed, and the goods stowed in a ship.
THe proper terms belonging to Anchors are many: the least are called
Kedgers, A Kedger.
to use in calm weather in a slow stream, or to kedg up and down a narrow
River, which is when they fear the wind or tide may drive them on shore; they
row by her with an Anchor in a boat, and in the midst of the stream, or
where they find most fit if the Ship come too near the shore, and so by a
Hawser wind her head about, then weigh it again till the like occasion, and
this is kedging. There is also a stream Anchor not much bigger, Stream Anchor.

The first.

Second.

Third Anchor.

Sheat Anchor.


to stem in easy stream or tide. Then there is the first, second, and third
Anchor, yet all such as a Ship in fair weather may ride by, and are called Bow
Anchors. The greatest is the sheat Anchor, and never used but in great
necessity. They are commonly made according to the burden of the Ship by
proportion, for that the sheat Anchor of a small ship will not serve for a
Kedger to a great ship. An Anchors shanke.

Flook.

Shoulder.

Beam or Nut.

Eye.

Ring.

Stock.


Also it bears a proportion in it self, as the one flooke, which is that
does stick in the ground, is but the third part of the shanke in length; at
the head of the Shanke there is a hole called an Eye, and in it a Ring, wherein
is the Nut to which there is fast fixed a Stock of wood crossing the Flookes,
and the length is taken from the length of the Shanke. These differ not in
shape but in weight, from two hundred, to three or four thousand weight.
Grapells, or Graplings, are the least of all, and have four flookes but no
stock; for a boat to ride by, or to throw into a ship in a fight, to pull down
the gratings or hold fast.

A Cable, the first, second, and third.
The Cables also carry a proportion to the Anchors, but if it be not three
stroud, it is accounted but a Hawser, yet a great ships Hawser may be a Cable
to the sheat Anchor for a small ship: and there is the first, second, and third
Cable, besides the Sheat Anchor Cable. Sheat Anchor

Cable.

Keckell.


If the Cable be well made, we say it is well laid. To keckell or sarue the
Cable, as is said, is but to bind some old clouts to keep it from galling in
the Hawse or Ring. Splice.
Splice a Cable, is to fasten two ends together, that it may be double in
length, to make the Ship ride with more ease, A shot of Cable.

Quoile.

A Fake.

Pay.

Pay cheap.


and is called a shot of Cable. Quoile a Cable, is to lay it up in a round
Ring; or fake one above another. Pay more Cable, is when you carry an Anchor
out in the boat to turn over. Pay cheap, is when you over set it, or turns it
over board faster. Veere more Cable, End for end.
is when you ride at Anchor. And end for end is when the Cable runs clear
out of the Hawse, or any Rope out of his shiuer. A Bight.
A Bight is to hold by any part of a coile, A Bitter.
that is, the vpmost fake. A Bitter is but the turn of a Cable about the Bits,
and veare it out by little and little. And the Bitters end is that part of the
Cable does stay within board. A Bitters end.
Gert.
Gert, is when the Cable is so taught that upon the turning of a tide, a Ship
cannot go over it.

To bend.
To bend the Cable to the Anchor, is to make it fast to the Ring; Unbend.
unbend the Cable, is but to take it away, which we usually do when we are at
Sea, and to tie two ropes or Cables together is called bending. Bending.

Hitch.


Hitch, is to catch hold of any thing with a rope to hold it fast, or with a
hook, as hitch the fish-hooke to the Anchors flooke, Fenders.

Iunkes.


or the Tackles into the Garnets of the Slings. Fenders are pieces of old
Hawsers called Iunkes hung over the ship sides to keep them from brusing. In
boats they use poles or boathooks to fend off the boat from brusing. Breast fast.
A Brest-fast is a rope which is fastened to some part of the Ship forward on,
to hold her head to a wharfe or any thing, Stern fast.
and a Sterne-fast is the same in the Stern. The use for the Hawser is to warp
the Ship by, which is laying out an Anchor, and wind her up to it by a
Capsterne. Rousing.
Rousing is but pulling the slacknesse of any Cables with men's hands into the
Ship. Shank-panter.
The Shank painter is a short chain fastend under the fore masts shrouds with
a bolt to the ships sides, and at the other end a rope to make fast the Anchor
to the Bow. Stop.
To stop is when you come to an Anchor, and veares out your Cable, but by
degrees till the Ship ride well, then they say stop the Ship. To those Cables
and Anchors belongs short pieces of wood called Boys, Boys.
or close hooped barrels like Tankards as is said, but much shorter, to show
you the Anchor and help to weigh it, there is another sort of Cans called Can
Boys much greater, Can Boys.
mored upon shoules to give Mariners warning of the dangers.

The maine sail and the fore sail is called the fore course, Sails.

Maine Sail.

Fore Sail.

Maine course.

Fore course.

Bonits.

Drablers.


and the maine course or a pair of courses. Bonits and Drablers are commonly
one third part a piece to the sail they belong unto in depth, but their
proportion is uncertain; for some will make the maine sail so deep, that
with a shallow bonet they will cloth all the Mast without a Drabler, but
without bonets we call them but courses; we say, lash on the bonet to the
course, because it is made fast with La^chets into the eylot holes of the
sail, Maine top Sail.

Fore top Sail.

Top gallant Sails.

Studding Sails.


as the Drabler is to it, and used as the wind permits. There is also your
maine top-saile, and fore top-saile, with their top-gallant sails, and in a
fair gaile your studding sails, which are bolts of Canuasse, or any cloth
that will hold wind, we ex^end along the side of the maine sail, and boomes
i^ out with a boome or long pole, which we use also sometimes to the clew of
the maine sail, fore sail, and spret sail, Misen.

Misen top Sail.

Spret sail.

Spretsaile top.

Sail.

Drift Sail.


when you go before the wind or quartering, else not. Your Miszen, and Miszen
top-saile, your Spret and Spret top-saile, as the rest, take all their names of
their yards. A Drift sail is only used under water, veared out right a head
by sheats, to keep the Ships head right upon the Sea in a storm, or when a
ship drives too fast in a current. Netting Sail.
A Netting sail is only a sail laid over the Netting, Nettings.
which is small ropes from the top of the fore castle to the Poope, stretched
upon the ledges from the Waist-trees to the Rouse-trees, Waist-trees.

Rouse-trees.


which are only small Timbers to bear up the Gratings from the half Deck to
the fore-castle, Stantions.

Gratings.


supported by Stantions that rest upon the half Deck; and this Netting or
Grating, which is but the like made of wood, you may set up or take down when
you please, and is called the close fights fore and aft. Head Sails.
Now the use of those sails is thus, all head Sails which are those belonging
to the fore Mast and Boltsprer, do keep the Ship from the wind or to fall
off. After Sails.
All after sails, that is, all the sails belonging to the maine Mast and
Miszen keeps her to wind ward, therefore few ships will steare upon quarter
winds with one sail, but must have one after sail, and one head sail. The
sails are cut in proportion as the Masts and Yards are in breadth and length,
but the Spret-saile is ^ parts the depth of the fore sail, and the Miszen by
the Leech twice so deep as the Mast is long from the Deck to the Hounds.
Leech.
The Leech of a sail is the outward side or skirt of the sail from the earing
to the clew, the middle betwixt which we account the Leech. The Clew.
The Clew is the lower corner of a Sail, to which you make fast your Sheats
and Tacks, or that which comes goring out from the square of the sail, Goring.
for a square sail has no Clew, but the mainesaile must be cut goring,
because the Tacks will come closer aboard, and so cause the sail to hold more
wind; now when the Sail is large and has a good Clew, we say she spreds a
large Clew, or spreds much Canuas. In making those sails they use two sorts of
seames down the Sails, which does sow the breadth of the Canuas together, A
Monk seame.

A Round seame.


the one we call a Munke seame, which is flat, the other a round seame, which
is so called because it is round.

The Ship being thus provided, there wants yet her Ordnances, which should be
in greatness according to her building in strength and burden, but the
greatest commonly lies lowest, which we call the lower tier, if she be
furnished fore and aft. Likewise the second Tier, A Tier.

Third.

Second.

Half a Tier.


and the third, which are the smallest. The fore-Castle and the half Deck
being also furnished, we account half a Tier.

Sowage or to stow, Stowage.

To Stow.

Ballast.


is to put the goods in Howl in order. The most ponderous next the Ballast,
which is next the Keelson to keep her stiff in the Sea. Balast is either
Gravel, Stones, or Lead, but that which is driest, heauiest, and lies closest
is best. To find a leake, Trench the Ballast.

Shout.


they trench the Ballast, that is, to divide it. The Ballast will sometimes
shoot, that is, run from one side to another, and so will Corn and Salt, if
you make not Pouches or Bulk-heads, which when the Ship does heeld is very
dangerous to ouer^et or turn the Keele upwards. For Caske that is so stowed,
tier above tier with Ballast, and canting Coins, Canting Coins.
which are little short pieces of wood or Billets cut with a sharp ridge or
edge to lie betwixt the Caske; Standing Coins.

To bear.


and standing Coins are Billets or Pipe-staues, to make them they cannot give
way nor stir. The ship will bear much, that is, carry much Ordnance or
goods, or bear much sail; and when you let any thing down into the Howl,
lowering it by degrees, they say, Amain; and being down, Strike.

CHAP. VIII. The charge and duty of the Captain of a ship, and every Office
and Officer in a man of War.
The Captains charge.
THe Captains charge is to command all, and tell the Master to what Port he
will go, or to what Height; In a fight he is to give direction for the
managing thereof, and the Master is to see the cunning of the ship, and
trimming of the sails.

The Master and his Mates.
The Master and his Mates are to direct the course, command all the Sailers, for
stearing, trimming, and sailing the ship; his Mates are only his seconds,
allowed sometimes for the two mid ships men, that ought to take charge of the
first prise.

The Pilot.
The Pilot when they make land does take the charge of the ship till he bring
her to harbor.

The Surgeon and his Mate.
The Surgeon is to be exempted from all duty, but to attend the sick, and
cure the wounded: and good care would be had he have a certificate from Barber
Chirurgions Hall of his sufficiency, and also that his chest be well furnished
both for Physic and Surgery, and so near as may be proper for that clime
you go for, which neglect has been the loss of many a man's life.

The Cape-merchant or Purser.
The Cape-merchant or Purser has the charge of all the Ca^ragasoune or
merchandise, and does keep an account of all that is received, or delivered,
but a man of War has only a Purser. The Gunner with his Mate, and quarter
Gunners.


The Master Gunner has the charge of the ordnance, and shot, powder, match,
ladles, spunges, worms, cartrages, arms and fire-workes; and the rest of the
Gunners, or quarter Gunners to receive their charge from him according to
directions, and to give an account of their store.

The Carpenter and his Mate, is to have the nails, clinches, The Carpenter and
his Mate.
rooue and clinch nails, spikes, plates, rudder irons, pumpe nails, skupper
nails and leather, sawes, files, hatchets and such like, and ever ready for
calking, breaming, stopping leakes, fishing, or splicing the mafts or yards as
occasion requires, and to give an account of his store.

The Boatswaine is to have the charge of all the cordage, The Boatswaine and
his Mate.
tackling, sails, fids and marling spikes, needles, twine, saile-cloth, and
rigging the ship, his Mate the command of the long boat, for the setting forth
of anchors, weighing or fetching home an anchor, warping, towing, or moring,
and to give an account of his store.

The Trumpeter is always to attend the Captains command, The Trumpeter.
and to sound either at his going a shore, or coming aboard, at the
entertainment of strangers, also when you hale a ship, when you charge, board,
or enter; and the poope is his place to stand or sit upon, if there be a
noise, they are to attend him, if there be not, every one he does teach to
bear a part, the Captain is to encourage him, by increasing his shares, or
pay, and give the master Trumpeter a reward.

The Marshall is to punish offenders, The Marshall.
and to see justice executed according to directions; as ducking at the yards
arm, haling under the keele, bound to the capsterne, or maine mast with a
basket of shot about his neck, setting in the bilbowes, and to pay the Cobtie
or the Morioune; but the boys the Boatswaine is to see every Monday at the
chest, to say their compass, and receive their punishment for all their weeks
offenses, which done, they are to have a quarter can of beer, and a basket of
bread, but if the Boatswaine eat or drink before he catch them, they are free.

The Corporal is to see the setting and releeuing the watch, The Corporal.
and see all the soldiers and sailers keep their arms clean, neat, and yare
and teach them their use.

The Steward and his Mate.
The Steward is to deliver out the victuals according to the Captains
directions, and mess them four, five, or six, as there is occasion.

The quarter Masters.
The quarter Masters have the charge of the howl, for stowing, romaging, and
trimming the ship in the hold, and of their squadrons for the watch, and for
fishing to have a Said, a fisgig, a harpin iron, and fish hooks, for Porgos,
Bonetos, Dolphins, or Dorados, and railing lines for Mackrels.

The Cooper and his Mate.
The Cooper is to look to the caske, hoopes and twigs, to staue or repair the
buckets, baricos, cans, steep tubs, runlets, hogsheads, pipes, buts, etc. for
wine, bear, sider, beuerage, fresh water, or any liquor.

The Coxswaine and his Mate.
The Coxswaine is to have a choice Gang to attend the skiffe to go to and
again as occasion commands.

The Cook and his Mate.
The Cook is to dress and deliver out the victual, he has his store of
quarter cans, small cans, platters, spoones, lanthornes, etc. and is to give
his account of the remainder.

The Swabber.
The Swabber is to wash and keep clean the ship and maps.

The Liar.
The Liar is to hold his place but for a week, and he that is first taken with
a lie, every Monday is so proclaimed at the maine mast by a general cry, a
Liar, a Liar, a Liar, he is under the Swabber, and only to keep clean the
beak head, and chains.

The Sailers.
The Sailers are the ancient men for hoising the sails, getting the tacks
aboard, haling the bowlings, and stearing the ship.

The Younkers.
The Younkers are the young men called sore-mast men, to take in the top-sailes,
or top and yard, for surling the sails, or slinging the yards, bousing or
^rising, and take their turns at helm.

The Lieutenant his place.
The Lieutenant is to associate the Captain, and in his absence to execute his
place, he is to see the Marshall and Corporal do their duties, and assist
them in instructing the soldiers, and in a fight the fore-castle is his place
to make good, as the Captain does the half deck, and the quarter Masters, or
Masters Mate the mid ships, and in a States man of War, he is allowed as
necessary as a Lieutenant on shore.

CHAP. IX. Proper Sea terms for dividing the company at Sea, and stearing,
sailing, or moring a Ship in fair weather, or in a storm.
IT is to be supposed by this the Ship is victualled and manned, the voyage
determined, Steep Tubs.
the steep Tubs in the chains to shift their Beef, Porke, or Fish in salt
water, till the salt be out though not the saltness, and all things else ready
to set sail; but before we go any further, for the better understanding the
rest, a few words for stearing and cunning the Ship would not be amiss. Then
know, Star-boord is the right hand, Lar-boord the left; Starboord.

Larboord.

Cunning.

Stearing.

Mid-ships.

Port.


Starboord the Helm, is to put the Helm a Starboord, then the ship will go
to the Larboord. Right your Helm, that is, to keep it in the mid ships, or
right up. Port, that is, to put the Helm to Larboord, and the Ship will go to
the Starboord, for the Ship will ever go contrary to the Helm. Now by a
quarter wind, they will say aloof, or keep your loofe, keep her to it, A
loofe.

Keep your loofe.

War no more.

No near.

Ease.

Steady.


have a care of your Lee-latch. Touch the wind, and war no more, is no more
but to bid him at the Helm to keep her so near the wind as may be; no near,
ease the Helm, or bear up, is to let her fall to Lee-ward. Steady, that is,
to keep her right upon that point you steare by; Yare.
be yare at the Helm, or a fresh man to the Helm. But he that keeps the Ship
most from yawing does commonly use the lest motion with the Helm, and those
steare the best.

The Master and company being aboard, he commands them to get the sails to the
yards, Gear.
and about your gear or work on all hands, stretch forward your maine
Halliards, hoise your Sails half mast high. Predy.
Predy, or make ready to set sail, cross your yards, bring your Cable to the
Capsterne, Boatswaine setch an Anchor aboard, break ground or weigh Anchor.
Heave a head, men into the Tops, men upon the yards; A Pike.
come, is the Anchor a pike, that is, to heave the Hawse of the ship right over
the Anchor, what is the Anchor away? Tally.
Yea, yea. Let fall your fore-saile. Tally, that is, hale off the Sheats; who
is at the Helm there, coile your Cables in small fakes, hale the Cat, a
Bitter, belay, loose fast your Anchor with your shank-painter, stow the Boat,
set the land, how it bears by the Compass that we may the better know thereby
to keep our account and direct our course, let fall your maine sail, every man
say his private prayer for a boon voyage, out with your spret sail, on with
your bonits and Drablers, steare steady and keep your course, so, you go well.

How they divide the company at sea, and set, and rule the watch.
When this is done, the Captain or Master commands the Boatswaine to call up
the company; the Master being chief of the Starboord watch does call one, and
his right hand Mate on the Larboord does call another, and so forward till they
be divided in two parts, then each man is to choose his Mate, Consort, or
Comrade, and then divide them into squadrons according to your number and
burden of your ship as you see occasion; these are to take their turns at the
Helm, trim sails, pumpe, and do all duties each half, or each squadron for
eight Glasses or four hours which is a watch, but care would be had that
there be not two Comrades upon one watch because they may have the more room
in their Cabbins to rest. And as the Captain and masters Mates, Gunners,
Carpenters, Quartermasters, Trumpeters, etc. are to be abast the Mast, so the
Boatswaine, and all the Yonkers or common Sailers under his command is to be
before the Mast. The next is, to mess them four to a mess, and then give
every mess a quarter Can of beer and a basket of bread to stay their stomachs
till the Kettle be boiled, that they may first go to prayer, then to supper,
and at six a clock sing a Psalm, say a Prayer, and the Master with his side
begins the watch, then all the rest may do what they will till midnight; and
then his Mate with his Larboord men with a Psalm and a Prayer releeues them
till four in the morning, and so from eight to twelve each other, except some
flaw of wind come, some storm or gust, or some accident that requires the
help of all hands, which commonly after such good cheer in most voyages does
happen.

For now the wind veeres, that is, The wind veeres.
it does shift from point to point, get your Starboord tacks aboard, Tally.
and tally or hale off your Lee-Sheats. The Ship will not wayer, settle your
maine Topsaile, veere a fadome of your sheat. The wind comes fair again and a
fresh gale, Flowne.
hale up the slatch of the Lee-boling. By Slatch is meant the middle part of
any rope hangs over board. Veere more sheat, or a flowne sheat, that is, when
they are not haled home to the block. Fly.
But when we say, let fly the sheats, then they let go amain, which commonly
is in some gust, A pair of courses.
lest they spend their topsailes, or if her quick side lie in the water,
ouerset the ship. A flowne sheat is when she goes before the wind, or betwixt
a pair of sheats, or all sails drawing. But the wind shrinkes, that is, when
you must take in the Spretsaile, and get the tacks aboard, hale close the maine
Boling, that is, when your Tacks are close aboard. If you would sail against
the wind or keep your own, that is, not to fall to lee-ward or go back
again, by halling off close your Bolings, you set your sails so sharp as you
can to lie close by a wind, thwarting it a league or two, or more or less, as
you see cause, first on the one board then on the other; this we call boording
or beating it up upon a tacke in the winds eye, or bolting to and again; but
the longer your boords are, the more you work or gather into the wind. If a
sudden flaw of wind should surprise you, when you would lower a yard so fast as
you can, they call A maine; but a cross sail cannot come nearer the wind than
six points, but a Caruell whose sails stand like a pair of Tailers sheeres,
will go much nearer.

How to handle a ship in a storm.
It ouer-casts we shall have wind, foul weather, settell your top sails, take
in the spret-saile, in with your topsailes, lower the fore-saile, tallow under
the parrels, brade up close all them sails, lash sure the ordnance, strike
your top-masts to the cap, make it sure with your sheeps feet. A storm, Try.
let us lie at Try with our maine course, that is, to hale the tacke aboard,
the sheat close aft, the boling set up, and the helm tied close aboard. When
that will not serve then Try the mizen, if that split, or the storm grow so
great she cannot bear it; Hall.
then hull, which is to bear no sail, but to strike a hull is when they would
lie obscurely in the Sea, or stay for some consort, lash sure the helm a lee,
Under the Sea.
and so a good ship will lie at ease under the Sea as we term it. Weather
coile.
If she will weather coile, and lay her head the other way without loosing a
sail, that must be done by bearing up the Helm, and then she will drive
nothing so far to Leeward. They call it hulling also in a calm swelling Sea,
which is commonly before a storm, when they strike their sails left she
should beat them in pieces against the mast by Rolling. Rolling.

Labor.


We say a ship does Labor much when she does roll much any way; but if she
will neither Try nor Hull, Spoone.
Then Spoone, that is, put her right before the wind, this way although she
will roll more than the other, yet if she be weak it will not strain her any
thing so much in the Trough of the Sea, Trough.
which is the distance betwixt two waves or Billows. If none of this will do
well, then she is in danger to founder, Founder.
if not sink. Foundering is when she will neither veere nor steare, the Sea
will so over rake her, except you free out the water, she will lie like a log,
and so consequently sink. To spend a mast.
To spend a mast or yard, is when they are broke by foul weather, Spring a
mast.
and to spring a mast is when it is cracked in any place.

In this extremity he that does cun the ship cannot have too much judgment, A
Yoke.
nor experience to try her drift, or how she capes, which are two terms also
used in the trials of the running or setting of currants. A yoke is when the
Sea is so rough as that men cannot govern the Helm with their hands, and then
they sease a block to the Helm on each side at the end, and reeuiug two falls
through them like Gunners Tackles brings them to the ships side, and so some
being at the one side of the Tackle, some at the other, they steare her with
much more ease than they can with a single rope with a double Turn about the
Helm.

When the storm is past, though the wind may alter three or four points of
the compass, or more, yet the Sea for a good time will go the same way; then
if your course be right against it, you shall meet it right a head, so we call
it a head Sea. Sometimes when there is but little wind, A head Sea.
there will come a contrary Sea, and presently the wind after it, whereby we
may judge that from whence it came was much wind, for commonly before any
great storm the Sea will come that way. Now if the ship may run on shore in
ose or mud she may escape, or Billage on a rock, or Ancors flooke, repair her
leake, but if she split or sink, she is a wrack. But seeing the storm
decreaseth, let us try if she will endure the Hullocke of a Sail, Hullocke.
which sometimes is a piece of the mizen sail or some other little sail, part
opned to keep her head to the sea, but if yet she would weather coile, we
will loose a Hullocke of her fore-saile, and put the Helm a weather, and it
will bring her head where her stern is; courage my hearts.

It cleares up, set your fore-saile; Now it is fair weather, Lardge. Laske.
out with all your sails, go lardge or laske, that is, when we have a fresh
gale, or fair wind, and all sails drawing. But for more haste vnparrell the
mizen yard and lanch it, and the sail over her Lee quarter, and fit Gives at
the further end to keep the yard steady, and with a Boome boome it out; this
we call a Goose-wing. Goosewing.
Who is at Helm there? Sir you must be amongst the Points; Well Master the
Channel is broad enough; Yet you cannot steare betwixt a pair of sheats;
Those are words of mockery betwixt the Cunner and the Stearesman. But to
proceed,

Get your Larboord Tackes aboard, hale off your starboord sheats, keep your
coarse upon the point you are directed, Port, he will lay her by the lee; the
stays, or back stays, that is, when all the sails flutter in the wind, and
are not kept full, that is full of wind, they fall upon the masts and shrowds,
so that the ship goes a drift upon her broad side, fill the sails, keep full,
full and by. Make ready to Tacke about, is but for every man to stand to handle
the sails and ropes they must hale, Tacke about is to bear up the helm, and
that brings her to stay all her sails lying flat against the shrowds, then as
she turns we say she is paid, then let rise your Lee tacks and hale off
your sheats, and trim all your sails as they were before, which is cast of
that Boling which was the weather boling, and hale up taught the other. So all
your Sheats, Brases, and Tackes are trimmed by a wind as before. To belay, is
to make fast the ropes in their proper places. Round in.
Round in, is when the wind larges, let rise the maine tacke and fore tacke,
and hale aft the fore sheat to the cats head, and the maine sheat to the
cubbridge head, this is Rounding in, or rounding aft the sail; Rounding aft.
Pasarado.
the sheats being there they hale them down to keep them firm from flying up
with a Pasarado, which is any rope wherewith we hale down the sheats, blocks
of the maine or fore sail, when they are haled aft the clew of the maine sail
to the Cubbridge head of the maine mast, and the clew of the fore sail to the
Cat head; Do this when the ships goes large.

Observe.
Observe the height, that is, at twelve a clock to take the height of the
Sun, or in the night the North star, or in the forenoone and afternoon, if
you miss these by finding the Azimuth end Alnicanter. Dead water.
Dead water is the Eddie water follows the stern of the ship, not passing
away so quickly as that slides by her sides. The Wake.
The wake of a ship is the smooth water a stern showing the way she has gone
in the sea, by this we judge what way she does make, for if the wake be right a
stern, we know she makes good her way forwards; but if to Lee-ward a point or
two, we then think to the Lee-ward of her course, but she is a nimble ship
that in turning or tacking about will not fall to thee Lee-ward of her wake
when she has weathered it. Disimbogue is to pass some narrow strait or
current into the maine Ocean, out of some great Gulf or Bay. Disimbogue.
A Drift.
A Drift is any thing floating in the sea that is of wood. Rockweed.
Rockweed does grow by the shore, and is a sign of land, yet it is often found
far in the Sea. Lay the ship by the Lee to try the Dipsie line, Dipsie line.
which is a small line some hundred and fifty fadome long, with a long plummet
at the end, made hollow, wherein is put tallow, that will bring up any gravel;
which is first marked at twenty fadome, and after increased by tens to the end;
and those distinguished by so many small knots upon each little string that is
fixed at the mark through the strouds or midst of the line, showing it is so
many times ten fadome deep, Plummet.
where the plummet does rest from drawing the line out of your hand; this is
only used in deep water when we think we approach the shore, for in the
maine sea at 300. fadomes we find no bottom. Bring the ship to rights, that
is, again under sail as she was, some use a Log line, Log line.
and a minute glass to know what way she makes, but that is so uncertain, it
is not worth the labor to try it.

One to the top to look out for land, Land to.

Kenning.

To lay a land.


the man cries out Land to; which is just so far as a kenning, or a man may
discover, descrie, or see the land. And to lay a land is to sail from it just
so far as you can see it. Good land fall.
A good Land fall is when we fall just with our reckoning, if otherwise a bad
Land fall; but howeuer how it bears, Bad land fall.

A head land.

A Point.

Land mark.

To ^ai^e a land.

To make land.

A Reach.


set it by the compass, and bend your Cables to the Anchors. A Head land, or a
Point of land does lie further cut at sea than the rest. A Land mark, is any
Mountain, Rock, Church, Windmill or the like, that the Pilot can know by
comparing one by another how they bear by the compass. A Reach is the
distance of two points so far as you can see them in a right line, as White
Hall and London Bride, or White Hall and the end of Lambeth toward Chelsey.
Fetch the Sounding line, Sounding line.
this is bigger than the Dipsie-line, and is marked at two fadome next the lead
with a piece of black leather, at three fadome the like, but slit; at 5.
fadome with a piece of white cloth, at 7. fadome with a piece of red in a piece
of white leather, at 15. with a white cloth, etc. The sounding lead is six or
seven pound weight, The Lead.
and near a foot long, he that does heave this lead stands by the horse, or in
the chains, and does sing fadome by the mark 5. c. and a shaftment less,
4.0. this is to find where the ship may sail by the depth of the water. Foul
water.
Foul water is when she comes into shallow water where she raises the sand or
ose with her way yet not touch the ground, but she cannot feel her helm so
well as in deep water.

When a ship sails with a large wind toward the land, or a fair wind into a
harbor, Bear in.
we say she bears in with the land or harbor. And when she would not come
near the land, but goes more Roome-way than her couse, we say she bears
off; Bear off.
but a ship board, bear off is used to every thing you would thrust from you.
Bear up. Hold off.
Bear up is to bring the ship to go large or before the wind. To Hold off is
when we heave the Cable at the Capsterne, if it be great and stiff, or slimie
with ose, Surges.
it surges or slips back unless they keep it close to the whelps, and then
they either hold it fast with nippers, or brings it to the I care Capsterne,
and this is called Holding off. As you approach the store, shorten your sails,
when you are in harbor take in your sails, and come to an anchor, wherein
much judgment is required.

Neale to.
To know well the soundings, if it be Nealed to, that is, deep water close
aboard the shore, or shallow, or if the Leevnder the weather shore, or the lee
shore be sandy, clay, osie, or foul and rockie ground, but the Lee shore all
men would shun that can avoid it. A Road. Offing.
Or a Road which is an open place near the shore. Or the Offing which is the
open Sea from the shore, or the midst of any great stream is called the
Offing. Land lock, Land locked.
is when the land is round about you.

Now the ship is said to Ride, To Ride.
so long as the Anchors do hold and comes not home. Ride a great Road.
To Ride a great road is when the wind has much power. They will strike
their top masts, and the yards along ships, and the deeper the water is, it
requires more Cable; when we have rid in any distress we say we have rid
hawse full, Ride a stresse.

Ride betwixt.


because the water broke into the hawses. To ride betwixt wind and tide, is
when the wind and tide are contrary and of equal power, Wind and tide.
which will make her roll extremely, yet not strain much the cable. To Ride
thwart is to ride with her side to the tide, Ride thwart tide.
and then she never strains it. Ride a pike.
To ride a pike is to pike your yards when you ride amongst many ships. Ride
cross.
To ride acrosse is to hoise the maine and fore yards to the hounds, and topped
alike. When the water is gone and the ships lies dry, we say she is Sewed; if
her head but lie dry, Sewed.
she is Sewed a head; but if she cannot all lie dry, she cannot Sew there. Sew.
Water borne is when there is no more water than will just bear her from the
ground. Water borne.

Water line.


The water line is to that Bend or place she should swim in when she is loaded.

Lastly, To More.
to More a ship is to lay out her anchors as is most fit for her to ride by,
and the ways are diverse; as first, to More a fair Berth from any annoiance.
More cross.
To More a cross is to lay one anchor to one side of the stream, and the
other to the other right against one another, and so they Bear equally ebb
and flood. More along.
To More along is to lay an anchor amidst the stream ahead, and another
asterne, when you fear driving a shore. Water shot.
Water shot is to more quartering betwixt both nether cross, nor along the
ride. In an open rode they will more that way they think the wind will come
the most to hurt them. More Prouiso.
To more a Prouiso, is to have one anchor in the river, and a hawser a shore,
which is mored with her head a shore; otherwise two cables is the least, and
four cables the best to more by.

CHAP. X. Proper terms for the Winds, Ebbes, Floods, and Eddies, with their
definitions, and an estimate of the depth of the Sea, by the height of the Hills
and the largeness of the Earth.
A Calm.

A Breze.


WHen there is not a breath of wind stirring, it is a calm or a stark calm. A
Breze is a wind blows out of the Sea, and commonly in fair weather begins
about nine in the morning, and lasts till near night; so likewise all the
night it is from the shore which is called a Turnado, or a Sea-turne, but this
is but upon such coasts where it blows thus most certainly, except it be a
storm, or very foul weather, as in Barbaria, Egypt, and the most of the
Leuant. We have such Brezes in most hot countries in Summer, but they are very
uncertain. A fresh gale.
A fresh Gale is that does presently blow after a calm, when the wind
begins to quicken or blow. A Loome gale.
A fair Loome Gale is the best to sail in, because the Sea goes not high,
and we bear out all our sails. A stiff Gale is so much wind as our
top-sailes can endure to bear. Eddie wind.
An Eddie wind is checked by the sail, a mountain, turning, or any such thing
that makes it return back again. It over blows.
It over blows when we can bear no top-sailes. A Gust.
A flaw of wind is a Gust which is very violent upon a sudden, A Spout.
but quickly ends. A Spout in the West Indies commonly falls in those
Gusts, which is, as it were, a small river falling entirely from the clouds,
like out of our water Spouts, which make the Sea where it falls rebound in
flashes exceeding high. Whirle winds runs round, A whirle wind.
and blows diverse ways at once. A Storm.
A storm is known to every one not to be much less than a tempest, A
Tempest.
that will blow down houses, and trees up by the roots. A Mounsoune.
A Mounsoune is a constant wind in the East Indies, that blows always three
months together one way, and the next three months the contrary way. A
Hericano.
A Hericano is so violent in the West Indies, it will continue three, four, or
five weeks, but they have it not past once in five, six, or seven years; but
then it is with such extremity that the Sea flies like rain, and the waves so
high, they over flow the low grounds by the Sea, in so much, that ships have
been driven over tops of high trees there growing, many leagues into the land,
and there left, as was Captain Francis Nelson an Englishman, and an excellent
Seaman for one.

We say a calm sea, or Becalmed, Becalmed.
when it is so smooth the ship moves very little, and the men leap over board
to swim. A Rough Sea is when the waves grow high. A Rough Sea.

An ouergrowne Sea.

Surges.

The Rut of the Sea.

The Roaring of the Sea.

Floods and ebbes.


An ouergrowne Sea when the surges and billows go highest. The Rut of the sea
where it does dash against anything. And the Roaring of the Sea is most
commonly observed a shore, a little before a storm or after a storm.

Flood is when the water begins to rise, which is young flood as we call it,
then quarter flood, half flood, full Sea, still water, or high water. So when
it Ebbes, quarter ebb, half ebb, three quarter ebb, low water, or dead low
water every one does know; and also that as at a spring tide the Sea or water
is at the highest, so at a Neape tide it is at the lowest. This word Tide, is
common both to Flood and Ebb; for you say as well tide of ebb, as tide of
flood, A Tide of ebb.

A Tide of flood.

A windward Tide A Lee-ward tide.


or a windward Tide when the Tide runs against the stream, as a Lee-warde
Tide, that is, when the wind and the Tide goes both one way, which makes the
water as smooth as the other rough. To Tide over to a place, To Tide over.
is to go over with the Tide of ebb or flood, and stop the contrary by
anchoring till the next Tide, thus you may work against the wind if it over
blow not. A Tide gate.
A Tide gate is where the tide runs strongest. Tide and half Tide.
It flows Tide and half Tide, that is, it will be half flood by the shore,
before it begin to flow in the channel; for although the Tide of flood run
aloft, yet the Tide of ebb runs close by the ground. An Eddie tide is where
the water does run back contrary to the tide, Eddie Tide.
that is, when some headland or great point in a River hinders the free
passage of the stream, that causes the water on the other side the point to
turn round by the shore as in a circle, till it fall into the tide again.

As touching the reasons of ebbes and floods, and to know how far it is to the
bottom of the deepest place of the Sea, I will not take upon me to discourse
of; as knowing the same to be the secrets of God unrevealed to man: only I will
set down a Philosophical speculation of diverse men's opinions touching the
depth of the Sea; which I hope will not be thought much impertinent to the
subject of this book by the judicious Reader.

The height of mountains perpendicular.
Fabianus in Plinis, and Cleomides conceived the depth of the Sea to be
fifteen furlongs, that is, a mile and ^ parts, Plutarch compared it equal to
the highest mountains, Scallinger and others conceited the hills far
surpassed the deepnesse of the Sea, and that in few places it is more than a
hundred paces in depth, it may be he meant in some narrow Seas, but in the
maine Ocean experience has taught us it is much more than twice so much, for I
have founded 300. fadome, yet found no ground. Eratosthenes in Theon that great
Mathematitian writes the highest mountain perpendicular is but ten furlongs,
that is, one mile and a quarter. Also Dicaearcus affirms this to be the
height of the hill P^lius in Thessalia, but Xenagoras in Plutarch observed the
height of Olimpus in the same region to be twenty paces more, which is 1270.
paces, but surely all those mean only those mountains in or about Greece
where they lived and were best acquainted; but how these may compare with the
Alps in Asia, Atlas in Africa, Caucasus in India, the Andes in Peru, and diverse
others has not yet been examined.

But whatsoever the hills may be above the superficies of the earth, The height
of the hills compared with the superficies of the earth and depth of the Sea.
many hold opinion the Sea is much deeper, who suppose that the earth at the
first framing was in the superficies regular and sphericall, as the holy
Scriptures directs us to believe; because the water covered and compassed all
the face of the earth, also that the face of the earth was equal to that of
the Sea. Damascen notes, that the unevenness and irregularity which now is
seen in the earths superficies, was caused by taking some parts out of the
upper face of the earth in sundry places to make it more hollow, and lay them
in other places to make it more conuex, or by raising up some part and
depressing others to make room and receipt for the Sea, that mutation being
wrought by the power of the word of the Lord, Let the waters be gathered into
one place that the dry land may appear. As for Aquinas, Dionysius,
Catharianus, and some Divines that conceited there was no mutation, but a
violent accumulation of the waters, or heaping them up on high is unreasonable;
because it is against nature, that water being a flexible and a ponderous body,
so to consist and stay it self, and not fall to the lower parts about it;
where in nature there is nothing to hinder it, or, if it be restrained
supernaturally by the hand and bridle of Almighty God, lest it should
ouer-whelme and drown all the land, it must follow, that God even in the very
institution of nature imposed a perpetual violence upon nature. And this with
all, that at the Deluge there was no necessity to break up the springs of the
deep and to open the cattaracts of Heaven, and power down water continually
so many days and nights together, seeing the only withdrawing of that hand,
or letting go of that bridle which restrains the water would presently have
overwhelmed all. How all the hills and dry land above the superficies of the Sea
has made room for the Sea, therefore they are in equal height and depth.


But both by Scriptures, the experience of Nauigators, and reason in making
estimation of the depth of the Sea, reckon not only the height of the hills
above the common superficies of the earth, but the height of all the dry land
above the superficies of the Sea, because the whole mass of earth that now
appears above the waters, being taken as it were out of the places which the
waters now possess, must be equal to the place out of which it was taken; so
consequently it seems, that the height or elevation of the one should answer
the descending or depth of the other; and therefore in estimating the depth of
the Sea, we consider not only the erection of the hills above the ordinary
land, but the advantage of the dry land above the Sea; which latter, I mean
the height of the ordinary maine land, excluding the hills, which properly
answer the extraordinary deepes and whirle-pooles in the Sea. The rest is held
more in large Continents above the Sea, than that of the hills is above the land.

That there is small difference betwixt the springs first rising out of the
earth, and their falling into the Sea.
For that the plain face of the dry land is not leuel, or equally distant from
the Center, but has a great descent toward the Sea, and a rising toward the
mid-land parts, although it appear not plainly to the eye, yet to reason it is
most manifest; because we find that part of the earth the Sea covers
descends lower and lower toward the Sea. For the Sea, which touching the
upper face of it, is known by nature to be level and euenly distant from the
center, is observed to wax deeper and deeper the further one saileth from the
shore cowards the maine Ocean: even so in that part which is vntouered, the
streamings of Rivers on all sides from the midland parts toward the Sea,
sliding from the higher to the lower declares so much, whose courses are some
1000. or 2000. miles, in which declination, Pliny in his deriuation of water
requires one cubit of declining in 240. foot of proceeding. But Columella,
Viturnius, Paladius, and others, in their conduction of waters require somewhat
less; namely, that in the proceeding of 200. foot forward, there should be
allowed one foot of descending downward, which yet in the course of 1000.
miles, as Danubius, Volgha, or Indus, etc. have so much or more, which will
make five miles of descent in perpendicular account, and in the course of 2000.
or more, as Nilus, Niger, and the River of the Amazons have 10. miles or more
of the like descent.

These are not taken as rules of necessity, The determination of these
questions.
as though water could not run without that advantage, for that respect the
conueyers of waters in these times content themselves with one inch in 600.
foot, as Philander and Viturnius observed, but is rather under a rule of
commodity for expedition and wholsomnesse of water so conveyed, left resting
too long in pipes it should contract some unwholesome condition, or else through
the slacknesse of motion, or long closeness, or banishment from the air,
gather some aptness and disposition to putr^fie. Although I say, such excess
of advantage as in the artificial conueyance of waters the forenamed Authors
require, be not of necessity exacted in the natural deriuation of them, yet
certain it is, that the descent of rivers being continually and their
courselong, and in many places swift, and in some places headlong and furious;
Note the difference betwixt the springs of the rivers. and their falling into
the Sea is not great.
the differences of height or advantage cannot be great betwixt the springs of
the rivers and their out lets, betwixt the first rising out of the earth and
their falling into the Sea: unto which declinity of land seeing the deepenesse
of the Sea in proportion answer as I before declared, and not only to the
height of the hills: it is concluded, that the deepenesse to be much more than
the Philosophers commonly reputed: and although the deepnesse of the Sardinian
Sea, which Aristotle says, was the deepest of the Mediterranean, recorded by
Posidonius in Strabo, to have been found but 1000. fadome, which is but a mile
and a fifth part, and the greatest breadth not past 600. miles: then seeing if
in so narrow a Sea it be so deep, what may we esteem the maine Ocean to be,
that in many places is five times so broad, seeing the broader the Seas are, if
they be entire and free from Islands, they are answerably observed to be the
deeper. If you desire any further satisfaction, read the first part of Purchase
his Pilgrimage, where you may read how to find all those Authors at large. Now
because he has taken near 100. times as much from me, I have made bold to
borrow this from him, seeing he has founded such deep waters for this our
Ship to fail in, being a Gentleman whose person I loved, and whose memory and
virtues I will ever honor.

CHAP. XI. Proper Sea terms belonging to the good or bad condition of Ships,
how to find them and amend them.
A Ship that will try hull, and ride well at Anchor, A wholesome ship.
we call a wholesome Ship. A long Ship that draws much water will do all this,
but if she draw much water and be short, she may hull well, but neither try nor
ride well; if she draw little water and belong, she may try and ride well, An
unwholesome Ship.
but never hull well, which is called an unwholesome ship. Howsing a Ship.
The howsing in of a Ship is when she is past the breadth of her bearing she is
brought in narrow to her upper works: it is certain this makes her wholesome
in the Sea without rolling, because the weight of her Ordnance does
counterpoise her breadth under water, but it is not so good in a man of war,
because it takes away a great deal of her room, nor will her tacks ever so
well come aboard as if she were laid out aloft and not flaring, Flaring.
which is when she is a little howsing in, near the water, and then the upper
work does hang over again, and is laid out brother aloft, this makes a Ship
more roomy aloft for men to use their arms in, but Sir Walter Rawleighs
proportion, which is to be proportionally wrought to her other work is the
best, because the counter poise on each side does make her swim perpendicular
or straight, and consequently steady, which is the best.

If a ship be narrow, and her bearing either not laid out enough or too low,
then you must make her broader and her bearing the higher by ripping off the
plankes two or three strakes under water and as much above, and put other
Timbers upon the first, and then put on the plankes upon those Timbers, this
will make her bear a better sail, but it is a hindrance to her sailing, this
is to be done when a Ship is cranke-sided and will bear no sail, Cranke side.
and is called Furring. Note also, Furring.
that when a Ship has a deep Keele it does keep her from rolling. If she be
floty and her keele shallow, put on another keele under the first to make it
deeper, for it will make her hold more in the water, this we call a false
Keele. A false Keele. Gripe.
Likewise if her stem be too flat to make her cut water the better, and not
gripe, which is when she will not keep a wind well; fix another stem before
it, A false stem.
and that is called a false stem, which will make her rid more way and bear a
better sail. The run.
Also the Run of a ship is as much to be regarded, for if it be too short and
too ^ull below, the water comes but slowly to the Rudder because the force of
it is broken by her breadth, and then to put a false stem post to lengthen her
is the next remedy, but to lengthen her is better; for when a Ship comes off
handsomely by degrees, and her Tuck does not lie too low, which will hinder the
water from coming swiftly to the Rudder, makes her she cannot steare well, and
they are called as they are, a good run or a bad. A good run.

A bad run.


When a Ship has lost a piece of her Keele, and that we cannot come well to
mend it, you much patch a new piece unto it, and bind it with a stirrup, A
Sirrup.
which is an iron comes round about it and the Keele up to the other side of
the Ship, whereto it is strongly nailed with Spikes. Her Rake also may be a
defect, Her Rake.
which is so much of the Hull, as by a perpendicular line the end of the Keele
is from the setting on of the stem, so much as it without that forward on, and
in like manner the setting in of her stem Post. Your French men gives great
Rakes forwards on, which makes her give good way and keep a good wind, but if
she have not a full bow she will pitch her head extremely in the Sea. If she
have but a small Rake, she is so blusse that the Seas meets her so suddenly
upon the Bows she cannot cut the water much, but the longer a ship is, the
fuller should be her Bow, but the mean is the best. Loome.
The looming of a ship is her prospectiue, that is, as she does show great or
little: Her water draught is so many foot as she goes in the water, but the
Ships that draws most water are commonly the most wholesome, but the least
draught goes best but rolls most, and we say a Ship does heeld on Starboord or
Larboord, Heeld.
that is, to that side she does lean most.

Ouerset.

Overthrow.


To ouerset or overthrow a ship, is by bearing too much sail you bring her
Keele upwards, or on shore overthrow her by grounding her, so that she falls
upon one side; and we say a Ship is walt when she is not stiff, Wale.
and has not Ballast enough in her to keep her stiff. Wall reared.
And wall reared when she is right built up, after she comes to her bearing it
makes her ill shapen and unseemly, but it gives her within much room, and she
is very wholesome, if her bearing be well laid out. The Masting of a Ship is
much to be considered, and will much cause her to sail well or ill, as I have
related in the masting a Ship. Iron sick.
Iron sick, is when the Bolts, Spikes, or Nails are so eaten with rust they
stand hollow in the plankes, and so makes her leake, the which to prevent, they
use to put lead over all the bolt heads under water. Trim.
Lastly, the trimming of a ship does much amend or impair her sailing, and so
alter her condition. To find her trim, that is, how she will sail best; is by
trying her sailing with another Ship so many glasses, trimmed a head and so
many a stern, and so many upon an even Keele, also the casing of her Masts and
Shrouds, for some ships will sail much better when they are stacke than when
they are taught.

CHAP. XII. Considerations for a Sea Captain in the choice of his Ship, and in
placing his Ordnance. In giving Chase, Boording, and entering a man of war
like himself, or a defending Merchant man.
IN Land service we call a man of war a Soldier either on foot or horse, How
to choose a Ship fit to make a man of wane.
and at Sea a Ship, which if she be not as well built, conditioned, and
provided, as near fitting such an imploiment as may be, she may prove (either)
as a horseman that knows not how to hold his raines, keep his seat in his
saddle and stirrops, carry his body, nor how to help his horse with leg and
spur in a curuet, gallop, or stop; or as an excellent horsemen that knows all
this, mounted upon a Jade that will do nothing, which were he mounted
according to his experience, he would do more with that one, than half a
dozen of the other though as well provided as himself. But I confess, every
horseman cannot mount himself alike, neither every Seaman ship himself as he
would, I mean not for outward ornament, which the better they are, the less
to be disliked; for there cannot be a brauer sight than a ship in her bravery,
but of a competent sufficiency as the business requires. But were I to choose
a ship for my self, I would have her sail well, yet strongly built, her decks
flush and flat, and so roomy that men might pass with ease; her Bow and chase
so Gally-like contrived, should bear as many Ordnances as with conueniency she
could, for that always comes most to fight, and so stiff, she should bear
a stiff sail and bear out her lower tier in any reasonable weather, neither
should her Gunroome be unprovided: not manned like a Merchant-man, which if
they be double manned, that is, to have twice so many men as would sail her,
they think it is too many in regard of the charge, yet to speak true, there is
few Merchant Ships in the world does any way exceed ours. And those men they
entertain in good voiages have such good pay, and such acquaintance one with
another in shipping themselves, that thirty or forty of them would trouble a
man of war with three or four times their number manned with pressed men,
being half of them scarce hale Boulings. Yea, and many times a Pirat who are
commonly the best manned, but they fight only for wealth, not for honor nor
revenge, except they be extremely constrained. But such a Ship as I have
spoken of well manned with rather too many than too few, with all sufficient
Officers; Shot, Powder, Victual, and all their appurtenances, in my opinion
might well pass muster for a man of war.

His reward that first discries a Ship, or enters a prize.
Now being at Sea, the tops are seldom without one or other to look out for
purchase, because he that first discries a sail, if she prove prize, is to
have a good suit of Aparell, or so much money as is set down by order for his
reward, as also he that does first enter a Ship there is a certain reward
allowed him; when we see a Ship alter her course, and uses all the means she
can to fetch you up, you are the chase, and he the chaser. In giving chase or
chasing, or to escape being chased, there is required an infinite judgment and
experience, for there is no rule for it; but the shortest way to fetch up your
chase is the best. How to give chase, and escape the chaser.
If you be too lee-ward, get all your Tacks aboard, and shape your course as
he does to meet him at the nearest angle you can, then he must either alter his
course and Tacke as you Tacke as near the wind as he can lie to keep his own
till night, and then strike a Hull that you may not descry him by his sails,
or do his best to lose you in the dark; for look how much he falls to
lee-ward, he falls so much in your way. If he be right ahead of you, that is
called a stern chase, if you weather him, for every man in chasing does seek
to get the weather, because you cannot board him except you weather him, he
will laske, or go large, if you gather on him that way, he will try you
before the wind, th^^ if your ordnance cannot reach him, if he can outstrip
you he is gone: But suppose you are to wind-ward, if he clap close by a wind,
and there goes ahead sea, and yours a lee-ward ship, if you do the like your
ship will so beat against the Sea, she will make no way; therefore you must go
a little more large though you chase under his lee till you can run ahead.

Board and Board is when two ships lie together side by side, but he that
knows how to defend himself, Board and board.
and work well, will so cun his ship, as force you to enter upon his quarter,
which is the highest part of the ship, and but the mizen shrouds to enter by;
from whence he may do you much hurt with little danger, except you fire him,
which a Pirat will never do, neither sink you if he can choose, except you be
able to force him to defend himself. But in a Sea fight we call Boording, in
Boording where we can, the greatest advantage for your Ordnance is to board
him thwart the hawse, because you may use all the ordnance you have on one
side, and she only them in her prow; but the best and safest boording for
entering is on the bow, Boording and entering a ship.
but you must be careful to clear the decks with burning granados, fire-pots,
poutches of powder, Powder chests.
to which give fire by a Gunpodwer match, to prevent trains to the powder
chest, which are long boards joined like a triangle with diverse broad ledges on
either side, wherein lies as many peeble stones or beatch as can there lie,
those being fired will make all clear before them. Besides in an extremity a
man would rather blow up the quarter deck, half deck, fore castle, or any
thing, than be taken by him he knows a mortal enemy, and commonly there is
more men lost in entering, if the chase stand to her defense, in an instant,
than in a long fight board and board, if she be provided of her close fights: I
confess, the charging upon trenches, and the entrances of a breach in a
rampire are attempts as desperate as a man would think could be performed, but
he that has tried himself as often in the entering a resisting ship as I have
done both them and the other, he would surely confess there is no such
dangerous service ashore, as a resolved resolute fight at sea. A ships close
fights, are small ledges of wood laid cross one another like the grates of iron
in a prisons window, betwixt the maine mast, and the fore mast, and are called
gratings, or nettings as is said, which are made of small ropes, much in like
manner covered with a sail, the which to undo is to heave a kedger, or fix a
grapling into them, tied in a rope, but a chain of iron is better, and
shearing off will tear it in pieces if the rope and anchor hold, some have
used sheare hooks, which are hooks like sickels fixed in the ends of the
yards arms, that if a ship under sail come to board her, those sheares will
cut her shrouds, and spoil her tackling, but they are so subject to break
their own yards, and cut all the ropes comes from the top-sailes, they are out
of request. To conclude, if a ship be open, presently to board her is the best
way to take her. But if you see your chase strip himself into fighting sails,
Evident signs that a chase will fight.
that is to put out his colors in the poope, his flag in the maine top, his
streamers or pendants as the ends of his yards arms, furle his spret-saile,
pike his mizen, and sling his maine yard, provide your self to fight. Now
because I would not be tedious in describing a fight at Sea, I have troubled
you with this short preamble that you may the plainlier understand it.

CHAP. XIII. How to manage a fight at Sea, with the proper terms in a fight
largely expressed, and the ordering of a Navy at Sea.
FOr this master piece of this work, I confess I might do better to leave it
to every particular man's conceit as it is, or those of longer practice or more
experience, yet because I have seen many books of the Art of War by land,
Many books of the Art of War for the land, none for the sea.
and never any for the Sea, seeing all men so silent in this most difficult
service, and there are so many young Captains, and others that desire to be
Captains, who know very little, or nothing at all to any purpose, for their
better understanding I have proceeded thus far; now for this that follows,
what I have seen, done, and conceived by my small experience, I refer me to
their friendly constructions, and well advised considerations.

A sail, how bears she or stands she, to wind-ward or lee-ward, set him by
the Compass; he stands right ahead, or on the weather-Bow, or lee-Bow, let
fly your colors if you have a consort, else not. Out with all your sails, a
steady man to the helm, sit close to keep her steady, give him chase or fetch
him up; he holds his own, no, To give chase.
we gather on him. Captain, out ^oes his flag and pendants, also his waste
clothes and top armings, Wast clothes.

Top armings.


which is a long red cloth about three quarters of a yard broad, edged on each
side with Calico or white linen cloth, that goes round about the ship on the
out sides of all her upper works fore and aft, and before the cubbridge heads,
also about the fore and maine tops, as well for the countenance and grace of
the ship, as to cover the men for being seen, he furles and slings his maine
yard, in goes his spret-saile. Thus they use to strip themselves into their
short sails, Fighting sails. To hale a ship.
or figting sails, which is only the fore sail, the maine and fore top
sails, because the rest should not be fired nor spoiled; besides they would be
troublesome to handle, hinder our sights and the using our arms; he makes
ready his close fights fore and aft.

How to begin a fight.
Master how stands the chase? Right on head I say; Well we shall reatch him by
and by; What Is all ready, Yea, yea, every man to his charge, dowse your
top-saile to salute him for the Sea, hale him with a noise of trumpets; Whence
is your ship? Of Spain; Whence is yours? Of England; Are you a Merchant, or a
man of War? We are of the Sea; He waves us to lee-ward with his drawn sword,
calls amain for the King of Spain, and springs his loufe, give him a chase
piece with your broad side, and run a good berth ahead of him; Done, done, We
have the wind of him, and he tackes about, tacke you about also and keep your
loufe, be yare at the helm, edge in with him, give him a volley of small shot,
also your prow and broad side as before, and keep your loufe; He pays us
shot for shot; Well, we shall require him; What are you ready again, Yea,
yea. Try him once more as before, Done, done; Keep your loufe and loge your
ordnance again; Is all ready? Yea, yea; edge in in with him again, begin with
your bow pieces, proceed with your broad side, and let her fall off with the
wind, to give her also your full chase, your weather broad side, and bring her
round that the stern may also discharge, and your tackes close aboard again;
Done, done, the wind veeres, the Sea goes too high to board her, and we are
shot through and through, and between wind and water. Try the pump, bear up the
helm, Master let us breathe and refresh a little, and sling a man over board
to stop the leakes; that is, to trusse him up about the middle in a piece of
canuas, How to sling a man over board.
and a rope to keep him from sinking, and his arms at liberty, with a malet
in the one hand, and a plug lapped in Okum, and well farred in a tarpawling
clout in the other, which he will quickly beat into the hole or holes the
bullets made; What cheer mates, is all well? All well, all well, all well;
Then make ready to bear up with him again, and withal your great and small
shot charge him, and in the smoke board him thwart the hawse, on the bow, mid
ships, or rather then fail, on his quarter, or make fast your graplings if you
can to his close fights and sheare off. Captain we are foul on each other,
and the ship is on fire, cut any thing to get clear, and smother the fire with
wet clothes. In such a case they will presently be such friends, as to help
one the other all they can to get clear, lest they both should burn together
and sink; and if they be generous, the fire quenched, drink kindly one to
another; heave their cans over board, and then begin again as before.

Well Master, the day is spent, the night draws on, A consultation and
direction in a sea fight, and how they bury their dead.
let us consult. Surgeon look to the wounded, and wind up the slain, with
each a weight or bullet at their heads and feet to make them sink, and give
them three gunnes for their funerals, Swabber make clean the ship, Purser
record their Names, Watch be vigilant to keep your berth to wind ward that we
lose him not in the night, Gunners sponge your Ordnance, Soldiers scowre your
pieces, Carpenters about your leakes, Boat swain and the rest repair the
sails and shrouds, and Cook see you observe your directions against the
morning watch, Boy, Holla Master Holla, is the kettle boiled, yea, yea,
Boatswaine call up the men to prayer and break fast.

Boy fetch my cellar of bottels, A preparation for a fresh charge.
a health to you all fore and aft, courage my hearts for a fresh charge,
Gunners beat open the ports, and out with your lower tire, and bring me from
the weather side to the lee, so many pieces as we have ports to bear upon him,
Master lay him aboard loufe for loufe, mid ships men see the tops and yards
well manned, with stones, fi^e pots, and brass bailes, to throw amongst them
before we enter, or if we be put off, charge them with all your great and small
shot, in the smoke let us enter them in the shrouds, and every squadron at his
best advantage, so sound Drums and Trumpets, and Saint George for England.

How a prise does yield, and how to entertain him Seaman like.
They hang out a flag of truce, hale him a maine, a base, or take in his flag,
strike their sails and come aboard with their Captain, Purser and Gunner,
with their commission, cocket, or bills of loading. Out goes the boat, they are
lanched from the ship side, entertain them with a general cry, God save the
Captain and all the company with the Trumpets sounding, examine them in
particular, and then conclude your conditions, with feasting, freedom, or
punishment, as you find occasion; but always have as much care to their
wounded as your own, and if there be either young women or aged men, use them
nobly, which is ever the nature of a generous disposition. To conclude, if you
surprise him, or enter perforce, you may stow the men, rifle, pillage, or
sack, and cry a prise.

How to call a Counsel of War, and order a Navy at Sea.
To call a Council of War in a Fleet; There is your Council of War to
manage all businesses of import, and the common Council for matters of small
moment, when they would have a meeting, where the Admiral does appoint it; if
in the Admiral, they hang out a flag in the maine shrouds; if in the Vice
Admiral, in the fore shrouds; if in the Rear Admiral, in the mizen; If there
be many squadrons, the Admiral of each squadron upon sundry occasions does
carry in their maine tops, flags of sundry colors, or else they are
distinguished by several pendants from the yards arms; every night or morning
they are to come under the Lee of the Admiral to salute him and know his
pleasure, but no Admiral of any squadron is to bear his flag in the maine
top, in the presence of the Admiral general, except the Admiral come aboard
of him to Council, to dinner, or collation, and so any ship else where he so
resideth during that time, is to wear his flag in the maine top. They use to
martial or order those squadrons in ranks like Manaples, which is four
square, if the wind and Sea permits, a good berth or distance from each other,
that they becalme not one another, nor come not foul of each other; the
General commonly in the midst, his Vice Admiral in the front, and his Rear
Admiral in the Rear; or otherwise like a half Moon, which is two squadrons
like two triangles for the two horns, and so the rest of the squadrons behind
each other a good distance, and the General in the midst of the half
circle, from whence he sees all his fleet, and sends his directions, as he
finds occasion to whom he pleases.

Now between two Nauies they use often, Stratagems for Seamen.
especially in a harbor or road where they are at anchor, to fill old Barks
with pitch, tar, train oil, lincet oil, brimstone, rosen, reeds, with dry
wood, and such combustible things, sometimes they link three or four together
in the night, and puts them adrift as they find occasion. To pass a fort some
will make both ship and sails all black, but if the fort keep but a fire on
the other side, and all the pieces point blanke with the fire, if they
discharge what is betwixt them and the fire, the shot will hit if the rule be
truly observed; for when a ship is betwixt the fire and you, she does keep
you from seeing it till she be past it. To conclude, there is as many
stratagems, advantages, and inventions to be used as you find occasions, and
therefore experience must be the best Tutor.

Chap. XIV. The names of all sorts of great Ordnance, and their appurtenances,
with their proper terms and expositions, also diverse observations concerning
their shooting, with a Table of proportion for their weight of metal, weight
of powder, weight of shot, and there best at random and point blanke enlarged.
The Names of great Ordnance.
A Canon royal, or double Canon, a Canon, a Canon Serpentine, a bastard Canon, a
demi Canon, a Canon Petro, a Culuering, a Basilisco, a demi culuering, a
bastard Culuering, a Sacar, a Minion, a Falcon, a Falconet, a Serpentine, a
Rabbinet. Carriages.
To all those do belong carriages whereon pieces do lie supported by an
axeltree betwixt two wh^eles, Trunnions.
whereon does lie the piece upon her trunnions, which are two knobs cast with
the piece on each of hersides, which does lie in two half holes upon the two
cheeks of the carriages, to raise her up or down as you will, Capsquares.
over them are the capsquares, which are two broad pieces of iron does cover
them, made fast by a pin with a fore lock to keep the piece from falling out.
That the piece and carriages is drawn along upon wheels every one does know,
Wheels.
if she be for land service, they have wheels made with spokes like coach
wheels, and according to their proportion strongly shod with iron, Trucks.
and the pins at the ends of the Axeltree is called Linch pins.

If for Sea she have Trucks, which are round intier pieces of wood like
wheels. To mount a Piece.

To dismount a Piece.

Beds.

Quoines.


To mount a piece is ^o lay her upon her carriages; to dismount her to take her
down. Her Bed is a planke does lie next the piece, or the piece upon it upon
the carriage, and betwixt the Piece and it they put their quoines, which are
great wedges of wood with a little handle at the end to put them forward or
backward for leuelling the Piece as you please. Trauas.
To trauas a Piece is to turn her which way you will upon her Platform.
Dispert.
To dispert a Piece is to find a difference betwixt the thickness of the
metal at her mouth and britch or carnouse, Britch.

Carnouse.

Musell.


which is the greatest circle about her britch, and her mussell Ring is the
greatest circle about her mouth thereby to make a just shot, there are diverse
ways to dispert her, but the most easiest is as good as the best: and that is
but by putting a little stick or a straw that is strait into the toutch hole
to the lower part of the Sillinder or Concaue, Sillinder.

Concaue.

Bore.


which is the bore of the Piece and cut it off close by the metal, and then
apply it in the same manner to the mouth, and it will exactly show you the
difference, How to dispert a Piece.
which being set upon the mussell of the Piece with a little Clay, Pitch, or
Wax, it will be as the pin of any Piece is to the sight, level to the
carnouse or britch of the Piece, otherways you may give her allowance
according to your judgment.

Taper boared, Taper boared.
is when a Piece is wider at the mouth then toward the britch, which is
dangerous (if the Bullet go not home) to burst her. Honicombed, Hony-combe.
is when she is ill cast or overmuch worn she will be rugged within, which
is dangerous for a cross bar shot to catch hold by, or any ragge of her
wadding being a fire and sticking there may fire the next charge you put in
her; How to find it.
and you may find if she be Taper boared, either with a crooked wire at the
end of a long staff, by scratching up and down to see where you can catch any
hold, or a light candle at the end of a staff thrust up and down to see if you
can see any fault. Britchings.
Britchings are the ropes by which you lash your Ordnance fast to the Ships
side in foul weather. Chambers.
Chambers is a charge made of brass or iron which we use to put in at the
britch of a sling or Murderer, containing just so much powder as will drive
away the case of stones of shot, or any thing in her. In a great Piece we call
that her Chamber so far as the powder does reach when she is laded.

Cartrages.
A Cartrage is a bag of Canuasse made upon a frame or a round piece of wood
somewhat less than the bore of the Piece, they make them also of paper, they
have also Cartrages or rather cases for Cartrages made of Lattin to keep the
Cartrages in, which is to have no more powder in them than just the charge of
your Piece, and they are closely covered in those cases of Latten, Cases.
to keep them dry, and from any mischances by fire, and are far more ready
and safer than your Ladles or Budgbarrels. A Budgbarell.
A Budgbarrell is a little Barrel made of Latten, filled with powder to carry
from place to place for fear of fire; in the cover it has a long neck to
fill the Ladles withal without opening. A Ladle is a long staff with a piece
of thin Copper at the end like half a Cartrage, A Ladle.
in breadth and length so much as will hold no more powder than the due charge
for the Piece it belongs to. A Sponge.
A Sponge is such another staff, with a piece of a Lamb skin at the end about
it to thrust up and down the Piece, to take off the dust, moisture, or sparks
of fire if any remain in her. A Rammer.
And a Rammer is a bob of wood at the other end to ram home the Powder and
the Waddings. Waddings.
Waddings is Okum, old clouts, or straw, put after the powder and the Bullet.
Wood cases.
A Case is made of two pieces of hollow wood joined together like two half
Cartrages fit to put into the bore of a Piece, Case shot.
and a case shot is any kind of small Bullets, Nails, old iron, or the like
to put into the case to shoot out of the Ordnances or Murderers, these will do
much mischief when we lie board and board: but for Spunges and Rammers they
use now a stiff Rope a little more than the length of the Piece, which you may
turn and wind within board as you will, with much more ease and safety than
the other.

Round Shot is a round Bullet for any Piece: Round shot.

Cross bar shot.


Crosbarshot is also a round shot, but it has a long spike of Iron cast with
it as if it did go through the midst of it, the ends whereof are commonly
armed for fear of bursting the Piece, To Arm a shot.
which is to bind a little Okum in a little Canuasse at the end of each Pike.
Trundle shot.
Trundle shot is only a bolt of iron sixteen or eighteen inches in length;
at both ends sharp pointed, and about a handful from each end a round broad
bowl of lead according to the bore of the Piece cast upon it. Langrell shot
runs loose with a shackell, Langrill shot.
to be shortened when you put it into the Piece, and when it flies out it does
spread it self, it has at the end of either bar a half Bullet either of
lead or iron. Chain shot.
Chain shot is two bullets with a chain betwixt them, and some are contrived
round as in a ball, yet will spread in flying their full length in breadth; all
these are used when you are near a ship to shoot down Masts, Yards, Shrouds,
tear the sails, spoil the men, or any thing that is above the decks. Fire
works.
Fireworkes are diverse, and of many compositions, Arrows of wild fire.

Pikes of wild fire.

Granados of diverse sorts.

Brass Balls.


as Arrows trimmed with wild fire to stick in the sails or ships side shot
burning. Pikes of wild fire to strike burning into a ship side to fire her.
There is also diverse sorts of Granados, some to break and fly in abundance of
pieces every way, as will your brass balls and earthen pots which when they
are covered with quartered bullets stuck in pitch, and the pots filled with
good powder, in a crowd of people will make an incredible slaughter; some will
burn under water, and never extinguish till the stuff be consumed; some
only will burn and fume out a most stinking poison smoke; some, being but
only an Oil, being nointed on anything made of dry wood, will take fire by
the heat of the Sun when the Sun shines hot. There is also a Powder, which
being laid in like manner upon any thing subject to burn, will take fire if
either any rain or water light upon it; but those inventions are bad on shore,
but much worse at Sea, and are naught because so dangerous, and not easy to
be quenched, and their practice worse, because they may do as much mischief
to a friend as to an enemy, therefore I will leave them as they are.

Powder.

Serpentine powder.

Gross corned Powder.

Fine corned Powder.


There are also diverse sorts of Powder, the Serpentine is like dust and weak,
and will not keep at Sea but be moist. The common sort is great corned powder
but gross, and only used in great Ordnance. Your fine corned Powder for hand
Guns is in goodness as your Saltpeter is often refined, and from ten pence a
pound to eighteen pence a pound.

A Tomkin.
A Tomkin is a round piece of wood put into the Pieces mouth and covered with
Tallow, A Fid
and a fid a little Okum made like a nail put in at the toutch hole, and
covered with a thin lead bound above it to keep the Powder dry in the Piece.
Shackels.
Shackels are a kind of Rings but not round, made like them at the hatches
corns (by which we take them up and lay them down) but bigger, fixed to the
midst of the por^s within board, through which we put a billet to keep fast
the port for flying open in soul weather, which may easily endanger, To cloy a
Piece or poison her.
if not sink the Ship. To cloy or poison a Piece, is to drive a nail into her
toutch hole, then you cannot give fire. To vncloy.
And to vncloy her, is to put as much oil as you can about the nail to make
it glib, and by a train give fire to her by her mouth, and so blow it out.

Compass Callipers.
Compass Callipers belongs to the Gunner, and is like two half Circles that
has a handle and joint like a pair of Compasses, but they are blunt at the
points to open as you please for to dispert a Piece. Horn.

Priming Iron.


A Horn is his touch box, his Primer is a small long piece of iron, sharp at
the small end to pierce the Cartrage through the toutch hole. His Lint stock is
a handsome carved stick, Lint stock.
more than half a yard long, with a Cock at the one end to hold fast his
Match, and a sharp pike in the other to stick it fast upon the Deck or
platform upright. Gunners quadrant.

Dark Lanthorn.

Morters.

The names of small Pieces, and their implements


The Gunners quadrant is to level a Piece or mount her to any randon. A dark
Lantern is as well to be used by any body as he. For Morters, or such
chambers as are only used for triumphs, there is no use for them in this
service; but for Curriours, Hargabusacrocks, Muskets, Bastard-muskets,
Coliuers, Crabuts, Carbins, long Pistols or short Pistols, Bandilers.

Bullet bags.

Worms.

Scowrers.

Melting Ladles.

Lead Molds.

Quartered shot.


there belongs to them Bandiliers, bullet Bags, Worms, Scowrers, melting
Ladles, Lead, Molds of al sorts to cast their shot. Quarter Bullets is but any
bullet quartered in four or eight parts, and all those are as useful a
ship-boord as on shore. For the soul, trunk, bore, fortification, the
diversity of their metals, and diverse other curious Theormes or terms used
about great Ordnance, there are so many uncertainties as well in her mounting,
leuelling upon her platform, as also the accidents that may happen in the
powder, the ground, the air, and differences inproportion, I will not
undertake to prescribe any certain artificial rule. These proportions
following are near the matter, but for your better satisfaction read Master
Digs Pantrimetria, Master Smith, or Master Burns art of Gunnery, or Master
Robert Nortons Exposition upon Master Digs Stratiaticos, any of those will show
the Theoricke at large. But to be a good Gunner you must learn it by practice.

A Table of proportion for the weight and shooting of great Ordnance.
The names of the great Pieces. The height of the pieces. The weight of the
pieces. The weight of the shot. The weight of the powder The breadth of the
Ladle. The length of the Ladle. 2400. ^. of powder makes of shot in a Shot
point blanke in Shot random in Inches. Pound. Pound. Pound Inche. Inches.
P^^ce. Pi^e^ ^^^e^. These Pieces be most serviceable for battery being within
80. paces to their mark, which is the chief of their forces. 1 A Canon
Royal. 8 8000 66 30 13 24 80 16 1930 2 A Canon. 8 6000 60 27 12 24 85 17 2000
3 A Canon Sarpentine. 7 5500 53 25 10 23 96 20 2000 4 A Bastard Canon. 7 4500
41 20 10 23 120 18 1800 5 A demi Canon. 6 4000 30 18 9 23 133 17 1700 6 A Canon
Petro. 6 3000 24 14 9 23 171 16 1600 These Pieces be good and also serviceable
to be mixed with the above Ordnance for battery to pieces being crossed with the
rest, as also fit for castles, Forts, and Walls to be planted, and for defense.
7 A Culuering. 5 4500 17 12 8 22 200 20 2500 8 A Basilisco. 5 4000 15 10 7 22
240 25 3000 9 A demi Culuering. 4 3400 9 8 6 21 300 20 2500 10 A bastard
Culuering. 4 3000 7 6 6 20 288 18 1800 11 A Sacre. 3 1400 5 5 5 18 490 17 1700
12 A Minion. 3 1000 4 4 4 17 600 16 ^600 13 A F^ulcon. 2 660 2 2 4 15 1087 15
1500 14 A Faulcon. 2 800 3 3 4 15 800 15 1500 These Pieces are good and
serviceable for the field, and most ready for defense. 15 A Faulconet. 2 500 1
1 3 11 1950 14 1400 16 A Sarpentine. 1 400 2 10 7200 13 1300 17 A Rabonet. 1
300 1 6 4800 12 1000

Note that seldom in Ships they use any Ordnance greater than Demi Canons, nor
have they any certainty either at point blanke or any random.

Note your Serpentine powder in old time was in meal, but now corned and made
stronger, and called Canon corn powder.

But that for small Ordnance is called corn Powder fine, and ought to have in
strength a quarter more, because those small Pieces are better fortified than
the greater.

Now if you have but one sort of Powder for all, abate part, and cut off of the
breadth and length of your Ladle.

But Cartrages are now found the best and most readiest.

Provided always, that all Shot must be a quarter less than the height of the
Piece.

CHAP. XV. How they divide their shares in a man of War, what Books and
Instruments are fit for a Sea man, with diverse aduertisements for Sea men, and
the use of the petty Tally.
THe ship has one third part, the victuallar the other third, the other third
part is for the Company, and this is subdivided thus in shares. Shares.


The Captain has 10 In some but 9. The Lieutenant 9 or as he agrees with the
Captain. The Master 8 In some but 7. The Mates 7 5. The Surgeon 6 3. The
Gunner 6 5. The Boatswaine 6 5. The Carpenter 6 5. The Trumpeter 6 5. The 4.
quarter Mast. 5 apeece, or 4. The Cooper 5 4. The Chirurg. Mate 5 4. The
Gunners Mate 5 4. The Carpent. Mate 5 4. The Corporal 4 3. The quarter Gunners
4 3. The Trump. Mate 3 3. The Steward. 4 3. The Cook 4 3. The Coxswaine 4 3.
The Swabber 4 3.

In English ships they seldom use any Marshall, whose shares amongst the
French is equal with the Boatswaines, all the rest of the Younkers, or
fore-mast-men according to their deserts, some 3. some 2. and. some 1. and ^.
and the boys 1. which is a single share, or 1. and. or as they do deserve.

Now the Master, or his right hand Mate, the Gunner, Boatswaine, and four
quarter Masters do make the shares, not the Captain, who has only this
privilege, to take away half a share, or a whole share at most, to give from
one to another as he best pleases.

For to learn to observe the Altitude, Latitude, Longitude, Amplitude, the
variation of the Compass, the Suns Azimuth and Almicanter, to shift the Sun
and Moon, and know the tides, your Rooms, prick your Card, say your
Compass, and get some of these books, but practice is the best. Master
Wrights errors of Navigations. Master Tapps Sea-mans Calendar. The Art of
Navigations. The Sea Regiment. The Sea-mans secret. Waggoner. Master Gunters
works. The Sea-mans glass for the Scale. The New Attracter for variation.
Master Wright for use of the Globe. Master Hewes for the same.


Instruments fitting for a Seaman.
Compasses so many pair and sorts as you will, an Astrolobe Quadrant, a Cross
staff, a Back staff, an Astrolobe, a Nocturnall.

Young Gentlemen that desires command at Sea, Aduertisment^ for young
Commanders, Captains, and other Officers.
ought well to consider the condition of his ship, victual, and company, for
if there be more learners than sailers how slightly soever many esteem
sailers, all the work to save, ship, goods, and lives must lie upon them,
especially in foul weather, then their labor, hazard, wet and cold, is so
incredible I cannot express it. It is not then the number of them that here
can say at home what I cannot do I can quickly learn, and what a great matter
is it to sail a ship, or go to Sea; surely those for a good time will do
more trouble than good, I confess it is most necessary such should go, but
not too many in one ship; for if the labor of threescore should lie upon
thirty, (as many times it does) they are so ouer-charged with labor, bruises,
and ouerstraining themselves they fall sick of one disease or other, for there
is no dallying nor excuses with storms, gusts, ouergrowne Seas, and
lee-shores, and when their victual is putrified it endangers all: Men of all
other professions in lighting, thunder, storms, and tempests with rain and
snow may shelter themselves in dry houses by good fires, but those are the
chief times Seamen must stand to their tackling, and attend with all
diligence their greatest labor upon the deckes. Many suppose any thing is good
enough to serve men at sea, and yet nothing sufficient for them ashore, either
for their healthes, for their ease, or estates, or state; A Commander at Sea
should do well to think the contrary, and provide for himself and company in
like manner; also seriously to consider what will be his charge to furnish
himself at Sea with bedding, linen, arms, and apparel, how to keep his
table aboard, and his expenses on shore, and provide his petty Tally, which is
a competent proportion according to your number of these particulars following.
^he petty Tally.


Fine wheat flower close and well packed, Rice, Currands, Sugar, Prunes,
Cynamon, Ginger, Pepper, Cloves, green Ginger, Oil, Butter, Holland cheese,
or old Cheese, Wine vinegar, Canarie sack, Aqua vita, the best Wines, the best
waters, the juice of Limons for the scuruy, white Biscuit, Oatmeale, gammons of
Bacon, dried Neats tongues, Beef packed up in vinegar, Legs of Mutton minced
and stewed, and close packed up, with tried sewet or butter in earthen pots. To
entertain strangers Marmalad, Suckets, Almonds, Comfits and such like.

Some it may be will say I would have men rather to feast than fight; The use
of the petty Tally.
But I say the want of those necessaries occasions the loss of more men than
in any English fleet has been slain since 88. For when a man is ill, or at
the point of death, I would know whether a dish of buttered Rice with a little
Cynamon, Ginger, and Sugar, a little minced meat, or roast Beef, a few stewed
Prunes, a race of green Ginger, a Flap-iacke, a can of fresh Water brewed with
a little Cinnamon, Ginger, and Sugar be not better than a little poor John, or
salt fish with oil and mustard, or biscuit, butter, cheese, or oatmeale pottage
on fish days, or on flesh days salt Beef, Porke, and Pease with six
shillings beer, this is your ordinary ships allowance, and good for them are
well if well conditioned, which is not always as Seamen can (too well)
witness. And after a storm, when poor men are all wet, and some have not so
much as a cloth to shift him, shaking with cold, few of those but will tell you
a little Sack or Aqua vitae is much better to keep them in health, than a
little small beer, or cold water although it be sweet. Now that every one
should provide those things for himself, few of them have either that
providence or means, and there is neither Alehouse, Tavern, nor Inneto burn
a faggot in, neither Grocer, Poulterer, Apothecary, nor Butchers shop, and
therefore the use of this petty Tally is necessary, and thus to be employed as
there is occasion. To entertain strangers as they are in quality every
Commander should show himself as like himself as he can, as well for the
credit of the ship, and his setters sorth, as himself; but in that herein
every one may moderate themselves according to their own pleasures, therefore
I leave it to their own discretions, and this brief discourse, and my self
to their friendly construction, and good opinion.

FINIS.

