ADVERTISEMENTS For the unexperienced Planters of New. England, or any where.

OR, The Pathway to experience to erect a PLANTATION.

With the yearly proceedings of this Country in Fishing and Planting, since
the year 1614. to the year 1630. and their present estate.

Also how to prevent the greatest inconveniences, by their proceedings in
Virginia, and other Plantations, by approved examples.

With the Countries Arms, a description of the Coast, Harbors, Habitations,
Land-markes, Latitude and Longitude: with the Map, allowed by our Royal King
CHARLES.

By Captain JOHN SMITH, sometimes Governor of VIROINIA, and Admiral of
NEW ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN HAVILAND, and are to be sold by ROBERT MILBOVRNE, at
the Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard. 1631.

GENS IN COGNITA MIHI SERVIET


To the Most Reverend Father in God, GEORGE Lord Archbishop of CANTERBVRIE his
Grace, Primate and Metrapolitan of all ENGLAND: AND The Right Reverend Father
in God, SAMVEL Lord Archbishop of YORK his Grace, Primate and Metrapolitan of
ENGLAND.
MY most Gracious Good Lords, I desire to leave testimony to the world, how
highly I honor as well the Miter as the Lance: therefore where my last Book
presented three most honorable Earls with a subject of War, and received
from them favorable acceptance: the work I now prosecute, concerning the
Plantation of New England, for the increase of Gods Church, converting
Salvages, and enlarging the Kings Dominions, prostrates it self humbly to your
Graces; who as you are in the name of Prelacy to this Kingdom, so you are to
me in goodness both Fathers and Protectors unexpectedly. God long preserve
your Gracious lives, and continue favor

Unto both your Graces most devoted servant, JOHN SMITH.

To the Reader.
HONEST READER,
APelles by the proportion of a foot, could make the whole proportion of a man:
were he now living, he might go to schools for now are thousands can by
opinion proportion Kingdoms, Cities, and Lordships, that never durst adventure
to see them. Malignancy, I expect from those, have lived 10. or 12. years in
those actions, and return as wise as they went, claiming time and experience
for their tutor, that can neither shift Sun nor Moon, nor say their Compass,
yet will tell you of more than all the world, betwixt the Exchange, Paul's and
Westminster: so it be news, it matters not what, that will pass current when
truth must be stayed with an army of conceits that can make or mar any thing,
and tell as well what all England is by seeing but Milford haven, as what
Apelles was by the picture of his great too. Now because examples give a
quicker impression than arguments, I have writ this discourse to satisfy
understanding, wisdom, and honesty, and not such as can do nothing but find
fault with that they neither know nor can amend. So I rest

Your friend John Smith.

The Sea Mark.
Aloof, aloof, and come no near,
the dangers do appear;
Which if my ruin had not been
you had not seen:
I only lie upon this shelfe
to be a mark to all
which on the same might fall,
That none may perish but my self.
If in or outward you be bound,
do not forget to sound;
Neglect of that was cause of this
to steare amiss.
The Seas were calm, the wind was fair,
that made me so secure,
that now I must endure
All weathers be they soul or fair.
The Winters cold, the Summers heat,
alternatively beat
Upon my bruised sides, that ^ue
because too true
That no relief can ever come.
But why should I despair
being promised so fair
That there shall be a day of Dome.
The Contents.
CHAP. 1. WHat people they are that begin this plantation, the bane of
Virginia: strange misprisions of wise men. CHAP. 2. Needless custom, effect
of flattery, cause of misery, factions, careless government, the dissolving
the Company and Patent. CHAP. 3. A great comfort to new England, it is no
Island, a strange plague. CHAP. 4. Our right to those Countries, true reasons
for plantations, rare examples. CHAP. 5. My first voyage to new England, my
return and profit. CHAP. 6. A description of the Coast, Harbors, Habitations,
Landmarks, Latitude, Longitude, with the map. CHAP. 7. New Englands yearly
trials, the planting new Plimoth, supprisals prevented, their wonderful
industry and fishing. CHAP. 8. Extremity next despair, Gods great mercy, their
estate, they make good salt, an unknown rich mine. CHAP. 9. Notes worth
observation, miserableness no good husbandry. CHAP. 10. The mistaking of
Patents, strange effects, encouragements for servants. CHAP. 11. The planting
Bastable or Salem and Charlton, a description of the Massachusetts. CHAP. 12.
Extraordinary means for building, many caveats, increase of corn, how to
spoil the woods, for any thing, their healths. CHAP. 13. Their great supplies,
present estate and accidents, advantage. CHAP. 14. Ecclesiastical government
in Virginia, authority from the Arch Bishop, their beginning at Bastable now
called Salem. CHAP. 15. The true model of a plantation, tenure, increase of
trade, true examples, necessity of expert Soldiers, the names of all the first
discoverers for plantations and their actions, what is requisite to be in the
Governor of a plantation, the expedition of Queen Elizabeth's Sea Captains.
SIGISMVNDVS BATHORI D G DVX TRANSILVANIE WALL
NONONONONONON





ADVERTISEMENTS: OR, The Pathway to Experience to erect a Plantation.
CHAP. 1.
What people they are that begin this plantation: the have of Virginia:
strange misprisions of wisemen.

THe Wars in Europe, Asia, and Africa, taught me how to subdue the wild
Salvages in Virginia and New England, in America; which now after many a stormy
blast of ignorant contradictors, projectors, and undertakers, both they and I
have been so tossed and tortured into so many extremities, as despair was the
next we both expected, till it pleased God now at last to stir up some good
minds, that I hope will produce glory to God, honor to his Majesty, and
profit to his Kingdoms, although all our Plantations have been so foiled and
abused, their best good willers have been for the most part discouraged, and
their good intents disgraced, as the general History of them will at large
truly relate you.

Pardon me if I offend in loving that I have cherished truly, No Browaist nor
Separatist admitted.
by the loss of my prime fortunes, means, and youth: If it over-glad me to
see Industry her self adventure now to make use of my aged endeavors, not by
such (I hope) as rumor does report, a many of discontented Brownists,
Anabaptists, Papists, Puritans, Separatists, and such factions Humorists, for
no such they will suffer among them, if known, as many of the chief of them
have assured me, and the much conferences I have had with many of them, does
considently persuade me to writethus much in their behalf.

I mean not the Brownists of Leyden and Amsterdam at New-Plimoth, who although
by accident, ignorance, and wilfulness, have endured with a wonderful
patience, many losses and extremities; yet they subsist and prosper so well,
not any of them will abandon the Country, but to the utmost of their powers
increase their numbers: But of those which are gone within this eighteen
months for Cape Anne, and the Bay of the Massachusetts: those which are their
chief what they are that biginne this Plantation.
Undertakers are Gentlemen of good estate, some of 500, some a thousand pound
land a year, all which they say they will sell for the advancing this
harmless and pious work; men of good credit and well-beloved in their
Country, not such as fly for debt, or any scandal at home, and are good
Catholic Protestants according to the reformed Church of England, if not, it
is well they are gone: the rest of them men of good means, or Arts,
Occupations, and Qualities, much more fit for such a business, and better
furnished of all necessaries if they arrive well, than was ever any Plantation
went out of England: I will not say but some of them may be more precise than
needs, nor that they all be so good as they should be, for Christ had but
twelve Apostles, and one was a traitor; and if there be no dissemblers among
them, it is more than a wonder: therefore do not condemn all for some; but
however they have as good authority from his Majesty as they could desire, if
they do ill, the loss is but their own; if well, a great glory and exceeding
good to this Kingdom, to make good at last what all our former conclusions
have disgraced. Now they take not that course the Virginia company did The bine
of Virginia.
for the Planters there, their purses and lives were subject to some few here
in London who were never there, that consumed all in Arguments, Projects, and
their own conceits, every year trying new conclusions, altering every thing
yearly as they altered opinions, till they had consumed more than two hundred
thousand pounds, and near eight thousand men's lives.

It is true, in the year of our Lord 1622. they were about seven or eight
thousand English indifferently well furnished with most necessaries, and many
of them grew to that height of bravery, living in that plenty and excess, that
went thither not worth any thing, made the Company here think all the world
was Oatmeale there, and all this proceeded by surviving those that died, nor
were they ignorant to use as curious tricks there as here, and out of the juice
of Tobacco, which at first they sold at such good rates, they regarded nothing
but Tobacco; a commodity then so vendable, it provided them all things: and the
loving Salvages their kind friends, they trained so well up to shoot in a
Piece, to hunt and kill them foul, they became more expert than our own
Countrymen, whose labors were more profitable to their Masters in planting
Tobacco, and other business.

This superfluity caused my poor beginnings scorned, or The differences
betwixt my beginning in Virginia and the proceedings of my successors.
to be spoken of but with much derision, that never sent Ship from thence
fraught, but only some small quantities of Wainscot, Clap-board, Pitch, Tar,
Rosin, Sope-ashes, Glass, Cedar, Cypress, Black Walnut, Knees for Ships, Ash
for Pikes, Iron Ore none better, some Silver Ore, but so poor it was not
regarded; better there may be, for I was no Mineralist, some Sturgion, but it
was too tart of the Vinegar, which was of my own store, for little came from
them which was good; and Wine of the Countries wild Grapes, but it was too
sour, yet better than they sent us any: in two or three years but one
Hogshead of Claret. Only speading my time to revenge my imprisonment upon the
harmless innocent Salvages, who by my cruelty I forced to feed me with their
contribution, and to send any offended my idle humor to James town to punish
at mine own discretion; or keep their Kings and subjects in chains, and make
them work. Things clean contrary to my Commission; whilst I and my company
took our needless pleasures in discovering the Countries about us, building
of Forts, and such unnecessary fooleries, where an Egge-shell (as they writ)
had been sufficient against such enemies; neglecting to answer the Merchants
expectations with profit, feeding the Company only with Letters and tastes of
such commodities as we writ the Country would afford in time by industry, as
Silk, Wines, Oils of Olives, Rape, and Linsed, Rasons, Prunes, Flax, Hemp,
and Iron, as for Tobacco, we never then dreamt of it.

Now because I sent not their ships full fraught home with those commodities,
they kindly writ to me, if we failed the next return, they would leave us
there as banished men, as if houses and all those commodities did grow
naturally, only for us to take at our pleasure, with such tedious Letters,
directions, and instructions, and most contrary to that was fitting, we did
admire how it was possible such wise men could A strange mistake is wise men.
so torment themselves and us with such strange absurdities and
impossibilities, making Religion their color, when all their aim was nothing
but present profit, as most plainly appeared, by sending us so many Refiners,
Goldsmiths, Iewellers, Lapidarics, Stone-cutters, Tabacco-pipe-makers,
Imbroderers, Perfumers, Silkemen, with all their appurtenances, but materials,
and all those had great sums out of the common stock: and so many spies and
super-intendents over us, as if they supposed we would turn Rebels, all
striving to suppress and advance they knew not what: at last got a Commission
in their own names, promising the King custom within seven years, where we
were free for one and twenty, appointing the Lord De-la-ware for Governor,
with as many great and stately officers, and offices under him, as does belong
to a great Kingdom, with good sums for their extraordinary expenses; also
privileges for Cities, Charters, for Corporations, Universities, Free-schooles,
and Glebe-land, putting all those in practice before there were either people,
students, or scholars to build or use them, or provision and victual to feed
them were then there: and to amend this, most of the Tradesmen in London that
would adventure but twelve pounds ten shillings, had the furnishing the Company
of all such things as belonged to his trade, such juggling there was betwixt
them, and such intruding Committies their associats, that all the trash they
could get in London was sent us to Uirginia, they being well paid for that was
good. Much they blamed us for not converting the Salvages, when those they sent
us were little better, if nor worse, nor did they all convert any of those we
sent them to England for that purpose. So doting of Mines of gold, and the
South Sea, that all the world could not have devised better courses to bring us
to ruin than they did themselves, with many more such like strange concoits;
by this you may avoid the like inconveniences, and take heed by those examples,
you have not too many irons in the fire at once, neither such change of
Governors, nor such a multitude of Officers, neither more Masters, Gentlemen,
Gentlewomen, and children, than you have men to work, which idle charge you
will find very troublesome, and the effects dangerous, and one hundred good
laborers better than a thousand such Gallants as were sent me, that could do
nothing but complain, curse, and despair, when they saw our miseries, and all
things so clean contrary to the report in England, yet must I provide as well
for them as for my self.

CHAP. 2.
Needless custom, effect of flatterr, cause of misery, factions, careless
government, the dissolving the Company and Patent.

THis the Mariners and Sailors did ever all they could Thee effect of slavrry
the (...) of misery.
to conceal, who had always both good fare, and good pay for the most part,
and part out of our own purses, never caring how long they stayed upon their
voyage, daily feasting before our faces, when we lived upon a little corn and
water, and not half enough of that, the most of which we had from amongst the
Salvages. Now although there be Dear in the woods, Fish in the rivers, and
Fowls in abundance in their seasons; yet the woods are so wide, the rivers so
broad, and the beasts so wild, and we so unskilful to catch them, we little
troubled them nor they us: for all this our letters that still signified unto
them the plain truth, would not be believed, because they required such things
as was most necessary: but their opinion was otherwise, for they desired but
to pack over so many as they could, saying necessity would make them get
victuals for themselves, as for good laborers they were more useful here in
England: but they found it otherwise; the charge was all one to send a workman
as a roarer, whose clamors to appease, we had much ado to get fish and corn
to maintain them from one supply till another came with more loyterers without
victuals still to make us worse and worse, for the most of them would rather
starve than work; yet had it not been for some few that were Gentlemen, both
by birth, industry, and discretion, we could not possibly have subsisted.

Many did urge I might have forced them to it, having authority that extended
so far as death: but I say, having neither Take heed of factions bred in
England.
meat, drink, lodging, pay, nor hope of any thing, or preferment; and seeing
the Merchants only did what they listed with all they wrought for, I know not
what punishment could be greater than that they endured; which miseries caused
us always to be in factions, the most part striving by any means to abandon
the Country, and I with my party to prevent them and cause them stay. But
indeed the cause of our factions was bred here in England, and grew to that
maturity among themselves that spoiled all, as all the Kingdom and other
Nations can too well testify: Yet in the year 1622. there were about seven or
eight thousand English, as has been said, so well trained, secure, and well
furnished, as they reported and conceited. These simple Salvages their bosom
friends, I so much oppressed, had laid their plot how to cut all their throats
in a morning, and upon the 22. of March, so innocently attempted it, they slew
three hundred forty seven, set their houses on fire, slew their cattle, and
brought them to that distraction and confusion within less The Massacre in
Virginia.
than a year, there were not many more than two thousand remaining: the which
loss to repair the company did what they could, till they had consumed all
their stock as is said: then they broke, not making any account, nor giving
satisfaction to the Lords, Planters, Adventurers, nor any, whose noble intents
had referred the managing of this intricate business to a few that lost not by
it; so that his Majesty recalled How the company dissolved.
their Commission, and by more just cause: then they persuaded King James to
call in ours, which were the first beginners without our knowledge or consent,
disposing of us and all our indevours at their pleasures.

CHAP. 3.
A great comfort to new England, it is no Island: a strange plague.

NOtwithstanding since they have been left in a manner, as it were, to
themselves, they have increased The abundance of victuals now in Virginia.
their numbers to four or five thousand, and near as many cattle, with
plenty of Goats, abundance of Swine, Poultry and Come, that as they report,
they have sufficient and to spare, to entertain three or four hundred people,
which is much better than to have many people more than provision. Now having
glutted the world with their too much over-abounding Tobacco: Reason, or
necessity, or both, will cause them, I hope, learn in time better to fortify
themselves, and make better use of the trials of their gross commodities that
I have propounded, and at the first sent over: and were it not a lamentable
dishonor so goodly a Country after so much cost, loss, and trouble, should
now in this estate not be regarded and supplied. And to those of New England
may it not be a great comfort to have so near A great comfort for New England
by Virginia.
a neighbor of their own Nation, that may furnish them with their spare
cattle, swine, poultry, and other roots and fruits, much better than from
England. But I fear the seed of envy, and the rust of covetousness does grow
too fast, for some would have all men advance Virginia to the ruin of
New England; and others the loss of Virginia to sustain New England, which
God of his mercy forbid: for at first it was intended by that most memorable
Judge Sir John Popham, then Lord chief Justice of England, and the Lords of
his Majesty's Privy Council, with diverse others, that two Colonies should be
planted, as now they be, for the better strengthening each other against all
occurrences; the which to perform, shall ever be in my hearty prayers to
Almighty God, to increase and continue that mutual love betwixt them for ever.

By this you may perceive somewhat, what unexpected inconveniences are incident
to a plantation, especially in such The differences betwixt the beginning of
Virginia, and them of Salem.
a multitude of voluntary contributers, superfluity of officers, and
unexperienced Commissioners. But it is not so, as yet, with those for
New England; for they will neither believe nor use such officers, in that they
are overseers of their own estates, and so well bred in labor and good
husbandry as any in England, where as few as I say was sent me to Virginia, but
these were naught here and worse there.

Now when these shall have laid the foundations, and provided means
beforehand, they may entertain all the poor A necessary consideration.
artificers and laborers in England, and their families which are burdensome
to their Parishes and Countries where they live upon alms and benevolence for
want of work, which if they would but pay for their transportation, they
should never be troubled with them more; for there is vast land enough for all
the people in England, Scotland, and Ireland: and it seems God has provided
this Country New England is no Island but the maine continent.
for our Nation, destroying the natives by the plague, it not touching one
Englishman, though many traded and were conversant amongst them; for they had
three plagues in three years successively near two hundred miles along the
Sea coast, that in some places there scarce remained five of a hundred, and as
they report thus it began:

A fishing ship being cast away upon the coast, two of the men escaped on
shore; one of them died, the other lived among the natives till he had learned
their language: then he persuaded them to become Christians, showing them a
Testament, some parts thereof expounding so well as he could, but they so much
derided him, that he told them he feared his God would destroy them: whereat
the King assembled A strange plague among the Salvages.
all his people about a hill, himself with the Christian standing on the top,
demanded if his God had so many people and able to kill all those? He answered
yes, and surely would, and bring in strangers to possess their land: but so
long they mocked him and his God, that not long after such a sickness came,
that of five or six hundred about the Massachusetts there remained but thirty,
on whom their neighbors fell and slew twenty eight: the two remaining fled the
Country till the English came, then they returned and surrendered their Country
and title to the English: if this be not true in every particular, excuse me, I
pray you, for I am not the Author: but it is most certain there was an
exceeding great plague amongst them; for where I have seen two or three
hundred, within three years after remained scarce thirty, but what disease it
was the Salvages knew not till the English told them, never having seen, nor
heard of the like before.

CHAP. 4.
Our right to those Countries, true reasons for plantations, rare examples.

MAny good religious devout men have made it a By what right we may possess
those Countries law fully.
great question, as a matter in conscience, by what warrant they might go to
possess those Countries, which are none of theirs, but the poor Salvages.
Which poor curiosity will answer it self; for God did make the world to be
inhabited with mankind, and to have his name known to all Nations, and from
generation to generation: as the people increased they dispersed themselves
into such Countries as they found most convenient. And here in Florida,
Virginia, New England, and Cannada, is more land than all the people in
Christendom can manure, and yet more to spare than all the natives of those
Countries can use and culturate. And shall we here keep such a coil for land,
and as such great rents and rates, when there is so much of the world
uninhabited, and as much more in other places, and as good, or rather better
than any we possess, were it manured and used accordingly. If this be not a
reason sufficient to such tender consciences; for a copper kettle and a few
toys, as beads and hatchets, they will fell you a whole Country; and for a
small matter, their houses and the ground they dwell upon; but those of the
Massachusetts have resigned theirs freely.

Now the reasons for plantations are many; Adam and True reasons for those
plantations.
Eve did first begin this innocent work to plant the earth to remain to
posterity, but not without labor, trouble, and industry: Noah and his family
began again the second plantation, and their seed as it still increased, has
still planted new Countries, and one Country another, and so the world to that
estate it is; but not without much hazard, travel, mortalities, discontents,
and many disasters: had those worthy Fathers and their memorable offspring not
been more diligent for us now in those ages, than we are to plant that yet
unplanted for after-livers. Had the seed of Abraham, our Savior Christ Jesus
and his Apostles, exposed themselves to no more dangers to plant the Gospel
we so much profess, than we, even we our selves had at this present been as
Salvages, and as miserable as the most barbarous Salvage, yet uncivilized. The
Hebrews, Lacedaemonians, the Goths, Grecians, Romans, and the rest, what was it
they would not undertake to enlarge their Territories, enrich their subjects,
and resist their enemies. Those that were the founders of those great
Monarchies and their virtues, were no silvered idle golden Pharisees, but
industrious honest hearted Publicans, they regarded more provisions and
necessaries for their people, than jewels, ease and delight for themselves;
riches was their servants, not their masters; they ruled as fathers, not as
tyrants; their people as children, not as slaves; there was no disaster could
discourage them; and let none think they incountered not with all manner of
encumbrances, and what has ever been the work of the best great Princes of
the world, but planting of Countries, and civilizing barbarous and inhumane
Nations to civility and humanity, whose eternal actions fills our histories
with more honor than those that have wasted and consumed them by wars.

Lastly, the Portugals and Spaniards that first began plantations Rare examples
of the Spaniards, Portugals, and the Ancients.
in this unknown world of America till within this 140. years, whose
everlasting actions before our eyes, will testify our idleness and
ingratitude to all posterity, and neglect of our duty and religion we owe our
God, our King, and Country, and want of charity to those poor Salvages, whose
Countries we challenge, use, and possess, except we be but made to mar what
our forefathers made, or but only tell what they did, or esteem our selves too
good to take the like pains where there is so much reason, liberty, and action
offers it self, having as much power and means as others: why should English
men despair and not do so much as any? Was it virtue in those Heroes to
provide that does maintain us, and baseness in us to do the like for others
to come? Surely no; then seeing we are not borne for our selves but each to
help other, and our abilities are much alike at the hour of our birth and
minute of our death: seeing our good deeds or bad, by faith in Christ's merits,
is all we have to carry our souls to heaven or hell: Seeing honor is our
lives ambition, and our ambition after death, to have an honorable memory of
our life: and seeing by no means we would be abated of the dignity and
glory of our predecessors, let us imitate their virtues to be worthily their
successors, or at least not hinder, if not further them that would and do
their utmost and best endeavor.

CHAP. 5.
My first voyage to new England my return and profit.

TO begin with the originals of the voyages to those My first voyage to
Notumbega now called New England. 1614.
coasts, I refer you to my general history; for New England by the most of
them was esteemed a most barren rocky desert: Notwithstanding at the sole
charge of some Merchants of London and my self, 1614. within eight weeks
sailing I arrived at Mo^ahigan an I Will in America in 43. degrees 39. minutes of
Northerly latitude. Had the fishing for Whale proved as we expected, I had
stayed in the Country; but we found the plots we had, so false, and the
seasons for fishing and trade by the unskilfulnesse of our Pylot so much
mistaken, I was contented, having taken by hooks and lines with fifteen or
eighteen men at most, more than 60000. Cod in less than a month: whilst my
self with eight others of them might best be spared, by an hour glass of
three months, ranging the coast in a small boat, got for trifles eleven
hundred Bever skins beside Otters and Martins; all amounting to the value of
fifteen hundred We got 1500. pound in six months.
pound, and arrived in England with all my men in health in six or seven
months: But Northward the French returned this year to France five and twenty
thousand bevers and good furs, whilst we were contending about Patents and
Commissions, with such fearful incredulity that more dazeled our eyes than
opened them. In this voyage I took the description of the coast as well by map
as writing, and called 25000. Bevers sent to France.
it New England: but malicious minds amongst Sailers and others, drowned that
name with the echo of Nusconcus, Canaday, and Penaquid; till at my humble
suit, our most gracious King Charles, then Prince of Wales, was pleased to
confirm it by that title, and did change the barbarous names of their
principal Harbors and habitations for such English, that posterity may say,
King Charles was their Godfather; and in my opinion it should seem an
unmannerly presumption in any that does alter them without his leave.

My second voyage was to begin a Plantation, and to My second and third
voyage. 1615. 1616.
do what else I could, but by extreme tempests that bore near all my Masts by
the board, being more than two hundred leagues at Sea, was forced to return to
Plimoth with a Jury-Mast. The third was intercepted by English and French
Pirates, by my treacherous company that betrayed me to them, who ran away with my
Ship and all that I had, such enemies the Sailers were to a Plantation, and the
greatest loss being mine, did easily excuse themselves to the Merchants in
England, that still provided to follow the fishing: much difference there was
betwixt the Londoners and the Westerlings to ingrosse it, who now would
adventure thousands, that when I went first would not adventure a groat; yet
there went four or five good Ships, but what by their dissension, and the
Turks men of war that took the best of them in the Straits, they scarce
saved themselves this year. At my return from France I did my best to have
united them, but that had been more than a work for Hercules, so violent is
the folly of greedy covetousness.

CHAP. 6.
A description of the Coast, Harbors, Habitations, Landmarks, Latitude,
Longitude, with the map.

THis Country we now speak of, lies betwixt 41. A description of the Country.
and 44 the very mean for heat and cold betwixt the Equinoctial and (...)
North Pole, in which I have founded about five and twenty very good Harbors; in
many whereof is Ancorage for five hundred good ships of any burden, in some of
them for a thousand, and more than three hundred Isles overgrowne with good
timber, or diverse sorts of other woods; in most of them (in their seasons)
plenty of wild fruits, Fish, and Foul, and pure springs of most excellent
water pleasantly distilling from their rockie foundations. The principal
habitations I was at Northward, was Pennobscot, who are in wars with the
Terentines, their next Northerly neighbors. Southerly up the Rivers, and along
the Coast, we found Mecadacut, Segocket, Pemmaquid, Nusconcus, Sagadahock,
Satquin, Aumughcawgen, and Kenabeca: to those belong the Countries and people
of Segot igo, Pauhuntanuck, Pocopassum, Taughtanakagnet, Wabigganus, Nassaque,
Masherosqueck, Wawrtgwick, Moshoquen, Waccogo, Pasharanack, etc. To those are
alied in confederacy, the Countries of Aucocisco, Accominticus, Passataquak,
Augawoam and Naemkeck, all these for any thing I could perceive differ little
in language or any thing, though most of them be Sagamos, and Lords of
themselves, yet they hold the Bashabes of Pennobscot the chief and greatest
amongst them. The next is Mattahunt, Totant, Massachuset, Paconekick, then Cape
Cod, by which is Pawmet, the Isles Nawset and Capawuck, near which are the
shoules of Rocks and sands that stretch themselves into the maine Sea twenty
leagues, and very dangerous betwixt the degrees of 40. and 41.

Now beyond Cape Cod, the land extends it self Southward to Virginia,
Florida, the West Indies, the Amazons, and Brasele, to the straits of
Magelanus, two and fifty degrees Southward beyond the Line; all those great
Countries, differing as they are in distance North or South from the
Equinoctial, in temper, heat, cold, Woods, Fruits, Fishes, Beasts, Birds, the
increase and decrease of the night and day, to six Under the Equinoctial,
twelve hours day, and twelve night.
months day and six months night. Some say, many of those Nations are so
brute they have no Religion, wherein surely they may be deceived, for myself I
never saw nor heard of any Nation in the world which had not Religion, Dear,
Bows, and Arrows. Those in New England, I take it, believe much alike as
those in Virginia, of many divine Powers, yet of one above all the rest; as the
Southerly Virginians call their chief God Kewassa, and that we now inhabit,
Okae, but Their Religion.
all their Kings Werowances. The M^ssichusots call their great God Kichtan, and
their Kings Sachemes; and that we suppose their Devil, they call Habamouk. The
Pennobscots, their God, Tantum, their Kings, Sagamos. About those Countries are
abundance of several Nations and languages, but much alike in their simple
curiosities, living and workmanship, except the wild estate of their chief
Kings, etc.

Of whose particular miserable magnificence, yet most happy in this, that they
never trouble themselves with such variety of Apparel, Drinks, Viands,
Sawses, Perfumes, Preservatives, and nicities as we; yet live as long, and much
more healthful and hardy: also the deities of their chiefest Gods, Priests,
Conjurers, Religion, Temples, Triumphs, Physic, and Chirurgeric, their
births, educations, duty of their women, exercise for their men; how they make
all their Instruments and Engines to cut down Trees, make their Clothes,
Boats, Lines, Nets, Fish-hooks, Weres, and Traps, Mats, Houses, Pots, Platters,
Morters, Bows, Arrows, Targets, Swords, Clubs, Jewels, and Hatchets. Their
several sorts of Woods, Serpents, Beasts, Fish, Foul, Roots, Berries, Fruits,
Stones, and Clay. Their best trade, what is most fit to trade with them. With
the particulars of the charge of a fishing voyage, and all the necessaries
belonging to it, their best countries to vent it for their best returns; also
the particulars for every private man or family that goes to plant, and the
best seasons to go or return thence, with the particular description of the
Salvages, Habitations, Harbors, and Land marks, their Latitude, Longitude, or
several distance, with their old names and the new by the Map augmented.
Lastly, the power of their Kings, obedience of their subjects, Laws,
executions, planting their Fields, Huntings, Fishings, the manner of their
wars and treacheries yet known; and in general, their lives and
conversation, and how to bridle their brute, barbarous, and salvage
dispositions: of all these particulars you may read at large in the general
History of Virginia, New England, and the Summer Isles, with many more such
strange actions and accidents, that to an ordinary capacity might rather seem
miracles than wonders possibly to be effected, which though they are but wound
up as bottoms of fine silk, which with a good needle might be flourished into
a far larger work, yet the Images of great things are best discerned,
contracted into smaller glasses.

CHAP. 7.
New Englands yearly trials, the planting new Plimoth, supprisals prevented,
their wonderful industry and fishing.

FOr all those differences there went eight tall ships before I arived in
England, from France, so that I spent 1617. Eight ships to fish.
that year in the West Country, to persuade the Cities, Towns, and Gentry
for a Plantation, which the Merchants very little liked, because they would
have the coast free only for themselves, and the Gentlemen were doubtful of
their true accounts; often and much it was so disputed, that at last they
promised me the next year twenty sail well furnished, made me Admiral of the
Country for my life under their hands, and the Colonels Seal for New England;
and in renewing their Letters Patents, to be a Patentee for my pains, yet
nothing but a voluntary fishing was effected for all this air.

In those years many Ships made exceeding good voyages, some in six months,
others in five, but one of two hundred 1618. 1619. 1620. Eight and thirty men
in six weeks took two thousand ox hundred pounds worth of fish.
tun in six weeks, with eight and thirty men and boys had her fraught,
which she sold at the first penny for one and twenty hundred pounds, besides
her Furs. Six or seven more went out of the West, and some Sailers that had
but a single share, had twenty pounds, and at home again in seven months,
which was more than such a one should have got in twenty months, had he gone
for wages any where: yet for all this, in all this time, though I had divulged
to my great NEW ENGLAND The most remarqueable parts thus named by the high and
mighty Prince CHARLES, Prince of great Britain
labor, cost, and loss, more than seven thousand Books and Maps, and moved
the particular Companies in London, as also Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Merchants
for a Plantation, all availed no more than to hew Rocks with Oister-shels, so
fresh were the living abuses of Virginia and the Summer Isles in their memories.

At last, upon those inducements, some well disposed Brownists, as they are
termed, with some Gentlemen and Merchants of Layden and Amsterdam, to save
charges, would try their own conclusions, though with great loss and much
misery, till time had taught them to see their own error; for such humorists
will never believe well, till they be beaten with their own rod.

They were supplied with a small Ship with seven and thirty 1621.
passengers, who found all them were left after they were seated, well, all but
six that died, for all their poverties: in this ship they returned the value of
five hundred pounds, which was taken by a Frenchman upon the coast of England.

There is gone from the West to fish five and thirty sail, 1622. Seven and
thirty sail to fish.
two from London with sixty passengers for them at New-Plimoth, and all made
good voyages. Now you are to understand, the seven and thirty passengers
miscarrying twice upon the coast of England, came so ill provided, they only
relied upon that poor company they found, that had lived two years by their
naked industry, and what the Country naturally afforded; it is true, at first
there has been taken a thousand Bayses at a draught, and more than twelve
hogsheads of Herrings in a night, of other fish when and what they would, when
they had means; but wanting most necessaries for fishing and fowling, it is a
wonder how they could subsist, fortify themselves, resist their enemies, and
plant their plants.

In July, a many of straggling forlorn Englishmen, whose wants they releeved,
though wanted themselves; the which to requite, destroyed their Corn and
Fruits, and would have done the like to them, and have surprised what they had;
the salvages also intended the like, but wisely they slew the salvage
Captains, and revenged those injuries upon the fugitive English, that would
have done the like to them.

CHAP. 8.
Extremity next despair, Gods great mercy, their estate, they make good salt,
an unknown rich mine.

AT New-Plimoth, having planted there Fields and 1623.
Gardens, such an extraordinary drought insued, all things withered, that they
expected no harvest; and having long expected a supply, they heard no news,
but a wrack split upon their Coast, they supposed their Ship: thus in the very
labyrinth of despair, they solemnly assembled themselves together nine houses
in prayer. At their departure, the parching fair skies all overcast with
black clouds, and the next morning, such a pleasant moderate rain continued
fourteen days, that it was hard to say, whether their withered fruits or
drooping affections were most revived; not long after came two Ships to supply
them, with all their Passengers well, except one, and he presently recovered;
for themselves, for all their wants, there was not one sick person amongst
them: the greater Ship they returned fraught with commodities. This year went
from England, only to fish, five and forty sail, and have all made a better
voyage Five and forty sail to fish.
than ever.

In this Plantation there is about an hundred and fourscore 1624.
persons, some Cattle, but many Swine and Poultry: their Town contains two
and thirty houses, whereof seven were burnt, with the value of five or six
hundred pounds in other goods, impailed about half a mile, within which within
a high Mount, a Fort, with a Watchtower, well built of stone, lome, and wood,
their Ordnance well mounted, and so healthful, that of the first Planters not
one has died this three years: yet at the first landing at Cape Cod, being an
hundred passengers, besides twenty they had left behind at Plimoth for want of
good take heed, thinking to find all things better than I advised them, spent
six or seven weeks in wandering up and down in frost and snow, wind and rain,
among the woods, cricks, and swamps, forty of them died, and threescore were
left in most miserable estate at New-Plimoth, where their Ship left them, and
but nine leagues by Sea from where they landed, whose misery and variable
opinions, for want of experience, occasioned much faction, till necessity
agreed them. These disasters, losses, and uncertainties, made such disagreement
among the Adventurers in England, who began to repent, and rather lose all,
than longer continue the charge, being out of purse six or seven thousand
pounds, accounting my books and their relations as old Almanacks. But the
Planters, rather than leave the Country, concluded absolutely to supply
themselves, and to all their adventurers pay them for nine years two hundred
pounds yearly without any other account; where more than six hundred
Adventurers for Virginia, for more than two hundred thousand pounds, had not
six pence. Since they have made a They make store of good salt.
salt work, wherewith they preserve all the fish they take, and have fraughted
this year a ship of an hundred and fourscore tun, living so well they desire
nothing but more company, and what ever they take, return commodities to the
value.

Thus you may plainly see, although many envying I should bring so much from
thence, where many others had been, and some the same year returned with
nothing, reported the Fish and Bevers I brought home, I had taken from the
French men of Canada, to discourage any from believing me, and excuse their
own misprisions, some only to have concealed this good Country (as is said)
to their private use; others taxed me as much of indiscretion, to make my
discoveries and designs so public for nothing, which might have been so well
managed by some concealers, to have been all rich ere any had known of it.
Those, and many such like wise rewards, have been my recompenses, for which I
am contented, so the Country prosper, and Gods name be there praised by my
Countrymen, I have my desire; and the benefit of this salt and fish, for
breeding Mariners and building ships, will make so many fit men to raise a
Commonwealth, if but managed, as my general history will show you; it An
incredible rich mine.
might well by this have been as profitable as the best Mine the King of
Spain has in his West Indies.

CHAP. 9.
Notes worth observation: miserableness no good husbandry.

NOw if you but truly consider how many strange Notes worthy observation.
accidents have befallen those plantations and my self, how often up, how often
down, sometimes near despair, and ere long flourishing; how many scandals
and Spanolized English have sought to disgrace them, bring them to ruin, or at
least hinder them all they could; how many have shaven and couzened both them
and me, and their most honorable supporters and well-willers, cannot but
conceive Gods infinite mercy both to them and me. Having been a slave to the
Turks, prisoner amongst the most barbarous Salvages, after my deliverance
commonly discovering and ranging those large rivers and unknown Nations with
such a handful of ignorant companions, that the wiser sort often gave me for
lost, always in mutinies, wants and miseries, blown up with gunpowder; A long
time prisoner among the French Pirates, from whom escaping in a little boat by
my self, and adrift, all such a stormy winter night when their ships were
split, more than an hundred thousand pound lost, we had taken at sea, and most
of them drowned upon the I Will of Ree, not far from whence I was driven on shore
in my little boat, etc. And many a score of the worst of winter months lived
in the fields, yet to have lived near 37. years in the midst of wars,
pestilence and famine; by which, many an hundred thousand have died about me,
and scarce five living of them went first with me to Virginia, and see the
fruits of my labors thus well begin to prosper: Though I have but my labor
for my pains, have I not much reason both privately and publicly to
acknowledge it and give God thanks, whose omnipotent power only delivered me.
to do the utmost of my best to make his name known in those remote parts of
the world, and his loving mercy to such a miserable sinner.

Had my designs been to have persuaded men to a mine Goods ill gotten ill
spent.
of gold, as I know many have done that knew no such matter; though few do
conceive either the charge or pains in refining it, nor the power nor care to
defend it; or some new invention to pass to the South sea, or some strange
plot to invade some strange Monastery; or some chargeable Fleet to take some
rich Charaques, or letters of mart, to rob some poor Merchant or honest fisher
men; what multitudes of both people and money would contend to be first
employed. But in those noble indevours now how few, unless it be to beg
them as Monopolies, and those seldom seek the common good, but the commons
goods, as the 217. the 218. and the 219. pages in the general history will
show. But only those noble Gentlemen and their associates, for whose better
encouragements I have recollected those experienced memorandums, as an Apology
against all calumniating detracters, as well for my self as them.

Now since them called Brownists went, some few before them also having my
books and maps, presumed they knew Miserableness no good husbandry.
as much as they desired, many other directers they had as wise as themselves,
but that was best that liked their own conceits; for indeed they would not be
known to have any knowledge of any but themselves, pretending only Religion
their governor, and frugality their counsel, when indeed it was only their
pride, and singularity, and contempt of authority; because they could not be
equals, they would have no superiors: in this fools Paradise, they so long
used that good husbandry, they have paid soundly in trying their own follies,
who undertaking in small handfuls to make many plantations, and to be several
Lords and Kings of themselves, most vanished to nothing, to the great
disparagement of the general business, therefore let them take heed that do
follow their example.

CHAP. 10.
The mistaking of Patents, strange effects, encouragements for servants.

WHo would not think that all those certainties 1625. 1626. 1627. 1628.
should not have made both me and this Country have prospered well by this? but
it fell out otherwise, for by the instigation of some, whose policy had long
watched their opportunity by the assurance of those profitable returns,
procured new Letters Patents from King James, drawing in many Noblemen and
others to the number of twenty, for Patentees, dividing my map and that tract
of land from the North Sea to the South Sea, East and West, The effect of the
last great Patent.
which is supposed by most Cosmographers at least more than two thousand miles;
and from 41. degrees to 48. of Northerly latitude about 560. miles; the bounds
Virginia to the South, the South Sea to the West, Canada to the North, and the
maine Ocean to the East; all this they divided in twenty parts, for which they
cast lots, but no lot for me but Smiths Isles, which are a many of barren rocks,
the most overgrowne with such shrubs and sharp whins you can hardly pass
them; without either grass or wood, but three or four short shrubby old
Cedars. Those Patentees procured a Proclamation, that no ship should go
thither to fish but pay them for the public, as it was pretended, five pound
upon A Proclamation for New England.
every thirty tuns of shipping, neither trade with the natives, cut down wood,
throw their balast over board, nor plant without commission, leave and content
to the Lord of that division or Manor; some of which for some of them I
believe will be tenantlesse this thousand year. Thus whereas this Country, as
the contrivers of those projects, should have planted it self of it self,
especially all the chief parts along the coast the first year, as they have
often told me, and chiefly by the fishing ships and some small help of their
own, thinking men would be glad upon any terms to be admitted under their
protections: but it proved so contrary, none would go at all. So for fear to
make a contempt against the Proclamation it has ever since been little
frequented to any purpose, nor would they do any thing but left it to it self.

Thus it lay again in a manner vast, till those noble Gentlemen Memorandums
for masters.
thus voluntarily undertook it, whem I entreat to take this as a memorandum of
my love, to make your plantations so near and great as you can; for many hands
make light work, whereas yet your small parties can do nothing availeable;
nor stand too much upon the letting, setting, or selling those wild Countries,
nor impose too much upon the commonalty either by your maggazines, which
commonly eat out all poor men's labors, nor any other too hard imposition for
present gain; but let every man so it be by order allotted him, plant freely
without limitation so much as he can, be it by the halfes or otherwise: And
at the end of five or six years, or when you make a division, for every acre
he has planted, let him have twenty, thirty, forty, or an hundred; or as you
find he has extraordinarily deserved, by it self to him and his heirs for
ever; all his charges being defrayed to his lord or master, and public good:
In so doing, a servant that will labor, within four or five years
Encouragements for servants.
may live as well there as his master did here: for where there is so much land
lie waste, it were a madness in a man at the first to buy, or hire, or pay
anything more than an acknowledgement to whom it shall be due; and he is
double mad that will leave his friends, means, and freedom in England, to be
worse there than here. Therefore let all men have as much freedom in reason as
may be, and true dealing, for it is the greatest comfort you can give them,
where the very name of servitude will breed much ill blood, and become odious
to God and man; but mildly temper correction with mercy, for I know well you
will have occasion enough to use both; and in thus doing, doubtless God will
bless you, and quickly triple and multiply your numbers, the which to my
utmost I will do my best endeavor.

CHAP. 11.
The planting Bastable or Salem and Charlton, a description of the Massachusetts.

IN all those plantations, yea, of those that have done least, yet the most
will say, we were the first; and so every 1629. The planting Salem.
next supply, still the next beginner: But seeing history is the memory of
time, the life of the dead, and the happiness of the living; because I have
more plainly discovered, and described, and discoursed of those Countries than
any as yet I know, I am the bolder to continue the story, and do all men right
so near as I can in those new beginnings, which hereafter perhaps may be in
better request than a forest of nine days pamphlets.

In the year 1629. about March, six good ships are gone with 350. men, women,
and children, people professing themselves Their provisions for Salem.
of good rank, zeal, means and quality: also 150. head of cattle, as horse,
mares, and neat beasts; 41. goats, some conies, with all provision for household
and apparel; six pieces of great Ordnance for a Fort, with Muskets, Pikes,
Corslets, Drums and Colors, with all provisions necessary for the good of man.
They are seated about 42. degrees and 38. minutes, at a place called by the
natives Naemkecke, by our Royal King Charles, Bastable; but now by the
planters, Salem; where they arrived for most part exceeding well, their cattle
and all things else prospering exceedingly, far beyond their expectation.

At this place they found some reasonable good provision The planting Salem and
Charlton.
and houses built by some few of Dorchester, with whom they are joined in
society with two hundred men, an hundred and fifty more they have sent to the
Massachusetts, which they call Charlton, or Charles Town: I took the fairest
reach in this Bay for a river, whereupon I called it Charles river, after the
name of our Royal King Charles; but they find that fair Channel to divide it
self into so many fair branches as make forty or fifty pleasant Islands within
that excellent Bay, where the land is of diverse and sundry sorts, in some
places very black and fat, in others good clay, sand and gravel, the A
description of the Massachusetts Bay.
superficies neither too flat in plains, nor too high in hills. In the Isles you
may keep your hogs, horse, cattle, conies or poultry, and secure for little
or nothing, and to command when you lift, only having a care of provision for
some extraordinary cold winter. In those Isles, as in the maine, you may make
your nurseries for fruits and plants where you put no cattle; in the maine you
may shape your Orchards, Vineyards, Pastures, Gardens, Walks, Parkes, and
Corn fields out of the whole piece as you please into such plots, one
adjoining to another, leaving every of them environed with two, three, four,
or six, or so many rows of well grown trees as you will, ready grown to your
hands, to defend them from ill weather, which in a champion you could not in
many ages; and this at first you may do with as much facility, as carelessly or
ignorantly cut down all before you, and then after better consideration make
ditches, pales, plant young trees with an excessive charge and labor, seeing
you may have so many great and small growing trees for your maine posts, to fix
hedges, palisados, houses, rales, or what you will; which order in Virginia
has not been so well observed as it might: where all the woods for many an
hundred mile for the most part grow straight, like unto the high grove or tuft
of trees, upon the high hill by the house of that worthy Knight Sir Humphrey
Mildmay, so remarkable in Essex in the Parish of Danbery, where I writ this
discourse, but much taller and greater, neither grow they so thick together by
the half, and much good ground between them without shrubs, and the best is
ever known by the greatness of the trees and the vesture it bears. Now in
New England the trees are commonly lower, but much thicker and firmer wood, and
more proper for shipping, of which I will speak a little, being the chief
engine we are to use in this work, and the rather for that within a square of
twenty leagues, you may have all, or most of the chief materials belonging to
them, were they wrought to their perfection as in other places.

Of all fabrics a ship is the most excellent, requiring more art in building,
rigging, sailing, trimming, defending, The masterpiece of workmanship.
and moaring, with such a number of several terms and names in continual
motion, not understood of any landman, as none would think of, but some few
that know them; for whose better instruction I writ my Sea-Grammar, a book
most necessary for those plantations, because there is scarce any thing
belonging to a ship, but the Sea-termes, charge and duty of every officer is
plainly expressed, and also any indifferent capacity may conceive how to direct
an unskilful Carpenter or Sailer to build Boats and Barks sufficient to sail
those coasts and rivers, and put a good workman in mind of many things in this
business he may easily mistake or forget. But to be excellent in this faculty
is the masterpiece of all the most necessary workmen in the world. The first
rule or model thereof being directed by God himself to Noah for his Arc,
which he never did to any other building but his Temple, which is tossed and
turned up and down the world with the like dangers, miseries, and extremities
as a ship, sometimes tasting the fury of the four Elements, as well as she,
by unlimited tyrants in their cruelty for tortures, that it is hard to conceive
whether those inhumanes exceed the beasts of the Forest, the birds of the
Air, the fishes of the Sea, either in numbers, greatness, swiftness,
fierceness or cruelty; whose actions and varieties, with such memorable
observations as I have collected, you shall find with admiration in my history
of the Sea, if God be pleased I live to finish it.

CHAP. 12.
Extraordinary means for building, many caveats, increase of corn, how to
spoil the woods, for any thing, their healths.

FOr the building houses, towns, and fortresses, where shall a man find the
like convenience, as stones of most Extraordinary means for buildings.
sorts, as well lime stone, if I be not much deceived, as Iron stone, smooth
stone, blew slate for covering houses, and great rocks we supposed Marble, so
that one place is called the marble harbor: There is grass plenty, though
very long and thick stalked, which being neither mowne nor eaten, is very
rank, yet all their cattle like and prosper well therewith, but indeed it is
weeds, herbs, and grass growing together, which although they be good and
sweet in the Summer, they will deceive your cattle in winter; therefore be
careful Caveats for catt^ll.
in the Spring to mow the swamps, and the low Islands of Auguan, where you may
have harsh sheare-grasse enough to make hay of, till you can clear ground to
make pasture, which will bear as good grass as can grow any where, as now it
does in Virginia; and unless you make this provision, if there come an
extraordinary winter, you will lose many of them and hazard the rest,
especially if you bring them in the latter end of Summer, or before the grass
be grown in the Spring, coming weak from Sea. All things they plant prosper
exceedingly: but one man of 13. gallons of Indian corn, reaped that year 364.
bushels London measure, as they confidently report, at which I much wonder,
having planted many bushels, but no such increase.

The best way we found in Virginia to spoil the woods, How to spoil the
woods for pasture and corn.
was first to cut a notch in the bark a hand broad round about the tree, which
pill off and the tree will sprout no more, and all the small boughs in a year
or two will decay, the greatest branches in the root they spoil with fire, but
you with more ease may cut them from the body and they will quickly rot:
betwixt those trees they plant their corn, whose great bodies do much defend
it from extreme gusts, and heat of the Sun, where that in the plains, where
the trees by time they have consumed, is subject to both; and this is the most
easy way to have pasture and corn fields, which is much more fertile than the
other: in Virginia they never manure their overworne fields, which is very few,
the ground for most part is so fertile: but in New England they do, sticking
at every plant of corn, a herring or two, which comes in that season in such
abundance, they may take more than they know what to do with.

Some infirmed bodies, or tender educats, complain of A silly complaint of
cold, the reason and remedy.
the piercing cold, especially in January and February, yet the French in
Canada, the Russians, Swethlanders, Polanders, Germans, and our neighbor
Hollanders, are much colder and far more Northward, for all that, rich
Countries and live well. Now they have wood enough if they will but cut it, at
their doors to make fires, and train oil with the splinters of the roots of
fur trees for candles, where in Holland they have little or none to build
ships, houses, or any thing but what they fetch from foreign Countries, yet they
dwell but in the latitude of Yorkshire, and New England is in the height of
the North cape of Spain, which is 10. degrees, 200. leagues, or 600. miles
nearer the Sun than we, where upon the mountains of Bisky I have felt as
much cold, frost, and snow as in England, and of this I am sure, a good part of
the best Countries and kingdoms of the world, both Northward and Southward of
the line, lie in the same paralels of Uirginia and New England as at large you
may find in the 201. page of the general history.

Thus you may see how prosperously thus far they have proceeded, in which
course by Gods grace they may contitinue; Proviso^s for passengers and sailors
at sea.
but great care would be had they pester not their ships too much with cattle
nor passengers, and to make good conditions for your peoples diet, for therein
is used much legerdemaine, therefore in that you cannot be too careful to
keep your men well, and in health at Sea: in this case some masters are very
provident, but the most part so they can get fraught enough, care not much
whether the passengers live or die, for a common sailer regards not a landman,
especially a poor passenger, as I have seen too often approved by lamentable
experience, although we have victualled them all at our own charges.

CHAP. 13.
Their great supplies, present estate and accidents, advantage.

WHo would not think but that all those trials had 1630. Their presnnt estate.
been sufficient to lay a foundation for a plantation, but we see many men
many minds, and still new Lords, new laws: for those 350. men with all their
cattle that so well arived and promised so much, not being of one body, but
several men's servants, few could command and fewer obey, lived merrily of that
they had, neither planting or building any thing to any purpose, but one fair
house for the Governor, till all was spent and the winter approached; then
they grew into many diseases, and as many inconveniences, depending only of a
supply from England, which expected Houses, Gardens, and Corn fields ready
planted by them for their entertainment.

It is true, that Master John Wynthrop, their now Governor, a worthy Gentleman
both in estate and esteem, went so well provided (for six or seven hundred
people went with him) as could be devised, but at Sea, such an extraordinary
storm encountered his Fleet, continuing ten days, that of two hundred Cattle
which were so tossed and bruised, threescore and ten died, many of their people
fell sick, and in this perplexed estate, after ten weeks, they arrived in
New England at several times, where they found threescore of their people
dead, the rest sick, nothing done, but all complaining, and all things so
contrary to their expectation, that now every monstrous humor began to show it
self. And to second this, near as many more came after them, but so ill
provided, with such multitudes of women and children, as redoubled their
necessities.

This small trial of their patience, caused among them no The fruits of
counterfeits.
small confusion, and put the Governor and his Council to their utmost wits;
some could not endure the name of a Bishop, others not the sight of a Cross
nor Surplesse, others by no means the book of common Prayer. This absolute
crew, only of the Elect, holding all (but such as themselves) reprobates and
cast-awaies, now make more haste to return to Babel, as they termed England,
than stay to enjoy the land they called Canaan; somewhat they must say to
excuse themselves.

Those he found Brownists, he let go for New-Plimoth, who are now betwixt
four or five hundred, and live well without want, some two hundred of the rest
he was content to return for England, whose clamors are as variable as their
humors and Auditors; some say they could see no timber of two foot diameter,
some the Country is all Woods, others they drunk all the Springs and Ponds
dry, yet like to famish for want of fresh water; some of the danger of the
rattell Snake; and that others sold their provisions at what rates they pleased
to them that wanted, and so returned to England great gainers out of others
miseries; yet all that returned are not of those humors.

Notwithstanding all this, the noble Governor was no way disanimated, neither
repents him of his enterprise for all those mistakes, but did order all things
with that temperance and discretion, and so releeved those that wanted with his
own provision, that there is six or seven hundred remained with him, and more
than 1600. English in all the Country, with three or four hundred head of
Cattle, as for Corn they are very ignorant: If upon the coast of America,
they do not before the end of this October (for toies) furnish themselves with
two or three thousand bushels of Indian Corn, which is better than ours, and
in a short time cause the Salvages to do them as good service as their own
men, as I did in Virginia, and yet neither use cruelty nor tyranny amongst
them; a consequence well worth putting in practice: and till it be effected,
they will hardly do well. I know ignorance will say it is impossible, but this
impossible task, ever since the massacre in Virginia, I have been a suter to
have undertaken, but with 150. men, to have got Corn, fortified the Country,
and discovered them more land than they all yet know or have demonstrated: but
the Merchants common answer was, necessity in time would force the Planters do
it themselves, and rather thus husbandly to lose ten sheep, than be at the
charge of a half penny worth of Tar.

Who is it that knows not what a small handful of Spaniards in the West
Indies, subdued millions of the inhabitants, Note well.
so depopulating those Countries they conquered, that they are glad to buy
Negroes in Africa at a great rate, in Countries far remote from them, which
although they be as idle and as devilish people as any in the world, yet they
cause them quickly to be their best servants; notwithstanding, there is for
every four or five natural Spaniards, two or three hundred Indians and
Negros, and in Virginia and New England more English than Salvages, that can
assemble themselves to assault or hurt them, and it is much better to help to
plant a country than unplant it and then replant it: but there Indians were in
such multitudes, the Spaniards had no other remedy; and ours such a few, and so
dispersed, it were nothing in a short time to bring them to labor and
obedience.

It is strange to me, that English men should not do as much as any, but upon
every slight affront, in stead to amend it, we make it worse; notwithstanding
the worst of all those rumors, the better sort there are constant in their
resolutions, and so are the most of their best friends here; and making
provision to supply them, many conceit they make a death here, which is nothing
so; for they would spend more here than they transport thither. One Ship this
Summer with twenty cattle, and forty or fifty passengers, arived all well, and
the Ship at home again in nine weeks: another for all this exclamation of
want, is returned with 10000. Corfish, and fourscore Kegs of Sturgion, which
they did take and save when the season was near past, and in the very heat of
Summer, yet as good as can be. Since another ship is gone from Bristow, and
many more a providing to follow them with all speed.

Thus you may plainly see for all these rumors, they are in no such distress
as is supposed: as for their mischances, misprisons, or what accidents may
befall them, I hope none is so malicious, as attribute the fault to the Country
nor me; yet if some blame us not both, it were more than a wonder; for I am
not ignorant that ignorance and too curious spectators, make it a great part of
their profession to censure (however) any man's actions, who having lost the
path to virtue, will make most excellent shifts to mount up any way; such
incomparable connivenoy is in the Devils most punctual cheaters, they will
hazard a joint, but where God has his Church they will have a Chapel; a
mischief so hard to be prevented, that I have thus plainly adventured to show
my affection, through the weakness of my ability, you may easily know them by
their absoluteness in opinions, holding experience but the mother of fools,
which indeed is the very ground of reason, and he that contemnes her in those
actions, may find occasion enough to use all the wit and wisdom he has to
correct his own solly, that thinks to find amongst those salvages such
Churches, Palaces, Monuments, and Buildings as are in England.

CHAP. 14.
Ecclesiastical government in Virginia, authority from the Arch Bishop, their
beginning at Bastable now called Salem.

NOw because I have spoke so much for the body, give Ecclesiastical government
in Virginia.
me leave to say somewhat of the soul; and the rather because I have been
demanded by so many, how we began to preach the Gospel in Virginia, and by
what authority, what Churches we had, our order of service, and maintenance for
our Ministers, therefore I think it not amiss to satisfy their demands, it
being the mother of all our Plantations, entreating pride to spare laughter, to
understand her simple beginning and proceedings.

When I went first to Virginia, I well remember, we did hang an awning (which
is an old sail) to three or four trees to shadow us from the Sun, our walls
were rales of wood, our seats unhewed trees, till we cut plankes, our Pulpit a
bar of wood nailed to two neighboring trees, in foul weather we shifted into
an old rotten tent, for we had few better, and this came by the way of
adventure for new; this was our Church, till we built a homely thing like a
barn, set upon Cratchets, covered with rafts, sedge, and earth, so was also
the walls: the best of our houses of the like curiosity, but the most part
far much worse workmanship, that could neither well defend wind nor rain,
yet we had daily Common Prayer morning and evening, every Sunday two Sermons,
and every three months the holy Communion, till our Minister died, but our
Prayers daily, with an Homily on Sundaies; we continued two or three years
after till more Preachers came, and surely God did most mercifully hearens,
till the continual inundations of mistaking directions, factions, and numbers
of unprovided Libertines near consumed us all, as the Israelites in the
wilderness.

Notwithstanding, out of the relics of our miseries, time and Their estates at
this day.
experience had brought that Country to a great happiness, had they not so
much doated on their Tobacco, on whose fumish foundation there is small
stability: there being so many good commodities besides, yet by it they have
builded many pretty Villages, fair houses, and Chapels, which are grown good
Benefices of 120. pounds a year, besides their own mundall industry, but
James town was 500. pounds a year, as they say, appointed by the Council
here, allowed by the Council there, and confirmed by the Archbishop of
Canterbury his Grace, Primate and Metrapolitan of all England. An. 1605. to
master Richard Haeclutt Prebend of Westminister, who by his authority sent
master Robert Hunt, an honest, religious, and courageous Divine; during whose
life our factions were often qualified, our wants and greatest extremities so
comforted, that they seemed easy in comparison of what we endured after his
memorable death.

Now in New England they have all our examples to teach Their order of teaching
in Salem.
them how to beware, and choice men, we most ignorant in all things, or little
better, therefore presage not the event of all such actions by our defailements:
For they write, they doubt not ere long to be able to defend themselves against
any indifferent enemy; in the interim, they have Preachers erected among
themselves, and Gods true Religion (they say) taught amongst them, the Sabbath
day observed, the common Prayer (as I understand) and Sermons performed, and
diligent catechizing, with strict and careful exercise, and commendable good
orders to bring those people with whom they have to deal withal into a
Christian conversation, to live well, to fear God, serve the King, and love
the Country; which done, in time from both those Plantations may grow a good
addition to the Church of England; but Rome was not built in one day, whose
beginnings was once as unhopefull as theirs, and to make them as eminent shall
be my humble and hearty prayers.

But as yet it is not well understood of any authority they have sought for the
government and tranquillity of the Church, which does cause those suspicions of
factions in Religion, wherein although I be no Divine, yet I hope without
offense The miserable effects of faction in Religion.
I may speak my opinion as well in this as I have done in the rest. He that
will but truly consider the greatness of the Turks Empire and power here in
Christendom, shall find the natural Turks are generally of one religion,
and the Christians in so many divisions and opinions, that they are among
themselves worse enemies than the Turks, whose disjoyntednesse has given him
that opportunity to command so many hundred thousand of Christians as he does,
where had they been constant to one God, one Christ, and one Church,
Christians might have been more able to have commanded as many Turks, as now
the Turks do poor miserable Christians. Let this example remember you to
beware of faction in that nature; for my own part, I have seen many of you
here in London go to Church as orderly as any.

Therefore I doubt not not but you will seek to the prime authority of the
Church of England, for such an orderly authority The necessity of order and
authority.
as in most men's opinions is fit for you both to entreat for and to have, which
I think will not be denied; and you have good reason, seeing you have such
liberty to transport so many of his Majesty's subjects, with all sorts of
cattle, arms, and provision as you please, and can provide means to
accomplish, nor can you have any certain relief, nor long subsist without
more supplies from England. Besides, this might prevent many inconveniences may
ensue, and would clearly take away all those idle and malicious rumors, and
occasion you many good and great friends and assistance you yet dream not of;
for you know better than I can tell, that the maintainers of good Orders and
Laws is the best preservation next God of a Kingdom: but when they are
stuffed with hypocrisy and corruption, that state is not doubtful but
lamentable in a well settled Commonwealth, much more in such as yours, which is
but a beginning, for as the Laws corrupt, the state consumes.

CHAP. 15.
The true model of a plantation, tenure, increase of trade, true examples,
necessity of expert Soldiers, the names of all the first discoverers for
plantations and their actions, what is requisite to be in the Governor of a
plantation, the expedition of Queen Elizabeth's Sea Captains.

IN regard of all that is past, it is better of those slow proceedings The
effect of a Cittadell, or (...) true model of a Plantation.
than lose all, and better to amendlate than never; I know how hateful it is
to envy, pride, flattery, and greatness to be advised, but I hope my true
meaning wise men will excuse, for making my opinion plain; I have been so
often and by so many honest men entreated for the rest, the more they mislike
it, the better I like it my self.

Concerning this point of a Cittadell, it is not the least, though the last
remembered: therefore seeing you have such good means and power of your own I
never had, with the best convenient speed may be erect a Fort, a Castle or
Cittadell, which in a manner is all one; toward the building, provision, and
maintenance thereof, every man for every acre he does culturate to pay four
pence yearly, and some small matter out of every hundred of fish taken or used
within five or ten miles, or as you please about it, it being the Center as a
Fortress for ever belonging to the State, and when the charge shall be
defrayed to the chief undertaker, in reason, let him be Governor for his
life: the overplus to go forward to the erecting another in like manner in a
most convenient place, and so one after another, as your abilities can
accomplish, by benevoleuces, forfeitures, fines, and impositions, as reason and
the necessity of the common good requires; all men holding their lands on
those manners as they do of Churches, Universities, and Hospitals, but all
depending upon one principal, and this would avoid all faction among the
Superiors, extremities from the comminalty, and none would repine at such
payments, when they shall see it justly employed for their own defense and
security; as for corruption in so small a Government, you may quickly perceive,
and punish it accordingly.

Now as his Majesty has made you custome-free for seven years, have a care
that all your Country men shall come to The condition of trade and freedom.
trade with you, be not troubled with Pilatage, Boyage, Ancorage, Wharfage,
Custom, or any such tricks as has been lately used in most of new
Plantations, where they would be Kings before their folly; to the
discouragement of many, and a scorn to them of understanding, for Dutch,
French, Biskin, or any will as yet use freely the Coast without control, and
why not English as well as they: Therefore use all comers with that respect,
courtesy, and liberty is fitting, which in a short time will much increase
your trade and shipping to fetch it from you, for as yet it were not good to
adventure any more abroad with factors till you be better provided; now there
is nothing more inricheth a Commonwealth than much trade, nor no means better
to increase than small custom, as Holland, Genua, Ligorne, and diverse other
places can well tell you, and does most beggar those places where they take
most custom, as Turkey, the Archipelagan Isles, Cicilia, the Spanish ports, but
that their officers will connive to enrich themselves, though undo the State.

In this your infancy, imagine you have many eyes attending your actions, some
for one end, and some only to find fault; neglect therefore no opportunity,
to inform his Majesty truly your orderly proceedings, which if it be to his
liking, and contrary to the common rumor here in England, doubtless his
Majesty will continue you custom free, till you have recovered your selves,
and are able to subsist; for till such time, to take any custom from a
Plantation, is not the way to make them prosper, nor is it likely those
Patentees shall accomplish anything; that will neither maintain them nor
defend them, but with Countenances, Counsels, and advice, which any reasonable
man there may better advise himself, than one thousand of them here who were
never there; nor will any man, that has any wit, throw himself into such a
kind of subjection, especially at his own cost and charges; but it is too often
seen that sometimes one is enough to deceive one hundred, but two hundred not
sufficient to keep one from being deceived.

I speak not this to discourage any with vain fears, but could The Spaniards
glory.
wish every English man to carry always this Motto in his heart; Why should
the brave Spanish Soldiers brag. The Sun never sets in the Spanish
dominions, but ever shines on one part or other we have conquered for our
King; who within these few hundred of years, was one of the least of most of
his neighbors; but to animate us to do the like for ours, who is no way his
inferior; and truly there is no pleasure comparable to a generous spirit; as
good imploiment in noble actions, especially amongst Turks, Heathens, and
Infidels, to see daily new Countries, people, fashions, governments,
stratagems, releeve the oppressed, comfort his friends, pass miseries, subdue
enemies, adventure upon any feazable danger for God and his Country: it is
true, it is a happy thing to be borne to strength, wealth, and honor, but that
which is got by prowess and magnanunity is the truest luster; and those can
the best distinguish content, that have escaped most honorable dangers, as if
out of every extremity he found himself now borne to a new life to learn how
to amend and maintain his age.

Those harsh conclusions have so often plundered me in those perplexed Provisoes
for exercise of arms.
actions, that if I could not freely express my self to them does second
them, I should think my self guilty of a most damnable crime worse than
ingratitude; however some overweining capricious conceits, may attribute it to
vainglory, ambition, or what other idle Epithete such pleased to bestow on
me: But such trash I so much scorn, that I presume further to advise those,
less advised than my self, that as your fish and trade increases, so let
your forts and exercise of arms, drilling your men at your most convenient
times, to rank, file, march, skirmish, and retire, in file, manaples,
battalia, or ambuskados, which service there is most proper; also how to
assault and defend your forts, and be not sparing of a little extraordinary
shot and powder to make them mark-men, especially your Gentlemen, and those you
find most capable, for shot must be your best weapon, yet all this will not
do unless you have atleast 100. or as many as you can, of expert, blouded,
approved good Soldiers, who dare boldly lead them, not to shoot a ducke, a
goose, or a dead mark, but at men, from whom you must expect such as you send.
The want of this, and the presumptuous assurance of literal Captains, was the
loss of the French and Spaniards in Florida, each surprising other, and lately
near the ruin of Mevis and Saint Christophers in the Indies: also the French
at Port Riall, and those at Canada, now your next English neighbors: Lastly,
Cape Britton not far from you, called New-Scotland. Questionless there were
some good Soldiers among them, yet somewhat was the cause they were undone by
those that watched the adva^tage of opportunity: for as rich preyes make true
men thieves; so you must not expect, if you be once worth taking and
unprovided, but by some to be attempted in the like manner: to the prevention
whereof, I have not been more willing at the request of my friends to print
this discourse, than I am ready to live and dye among you, upon conditions
sating my calling and profession to make good, and Virginia and New England, my
heirs, executors, administrators and assigns.

Now because I cannot express half that which is necessary for your full
satisfaction and instruction belonging to this business in A reference to the
action of all our prime discoverers and plonters.
this small pamphlet, I refer you to the general history of Virginia, the
Summer Isles, and New England; wherein you may plainly see all the discoveries,
plantations, accidents, the misprisions and causes of defailments of all those
noble and worthy Captains; Captain Philip Amadas, and Barlow; that most
renowned Knight Sir Richard Greenvile, worthy Sir Ralph Layne, and learned
Master Horiot, Captain John White, Captain Bartholomew Gosnold, Captain
Martin Pring, and George Waymouth, with mine own observations by sea, rivers
and land, and all the governors that yearly succeeded me in Virginia. Also
those most industrious Captains, Sir George Summers, and Sir Thomas Gates,
with all the governors that succeeded them in the Summer Isles. Likewise the
plantation of Sagadahock, by those noble Captains, George Popham, Rawley
Gilbert, Edward Harlow, Robert Davis, James Davis, John Davis, and diverse
others, with the maps of those Countries: with it also you may find the
plantations of Saint Christophers, Mevis, the Berbades, and the great river of
the Amazons, whose greatest defects, and the best means to amend them are
there yearly recorded, to be warnings and examples to them that are not too
wise to learn to understand.

This great work, though small in conceit, is not a work for What is
requisite to be in a Governor of a plantation.
everyone to manage such an affair, as make a discovery, and plant a Colony,
it requires all the best parts of art, judgment, courage, honesty, constancy,
diligence, and industry, to do but near well; some are more proper for one
thing than another, and therein best to be employed, and nothing breeds more
confusion than misplacing and misimploying men in their undertakings. Columbus,
Curtes, Pitzara, Zotto, Magellanus, and the rest, served more than an
apprentiship to learn how to begin their most memorable attempts in the West
Indies, which to the wonder of all ages, succesfully they effected, when many
hundreds far above them in the worlds opinion, being instructed but by
relation, scorning to follow their blunt examples, but in great state, with new
inventions came to shame and confusion in actions of small moment, who
doubtless in other matters, were both wise, discreet, generous and courageous.
I say not this to detract any thing from their nobleness, state, nor
greatness, but to answer those questionless questions that keep us from
imitating the others brave spirits, that advanced themselves from poor
Soldiers to great Captains, their posterity to great Lords, and their King to
be one of the greatest potentates on earth, and the fruits of their labors his
greatest glory, power, and renown.

Till his greatness and security made his so rich remote and dispersed The
expeditions of Queen Elizabeth's Sea-Captaines.
plantations such great booties and honors, to the incomparable Sir Fr. Drake,
the renowned Captain Candish, Sir Richard Luson, Sir John Hawkins, Captain
Carlisle, and Sir Martin Furbisher, etc. and the most memorable and right
honorable Earls, Cumberland, Essex, Southampton, and Nottingham that good L.
Admiral, with many hundreds of brave English Soldiers, Captains and
Gentlemen, that have taught the Hollanders to do the like: Those would never
stand upon a demurre who should give the first blow, when they see peace was
only but an empty name, and no sure league, but impuissance to do hurt, found
it better to buy peace by war, than take it up at interest of those could
better guide penknives than use swords; and there is no misery worse than be
conducted by a fool, or commanded by a coward; for who can endure to be
assaulted by any, see his men and self imbrued in their own blood, for fear
of a check, when it is so contrary to nature and necessity, and yet as
obedient to government and their Sovereign, as duty required. Now your best
plea is to stand upon your guard, and provide to defend as they did offend,
especially at landing: if you be forced to retire, you have the advantage five
for one in your retreat, wherein there is more discipline, than in a brave
charge; and though it seem less in fortune, it is as much in valor to defend
as to get, but it is more easy to defend than assault, especially in woods
where an enemy is ignorant. Lastly, remember as faction, pride, and security,
produces nothing but confusion, miseric and dissolution; so the contraries well
practiced will in short time make you happy, and the most admired people of all
our plantations for your time in the world.

John Smith
writ this with his own hand.
FINIS.
Errata.
Page 3. The Company in England say 7. or 8. thousand: the Counsel in Virginia
say but 2200. or there abouts.

Errata.
COurteous Reader, by reason of the false transcribeing of the Copy these
faults are past, which we desire you to mend with your Pen.

In the Epistle to the Reader l. 9. for detractnesse read detractment. in the
Contents. Chap. 7. l. 3. the Sants, r. them Phesants. page 1. l. 14. desirous,
r. desired. p 2. l. 28. denied not, r. denied it, not. p. 24. l. 25. the Sants
r. them Phesants. p. 26. l. 26. Cattanents, r. Catavents. p. 27. l. 16. with,
r. to which. p. 28 against line 22. R. B. wants in the margin. p. 32. l. 28.
Almond, r. Allom. p. 44. against line 7. R. B. wants in the margin. p. 52. l.
22. accord* r. action. p. 54. in line 14 and 15. blot out Cutters to have made
India Tobacco. p. 55. l. 4. then for mine, r. then mine for. p. 61. l. 3.
shaviva, r. aleavina. p. 66. l. 23. immitation, r. initiation. p. 67. l. 4.
come, r. am. p. 71. against line 29. R. B. wants in the margin. p. 72. l. 6. 7.
8. 9. for

Neva disant ma main faict cest aennre,
On ma vertut cebel aennre ae par faict;
Mais dis ainsi dien par moy a faict,
Dieu est santheur dei peu de bien que je' onre.
read,

Ne va disant ma main a faict cest oeuure,
Ou ma virtue ce bell oeuure a par faict;
Mais dis ainsi dieu par moy l'our a faict,
Dieu est l'autheur du peu de bien que je'oure.

