A MAP OF VIRGINIA.

WITH A DESCRIPTION OF THE COUNTRY, THE Commodities, People, Government and
Religion.

Written by Captain SMITH, sometimes Governor of the Country.

WHEREUNTO IS ANNEXED THE proceedings of those Colonies, since their first
departure from England, with the discourses, Orations, and relations of the
Salvages and the accidents that befell them in all their Iournies and
discoveries.

TAKEN FAITHFVLLY AS THEY were written out of the writings of

DOCTOR RVSSELL. THO. STVDLLY. ANAS TODKILL. IEFERA ABOT. RICHARD WIN^IN. WILL.
(...). NATHANIEL POWELL. RICHARD POTS.
And the relations of diverse other diligent observers there present then, and
now many of them in England.

By VV. S.



AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 161^.

TO THE HAND.
LEast I should wrong any in dedicating this Book to one: I have concluded it
shall be particular to none. I found it only dedicated to a Hand, and to that
hand I address it. Now for that this business is common to the world, this
book may best satisfy the world, because it was penned in the Land it
treats of. If it be disliked of men, then I would recommend it to women, for
being dearly bought, and far sought, it should be good for Ladies. When all
men rejected Christopher Collumbus: that ever renowned Queen Izabell of
Spain, could pawn her Jewels to supply his wants; whom all the wise men (as
they thought themselves) of that age contemned. I need not say what was his
worthiness, her nobleness, and their ignorance, that so scornefully did spit
at his wants, seeing the whole world is enriched with his golden fortunes.
Cannot this successful example move the incredulous of this time, to consider,
to conceive, and apprehend Virginia, which might be, or breed us a second
India? has not England an Izabell, as well as Spain, nor yet a Collumbus as
well as Genua? yes surely it has, whose desires are no less then was worthy
Collum bus, their certainties more, their experiences no way wanting, only
there wants but an Izabell, so it were not from Spain.

T. A.

Because many do desire to know the manner of their language, I have inserted
these few words.
Ka ka torawincs yowo. What call you this. Nemarough. a man. Crenepo. a woman.
Marowanchesso a boy. Yehawkans. Houses. Matchcores. Skins, or garments.
Mockasins. Shoes. Tussan. Beds. Pokatawer. Fire. Attawp. Abowe. Attonce.
Arrows. Monacookes. Swords. Aumoughhowgh. A Target. Pawcussacks. Gunnes.
Tomahacks. Axes. Tockahacks. Pickaxes. Pamesacks. Knives. Accowprets. Sheares.
Pawpecones. Pipes. Mattassin. Copper. Vssawassin. Iron, Brass, Silver, or any
white metal. Musses. Woods. Attasskuss. Leaves, weeds, or grass. Chepsin.
Land. Shacquohocan. A stone. Wepenter, a cookold. Suckahanna. Water. Noughmass.
Fish. (...) Surgion. We ghsha^ghes. Flesh. Sawwehone. Blood. Netoppew. Friends.
Marrapough. Enemies. Maskapow. The woe rst of the enemies. Mawchick chammay. The
best of friends. Casacunnakack, peya quagh acquintan v^^asantasough. In how
many days will there come hither any more English ships?
Their numbers.
Necut. 1. Ningh. 2 Nuss. 3. Yowgh. 4. Paranske. 5. Comotinch. 6. Toppawoss. 7.
Nusswash. 8. Kekatawgh. 9. Kaskeke. They count no more but by tennes as
follows. Case, how many. Ninghsapooeksku. 20. Nussapooeksku. 30.
Yowghapooeksku. 40. Parankestassapooeksku. 50. Comatinchtassapooeksku. 60.
Nussswashtassapooeksku. 80. Toppawousstassapooeksku. 70 Kekataughtassapooeksku.
90. Necuttoughtysinough. 100. Necuttwevnquaough. 1000. Rawcosowghs. Days.
Keskowghes. Suns. Toppquough. Nights. Nepawweshowghs. Moons, Pawpaxsoughes.
Years. Pummahumps. Stars. Osies. Heavens. Oaks. Gods. Quiyoughcosucks.
Petty Gods, and their affinities. Righcomoughes. Deaths. Kekughes. Lives.
Mowchick woyawgh tawgh noeragh kaquere mecher. I am very hungry? what shall I
eat? Tawnor nehiegh Powhatan. where dwells Powwahtan. Mache, nehiegh yowrowgh,
orapaks. Now he dwells a great way hence at orapaks. Vttapitchewayne anpechitchs
nehawper werowacomoco. You lie, he staide ever at werowocomoco. Kator nehiegh
mattagh near vttapitchewayne. Truly he is there I do not lie. Spaughtynere
keragh werowance mawmarinough kekaten wawgh peyaquaugh. Run you then to the
king mawmarynough and bid him come hither. Vtteke, epeya weyack wighwhip. Get
you gone, and come again quickly. Kekaten pokahontas patiaquagh niugh tanks
manotyens near mowchick rawrenock audowgh. Bid Pokahontas bring hither two
little Baskets, and I will give her white beads to make her a chain.
FINIS.
VIRGINIA


THE DESCRIPTION OF VIRGINIA BY CAPTAIN SMITH.
VIRGINIA is a Country in America that lies between the degrees of 34 and 44
of the north latitude. The latitude.
The bounds thereof on the East side are the great Ocean. On the South lies
Florida: on the North nova Francia. As for the West thereof, the limits are
unknown. Of all this country we purpose not to speak, but only of that part
which was planted by the English men in the year of our Lord, 1606. And this
is under the degrees 37. 38. and 39. The temperature of this country does
agree well with English constitutions being once seasoned to the country. Which
appeared by this, that though by many occasions our people fell sick; yet did
they recover by very small means and continued in health, though there were
other great causes, not only to have made them sick, but even to end their
days, etc.

The summer is hot as in Spain; the winter cold as in The te^perature.
France or England. The heat of summer is in June, Iulie, and August, but
commonly the cool Breefes assuage the vehemency of the heat. The chief of
winter is half December, January; February, and half March. The cold is
extreme sharp, but here the proverb is true that no extreme long continues.

In the year 1607. was an extraordinary frost in most of Europe, and this
frost was found as extreme in Uirginia. But the next year for 8. or 10.
days of ill weather, other 14 days would be as Summer.

The winds here are variable, but the like thunder and The winds.
lightning to purify the air, I have seldom either seen or heard in Europe.
From the Southwest came the greatest gustes with thunder and heat. The
Northwest wind is commonly cool and brings fair weather with it. From the
North is the greatest cold, and from the East and South-East as from the
Barmadas, fogs and raines.

Some times there are great droughts other times much rain, yet great
necessity of neither, by reason we see not but that all the variety of needful
fruits in Europe may be there in great plenty by the industry of men, as
appears by those we there planted.

There is but one entrance by sea into this country and The entrances.
that is at the mouth of a very goodly Bay the wideness whereof is near 18.
or 20. miles. The cape on the Southside is called Ccpe Henry in honor of our
most noble Cape Henry.
Prince. The show of the land there is a white hilly sand like unto the Downs,
and along the shores great plenty of Pines and Firres.

The north Cape is called Cape Charles in honor of the Cape Charles.
worthy Duke of York. Within is a country that may have the prerogative over
the most pleasant places of Europe, Asia, Africa, or America, for large and
pleasant navigable rivers, heaven and earth never agreed better to frame a
place for man's habitation being of our constitutions, were it fully manured and
inhabited by industrious people. here are mountains, hills, plains, valleys,
rivers and brooks, all The country.
running most pleasantly into a fair Bay compassed but for the mouth with
fruitful and delightsome land. In the Bay and rivers are many Isles both great
and small, some woody, some plain, most of them low and not inhabited. This
Bay lies North and South in which the water flows near 200 miles and has a
channel for 140 miles, of depth betwixt 7 and 15 fadome, holding in breadth
for the most part 10 or 14 miles. From the head of the Bay at the north, the
land is mountanous, and so in a manner from thence by a Southwest line; So that
the more Southward, the farther of from the Bay are those mounetaines. From
which fall certain brooks which after come to five principal navigable
rivers. These run from the Northwest into the South east, and so into the west
side of the Bay, where the fall of every River is within 20 or 15 miles one of
another.

The mountains are of diverse natures for at the head of The mountains.
the Bay the rocks are of a composition like milnstones. Some of marble, etc.
And many pieces of crystal we found as thrown down by water from the
mountains. For in winter these mountains are covered with much snow, and when
it dissolveth the waters fall with such violence, that it causes great
inundations in the narrow valleys which yet is scarce perceived being once in
the rivers. These waters wash from the rocks such glistering tinctures that the
ground in some places seems as gilded, where both the rocks and the earth
are so splendent to behold, that better judgments then ours might have been
persuaded, they contained more then probabilities. The vesture of the earth in
most places does manifestly prove the nature of the soil to be lusty and very
rich. The color of the earth we found The soil.
in diverse places, resembles bole Ammoniac, terra sigillata ad lemnia,
Fullers earth marle and diverse other such appearances. But generally for the
most part the earth is a black sandy mould, in some places a fat slimy clay, in
other places a very barren gravelli. But the best ground is known by the
vesture it bears, as by the greatness of trees or abundance of weeds, etc.

The country is not mountanous nor yet low but such The vallyes.
pleasant plain hills and fertle valleys, one prettily crossing an other, and
watered so conveniently with their sweet brooks and crystal springs, as if
art it self had devised them. By the rivers are many plain marshes
containing Plains.
some 20 some 100 some 200 Acres, some more, some less. Other plains there
are few, but only where the Savages inhabit: but all overgrowne with trees and
weeds being a plain wilderness as God first made it.

On the west side of the Bay, we said were 5. fair and delightful navigable
rivers, of which we will now proceed to report. The first of those rivers and
the next to the mouth of the Bay has his course from the West and by North.
The name of this river they call Powhatan accorto The river Powhatan.
the name of a principal country that lies upon it. The mouth of this river
is near three miles in breadth, yet do the shoules force the Channel so
near the land that a Sacre will overshoot it at point blanck. This river is
navigable 100 miles, the shouldes and soundings are here needless to be
expressed. It falls from Rocks far west in a country inhabited by a nation
that they call Monacan. But where it comes into our discovery it is
Powhatan. In the farthest place that was diligently observed, are falls,
rocks, showles, etc. which makes it past navigation any higher. Thence in the
running downward, the river is enriched with many goodly brooks, which are
maintained by an infinite number of small rundles and pleasant springs that
disperse themselves for best service, as do the veins of a man's body. From
the South there falls into this river. First The branches.
the pleasant river of Apamatuck. next more to the East are the two rivers of
Quiyoughcohanocke. A little farther is a Bay wherein falls 3 or 4 pretty
brooks and creekes that half entrench the Inhabitants of Warraskoyac then the
river of Nandsamund, and lastly the brook of Chisapeack. From the North side
is the river of Chickahamania, the back river of James Town; another by the
Cedar Isle, where we lived 10 weeks upon oisters, then a convenient harbor
for fisher boats or small boats at Kecoughtan, that so conveniently turns it
self into Bays and Creeks that make that place very pleasant to inhabit,
their cornefields being girded therein in a manner as Peninsulaes. The most of
these rivers are inhabited by several nations, or rather families. Of the name
of the rivers. They have also in every of those places some Governor, as their
king, which they call Werowances. In a Peninsula on the North side of this
James Town.
river are the English planted in a place by the^ called James Town, in honor
of the Kings most excellent Majesty, upon which side are also many places
under the Werowances.

The first and next the rivers mouth are the Kecoughtans, The several
inhabitants.
who besides their women and children, have not past 20. fighting men. The
Paspaheghes on whose land is seated the English Colony, some 40. miles from the
Bay have not past 40. The river called Chickahamania near 200. The Weanocks
100. The Arrowhatocks 30. The place called Powhatan, some 40. On the South side
this river the Appamatucks have 60 fighting men. The Quiyougcohanocks, 25. The
Warraskoyacks 40. The Nandsamunds 200. The Chesapeacks are able to make 100. Of
this last place the Bay bears the name. In all these places is a several
commander, which they call Werowance, except the Chickhamanians, who are
governed by the Priests and their Assistants of their Elders called
Caw-cawwassoughes. In somer no place affords more plenty of Sturgeon, nor in
winter more abundance of foul, especially in the time of frost. There was once
taken 52 Sturgeons at a draught, at another draught 68. From the later end of
May till the end of June are taken few, but young Sturgeons of 2 foot or a yard
long. From thence till the midst of September, them of 2 or three yards long
and few others. And in 4 or 5 hours with one net were ordinarily taken 7 or
8: often more, seldom less. In the small rivers all the year there is good
plenty of small fish, so that with hooks those that would take pains had
sufficient.

Fourteen miles Northward from the river Powhatan, R. Pamavnke.
is the river Pamavnke, which is navigable 60 or 70 miles, but with Catches and
small Barks, 30 or 40 miles farther. At the ordinary flowing of the salt
water, it divides it self into two gallant branches. On the South side
inhabit the people of Youghtanund, who have about 60 me^ for The inhabitants.
wars. On the North branch Mattapament, who have 30 men. Where this river is
divided the Country is called Pamavuke, and nourishes near 300 able men.
About 25 miles lower on the North side of this river is Werawocomoco, where
their great King inhabited when Captain Smith was delivered him prisoner; yet
there are not past 40 able men. But now he has abandoned that, and lives at
Orapakes by Youghtanund in the wilderness; 10 or 12 miles lower; on the South
side of this river is Chiskiack, which has some 40 or 50 men. These, as also
Apamatuck, Irrohatock, and Powhatan, are their great kings chief alliance and
inhabitance. The rest (as they report) his Conquests.

Before we come to the third river that falls from the Payankatank. R
mountains, there is another river (some 30 miles navigable) that comes from
the Inland, the river is called Payankatanke, the Inhabitants are about some 40
serviceable men.

The third navigable river is called Toppahanock. (This Toppahanock. R
is navigable some 130 miles) At the top of it inhabit the people called
Mannahoackes amongst the mountains, but they are above the place we describe.
Upon this river on the North side are seated a people called Cuttatawomen, The
inhabitants
with 30 fighting men. Higher on the river are the Moraughtacunds, with 80 able
men. Beyond them Toppahanock with 100 men. Far above is another Cuttatawomen
with 20 men. On the South, far within the river is Nautaughtacund having 150
men. This river also as the two former, is replenished with fish and foul.

The fourth river is called Patawomeke and is 6 or 7 miles in breadth. It is
navigable 140 miles, and fed as the rest with Patawomek, R.
many sweet rivers and springs, which fall from the bordering hills. These hills
many of them are planted, and yield no less plenty and variety of fruit then
the river exceeds with abundance of fish. This river is inhabited on both
sides. First on the South side at the very entrance is Wighcocomoco and has
some 130 men, beyond them Sekacawone with 30. The Onawmanient with 100. Then
Patawomeke The inhabitants
with 160 able men. Here does the river divide it self in to 3 or 4 convenient
rivers; The greatest of the least is called Quiyough treads north west, but
the river it self turns North east and is still a navigable stream. On the
western side of this bought is Tauxenent with 40 men. On the north of this
river is Secowocomoco with 40 men. Some what further Potapaco with 20. In the
East part of the bought of the river, is Pamacacack with 60 me^, After Moy
owances with 100. And lastly Nacotchtanke with 80 able men. The river 10 miles
above this place makes his passage down a low pleasant valley overshaddowed in
many places with high rocky mountains; from whence distill innumerable sweet
and pleasant springs,

The fifth river is called Pawtuxunt, and is of a less proportion Pawtuxunt, R.
then the rest; but the channel is 16 or 18 fadome deep in some places. Here
are infinite skuls of diverse kinds of fish more then elsewhere. Upon this river
dwell the people called Acquintanacksuak, Pawtuxunt and Mattapanient. 200 men
was the greatest strength that could be there perceived. But they inhabit
together, and not so dispersed as the rest. These of al other were found the
most civil to give intertainement.

Thirty leagues Northward is a river not inhabited, yet navigable; Bolus, R.
for the red earth or clay resembling bole Armoniack the English called it
Bolus. At the end of the Bay where The head of the Bay.
it is 6 or 7 miles in breadth, there fall into it 4 small rivers, 3 of them
issuing from diverse bogges environed with high mountains. There is one that
comes du north 3 or 4. days iourny from the head of the Bay and falls from
rocks and mountains, upon this river inhabit a people called Sasquesahanock.
They are seated 2 days higher then was passage Sasquesahanock.
for the discoverers Barge, which was hardly 2 toons, and had in it but 12 men
to perform this discovery, wherein they lay above the space of 12 weeks upon
those great waters in those unknown Countries, having nothing but a little
meal or oatmeale and water to feed them; and scarce half sufficient of that
for half that time, but that by the Savages and by the plenty of fish they
found in all places, they made themselves provision as opportunity served; yet
had they not a mariner or any that had skill to trim their sails, use their
oars, or any business belonging to the Barge, but 2 or 3. The rest being
Gentlemen or as ignorant in such toil and labor, yet necessity in a short
time by their Captains diligence and example, taught the^ to become so
perfect, that what they did by such small means, I leave to the censure of the
Reader to judge by this discourse and the annexed Map. But to proceed, 60 of
those Sasquesahanocks, came to the discouerers with skins, Bows, Arrows,
Targets, Beads, Swords, and Tobacco pipes for presents. Such great and well
proportioned men, are seldom seen, for they seemed like Giants to the
English, yea and to the neighbors, yet seemed of an honest and simple
disposition, with much ado restrained from adoring the discoverers as Gods.
Those are the most strange people of all those Countries, both in language and
attire; for their language it may well beseem their proportions, sounding from
them, as it were a great voice in a vault, or cave, as an Echo. Their attire
is the skins of Bears, and The description of a Sasquesa hanough.
Woolues, some have Cassacks made of Bears heads and skins that a man's
neck goes through the skins neck, and the ears of the bear fastened to his
shoulders behind, the nose and teeth hanging down his breast, and at the end
of the nose hung a Bears Pawe, the half sleeves coming to the elbowes were
the necks of Bears and the arms through the mouth with paws hanging at
their noses. One had the head of a Woolfe hanging in a chain for a Jewel, his
Tobacco pipe 3 quarters of a yard long, prettily carved with a Bird, a Bear, a
Dear, or some such devise at the great end, sufficient to beat out the brains
of a man, with bows, and arrows, and clubs, suitable to their greatness and
conditions. These are scarce known to Powhatan. They can make near 600 able
and mighty men and are pallisadoed in their Towns to defend them from the
Massawomekes their mortal enemies. 5 of their chief Werowances came aboard
the discoverers and crossed the Bay in their Barge. The picture of the greatest
of them is signified in the Map. The calfe of whose leg was 3 quarters of a
yard about, and all the rest of his limbs so answerable to that proportion,
that he seemed the goodliest man that ever we beheld. His hair, the one side
was long, the other shore close with a ridge over his crown like a cocks comb.
His arrows were five quarters long, headed with flints or splinters of stones,
in form like a heart, an inch broad, and an inch and a half or more long.
These he wore in a woolues skin at his back for his quiver, his bow in the
one hand and his clubbe in the other, as is described.

On the East side the Bay is the river of Tockwhogh, and Tockwhagh. R.
upon it a people that can make 100 men, seated some 7 miles within the river:
where they have a Fort very well pal lisadoed and mantelled with the bark of
trees. Next to them is Ozinies with 60 men. More to the South of that East side
of the Bay, the river of Rapahanock, near unto Rapahanock. R. Kuskarawaock. R.
Wighcocomoco. R.
which is the river of Kuskarawaock. Upon which is seated a people with 200
men. After that is the river of Tants Wighcocomoco, and on it a people with 100
men. The people of those rivers are of little stature, of another language from
the rest, and very rude. But they on the river of Acohanock with 40 men, and
they of Accomack 80 men does Accomack. R.
equalize any of the Territories of Powhatan and speak his language, who over
all those does rule as king.

Southward they went to some parts of Chawonock and Chawonock.
the Mangoags to search them there left by Sr Walter Raleigh; for those parts
to the Town of Chisapeack has formerly been discovered by Mr Heriots and Sr
Raph Layne. Amongst those people are thus many several nations of sundry
languages, that environ Powhatans Territories. The several languages.
The Chawonokes, the Mangoags, the Monacans, the Mannahokes, the Masawomekes,
the Powhatans, the Sasquesahanocks, the Atquanachukes, the Tockwoghes, and the
Kuscarawaokes. Al those not any one understands another but by Interpreters.
Their several habitations are more plainly described by this annexed Map,
which will present to the eye, the way of the mountains and current of the
rivers, with their several turnings, bays, shoules, Isles, Inlets, and
creekes, the breadth of the waters, the distances of places and such like. In
which Map observe this, that as far as you see the little Crosses on rivers,
mountains, or other places have been discovered; the rest was had by
information of the Savages, and are set down, according to their instructions.

Of such things which are natural in Uirginia and how they use them.
Uirginia does afford many excellent vegitables and living Creatures, yet
grass there is little or none, but what grows in low Marshes: for all the
Country is overgrowne Why there is little grass.
with trees, whose droppings continually turns their grass to weeds, by
reason of the rank nesse of the ground which would soon be amended by good
husbandry. The wood that is most common is Oak and Walnut, Weeds with their
fruits.
many of their Oaks are so tall and straight, that they will bear two foot
and a half square of good timber for 20 yards long; Of this wood there is 2 or
3 several kinds. The Acornes of one kind, whose bark is more white, then the
other, is somewhat sweetish, which being boiled half a day in several waters,
at last afford a sweet oil, which they keep in goards to anoint their heads
and ioints. The fruit they eat made in bread or otherwise. There is also some
Elm, some black walnut tree, and some Ash: of Ash Elm.
and Elm they make soap Ashes. If the trees be very great, the ashes will be
good, and melt to hard lumps, but if they be small, it will be but powder, and
not so good as the other. Of walnuts there is 2 or 3 kinds; there is a kind
of Walnuts. Supposed Cypres
wood we called Cypres, because both the wood, the fruit, and leaf did most
resemble it, and of those trees there are some near 3 fadome about at the root
very straight, and 50, 60, or 80 foot without a branch. By the dwelling of the
Savages are some great Mulbery trees, and in some parts of the Country, they
are found growing naturally Mulberies.
in pretty groves. There was an assay made to make silk, and and surely the
worms prospered excellent well, till the master workman fell sick. During
which time they were eaten with rats.

In some parts were found some Chestnuts whose wild fruit Chestnuts.
equalize the best in France, Spain, Germany, or Italy, to their tastes that
had tasted them all. Plumbs there are of 3 sorts. The red and white are like
our hedge plumbs, but the other which they call Putchamins, grow as high as a
Palmeta: the fruit is like a medler; it is first green then yellow, and red
when it is ripe; if it be not ripe it will draw a man's mouth awrie, with much
torment, but when it is ripe, it is as delicious as an Apricock.

They have Cherries and those are much like a Damsen, Cherries.
but for their tastes and color we called them Cherries. we see some few
Crabs, but very small and bitter. Of vines Vines.
great abundance in many parts that climb the tops of the highest trees in
some places, but these bear but few grapes. But by the rivers and Savage
habitations where they are not overshadowed from the sun, they are covered
with fruit, though never pruined nor manured. Of those hedge grapes we made
near 20 gallons of wine, which was near as good as your French British wine,
but certainly they would prove good were they well manured. There is another
sort of grape near as great as a Cherry, this they call Messaminnes, they be
fat, and the juice thick. Neither does the taste so well please when they are
made in wine. They have a small fruit growing on little trees, husked like a
Chestnut, but the fruit most like a very Chechinquae^s
small acorne. This they call Chechinquamins which they esteem a great
dainty. They have a berry much like our gooseberry, in greatness, color, and
taste; those they call Rawcomenes, and do eat them raw or boiled. Of these
natural fruits they live a great part of the year, which they Rawcomens
use in this manner, The walnuts, Chestnuts, Acornes, and How they use their
fruits
Chechinquamens are dried to keep. When they need them they break them
between two stones, yet some part of the walnut shells will cleave to the
fruit. Then do they dry them again upon a mat over a hurdle. After they put
it into a mortar of wood, and beat it very small: that done they mix it with
water, that the shells may sink to the bottom. This water will be colored as
milk, which they call Pawcohiscora, and keep it for their use. The fruit like
medlers Walnut milk.
they call Putchamins, they cast upon hurdles on a mat and preserve them as
Pruines. Of their Chestnuts and Chechinquamens boiled 4 hours, they make both
broth and bread for their chief men, or at their greatest feasts. Besides
those fruit trees, there is a white populer, and another tree like unto it,
that yields a very clear and an odoriferous Gum like Turpentine, which
some called Balsom. Gummes. Cedars. Saxafras trees.
There are also Cedars and Saxafras-trees. They also yield gummes in a small
proportion of themselves. We tried conclusions to extract it out of the wood,
but nature afforded more then our arts.

In the warry valleys grows a berry which they call Qcoughtanamnis very much
like unto Capers. These they Berries.
dry in summer. When they will eat them they boil them near half a day; for
otherwise they differ not much from poison. Mattoume grows as our bents do in
meddows. The seed is not much unlike to rye, though much smaller. Matoume.
this they use for a dainty bread buttered with dear suet.

During Somer there are either strawberries which ripen Strawberries
in April; or mulberries which ripe^ in May and June. Raspises hurtes; or a
fruit that the Inahbitants call Maracocks, which is a pleasant wholesome fruit
much like a lemond. Many herbs in the spring time there are commonly
dispersed throughout the woods, good for brothes and sallets, as Herbs.
Violets, Purslin, Sorrel, etc. Besides many we used whose names we know not.

The chief root they have for food is called Tockawhoughe, Roots.
It grows like a flagge in low muddy freshes. In one day a Savage will gather
sufficient for a week. These roots are much of the greatness and taste of
Potatoes. They use to cover a great many of the^ with oak leaves and fern, and
then cover all with earth in the manner of a colepit; over it, on each side,
they continue a great fire 24 hours before they dare eat it. Raw it is no
better then poison, and being roasted, except it be tender and the heat abated,
or sliced and dried in the sun, mixed with sorrel and meal or such like, it
will prickle and torment the throat extremely, and yet in summer they use this
ordinarily for bread.

They have an other root which they call wighsacan: as Wighsacan a* Root.
the other feeds the body, so this cures their hurts and diseases. It is a
small root which they bruise and apply to the wound. Pocones, is a small root
that grows in the mountains, Pocones a small Root.
which being dried and beat in powder turns red. And this they use for
swellings, aches, anointing their ioints, painting their heads and garments.
They account it very precious and of much worth. Musquaspenne is a root of the
bigness of a finger, and as red as blood. In drying it Musquaspenne. a Root.
will wither almost to nothing. This they use to paint their Mattes, Targets
and such like.

There is also Pellitory of Spain, Safafrage, and diverse other Pellitory.
Sasafrage.
simples, which the Apothecaries gathered, and commended to be good, and
medicinable.

In the low Marshes grow plots of Onyons containing Onyons.
an acre of ground or more in many places; but they are small not past the
bigness of the Top of ones Thumb.

Of beasts the chief are Dear, nothing differing from Their chief beasts
are Dear
ours. In the deserts toward the heads of the rivers, there are many, but
amongst the rivers few. There is a beast they call Aroughcun, much like a
badger, but uses to live on trees as Aroughcun. Squirrels.
Squirrels do. Their Squirrels some are near as great as our small est sort
of wild rabbits, some blackish or black and white, but the most are gray.

A small beast they have, they call Assapanick but we call them flying
squirrels, because spreading their legs, and so Assapanick a Squirrel flying
stretching the largeness of their skins that they have bin seen to fly 30 or
40 yards. An Opassom has a head like a Swine, and a tail like a Rat, and is
of the bigness of a Cat. Under Opassom.
her belly she has a bag, wherein she lodges, carries, and sucketh her
young. Mussascus, is a beast of the form and nature of our water Rats, but
many of the^ smell Mussascus.
exceeding strongly of musk. Their Hares no bigger then our Conies, and few of
them to be found.

Their Bears are very little in comparison of those of Muscovia and Tartaria.
The Beaver is as big as Bears. The Beaver.
an ordinary water dog, but his legs exceeding short. His fore feet like a
dogs, his hinder feet like a Swans. His tail somewhat like the form of a
Racket bare without hair, which to eat the Savages esteem a great delicate.
They have many Otters which as the Beavers they take with snares, and esteem
the skins great ornaments, and Otters.
of all those beasts they use to feed when they catch them.

There is also a beast they call Vetchunquoyes in the form of a wild Cat,
their Foxes are like our silver haired Conies Vetchunquoyes. Foxes. Dogs.
of a small proportion, and not smelling like those in England. Their Dogs of
that country are like their Wolves, and cannot bark but howl, and their
wolves not much bigger then our English Foxes. Martins, Powlecats, weessels
Martins. Polcats. Weesels. and Minkes.
and Minkes we know they have, because we have seen many of their skins,
though very seldom any of them alive. But one thing is strange that we could
never perceive their vermin destroy our hens, Eggs nor Chickens nor do any
hurt, nor their flies nor serpents any way pernicious, where in the South
parts of America they are always dangerous and often deadly.

Of birds the Eagle is the greatest devourer. Hawks Birds.
there be of diverse sorts as our Falconers called them. Sparowhawkes,
Lanarets, Goshawkes, Falcons and Osperayes, but they all pray most upon fish.
Patrridges there are little bigger then our Quails, wild Turkies are as big
as our tame. There are woosels or blackbirds with red shoulders, thrushes and
diverse sorts of small birds, some red, some blew, scarce so big as a wrenne,
but few in Summer. In winter there are great plenty of Swans, Craynes, gray and
white with black wings, Herons, Geese, Brants, Ducke, Wigeon, Dotterell,
Oxeies, Parrats and Pigeons. Of all those sorts great abundance, and some other
strange kinds to us unknown by name. But in summer not any or a very few to be
seen.

Of fish we were best acquainted with Sturgeon, Grampus, Fish.
Porpus, Seals, Stingraies, whose tails are very dangerous. Brettes, mullets,
white Salmonds, Trowts, Soles, Plaice, Herrings, Conyfish, Rockfish, Eeles,
Lampreyes, Catfish, Shades, Perch of 3 sorts, Crabs, Shrimps, Creuises,
Oysters, Cocles and Muscles. But the most strange fish is a small one so like
the picture of S. George his Dragon, as possible can be, except his legs and
wings, and the Todefish which will swell till it be like to brust, when it
comes into the air.

Concerning the entrails of the earth little can be said for certainty. There
wanted good Refiners. for these that The Rocks.
took upon them to have skill this way, took up the washings from the
mounetaines and some moskered shining stones and spangles which the waters
brought down, flattering themselves in their own vain conceits to have bin
supposed that they were not, by the means of that ore, if it proved as their
arts and judgments expected. Only this is certain, that many regions lying in
the same latitude, afford mines very rich of diverse natures. The crust also of
these rocks would easily persuade a man to believe there are other mines then
iron and steel, if there were but means and men of experience that knew the
mine from spare.

Of their Planted fruits in Uirginia and how they use them.
They divide the year into 5. seasons. Their winter some call Popanow, the
spring Cattapeuk, the summer Cohattayough, How they divide the year.
the caring of their Corn Nepinough, the harvest and fall of leaf Taquitock.
From September until the midst of November are the chief Feasts and
sacrifice. Then have they plenty of fruits as well planted as natural, as
corn, green and ripe, fish, foul, and wild beasts exceeding fat.

The greatest labor they take, is in planting their corn, for the country
naturally is ouergrowne with wood. To How they prepare the ground
prepare the ground they bruise the bark of the trees near the root, then do
they scortch the roots with fire that they grow no more. The next year with a
crooked piece of wood, they beat up the woods by the roots, and in that
moulds they plant their corn. Their manner is this. They make a hole in the
earth with a stick, and into it they put 4 grains of wheat, and 2 of beans.
These holes they make 4 foot one from another; Their women and children do
continually keep it with weeding, and when it is grown middle high, they hill
it about like a hop-yard.

In April they begin to plant, but their chief plantatio^ is in May, and so
they continue till the midst of June. What How they plant
they plant in April they reap in August, for May in September, for June in
October; Every stalk of their corn commonly bears two ears, some 3,
seldom any 4, many but one and some none. Every ear ordinarily has betwixt
200 and 500 grains. The stalk being green has a sweet juice in it, somewhat
like a sugar Cane, which is the cause that when they gather their corn green,
they suck the stalks: for as we gather green pease so do they their corn
being green, which excels their old. They plant also pease they call
Assetamens, which are the same they call in Italy', Fagioli. Their Beans are
the same the Turks call Garnanses, but these they much esteem for dainties.

Their corn they roast in the ear green, and bruising it in a mortar of wood
with a Polt, lap it in rowles in the How they use their corn.
leaves of their corn, and so boil it for a dainty. They also reserve that
corn late planted that will not ripe, by toasting it in hot ashes, the heat
thereof drying it. In winter they esteem it being boiled with beans for a rare
dish, they call Pausarowmena. Their old wheat they first steep a night in hot
water, in the morning pounding it in a mortar. They use a small basket for
their Temmes, then pound again the great, and so separating by dashing their
hand in the basket, receive the flower in a platter made of wood scraped to
that form with burning and shells. Tempering this flower with water, they make
it either in cakes covering them with ashes till they be baked, and then
washing them in fair water they dry presently with their own heat: or else
boil them in water eating the broth with the bread which they call Ponap. The
grouts and pieces of the corns remaining, by fanning in a Platter or in the
wind, away, the branne they boil 3 or 4 hours with water, which is an
ordinary food they call Ustatahamen. But some more thrifty then cleanly, do
burn the core of the ear to powder which they call Pungnough, mingling that
in their meal, but it never tasted well in bread, nor broth. Their fish and
flesh they boil either very tenderly, How they use their fish and flesh.
or broyle it so long on hurdles over the fire, or else after the Spanish
fashion, putting it on a spit, they turn first the one side, then the other,
til it be as dry as their ierkin beef in the west Indies, that they may keep
it a month or more without putrefying. The broth of fish or flesh they eat as
commonly as the meat.

In May also amongst their corn they plant Pumpeons, Planted fruits.
and a fruit like unto a musk millen, but less and worse, which they call
Macocks. These increase exceedingly, and ripen in the beginning of July, and
continue until September. They plant also Maracocks a wild fruit like a lemmon,
which also increase infinitely. They begin to ripe in September and continue
till the end of October. When all their fruits be gathered, little else they
plant, and this is done by their women and children; neither does this long
suffice them, for near 3 parts of the year, they only observe times and
seasons, and live of what the Country naturally affords from hand to mouth,
etc.

The commodities in Uirginia or that may be had by industry.
The mildness of the air, the fertility of the soil, and the situation of
the rivers are so propitious to the nature and use of man as no place is more
convenient for pleasure, profit, and man's sustenance. Under that latitude or
climat, here will live any beasts, as horses, goats, sheep, asses, hens, A
proof cattle will live well.
etc. as appeared by them that were carried thither. The waters, Isles, and
shoales, are full of safe harbors for ships of war or merchandise, for boats
of all sorts, for transportation or fishing, etc. The Bay and rivers have much
marchandable fish and places fit for Salt coats, building of ships, making of
iron, etc.

Muscovia and Polonia do yearly receive many thousands, for pitch, tar,
soap ashes, Rosen, Flax, Cordage, The commodities.
Sturgeon, masts, yards, wainscot, Firres, glass, and such like, also
Swethland for iron and copper. France in like manner for Wine, Canvas, and
Salt, Spain as much for Iron, Steel, Figs, Reasons, and Sackes. Italy with
Silks, and Velvers consumes our chief commodities. Holand maintains it self
by fishing and trading at our own doors. All these temporize with other for
necessities, but all as uncertain as peace or wars. Besides the charge,
travel, and danger in transporting them, by seas, lands, storms, and Pirates.
Then how much has Virginia the prerogative of all those flourishing kingdoms
for the benefit of our land, whenas within one hundred miles all those are to
be had, either ready provided by nature, or else to be prepared, were there
but industrious men to labor. Only of Copper we may doubt is wanting, but
there is good probability that both copper and better munerals are there to be
had for their labor. Other Countries have it. So the^ here is a place a nurse
for soldiers, a practice for martiners, a trade for merchants, a reward for
the good, and that which is most of all, a business (most acceptable to God)
to bring such poor infidels to the true knowledge of God and his holy Gospel.

Of the natural Inhabitants of Virginia.
The land is not populous, for the men be few; their far greater number is of
women and children. Within 60 miles of James Town there are about some 5000
people, but of able men fit for their wars scarce 1500. To nourish so The
numbers.
many together they have yet no means because they make so small a benefit of
their land, be it never so fertile. 6 or 700 700 men were the most were seen
together when they thought to have surprised Captain Smith. A description of
the people.
have been the most has been seen together, when they gathered themselves
to have surprised Captain Smyth at Pamavuke, having but 15 to withstand the
worst of their fury. As small as the proportion of ground that has yet been
discovered, is in comparison of that yet unknown. The people differ very much
in stature, especially in language, as before is expressed. Some being very
great as the Sesquesahamocks; others very little, as the Wighcocomocoes: but
generally tall and straight, of a comely proportion, and of a color brown
when they are of any age, but they are borne white. Their hair is generally
black, but few have any beards. The men wear half their heads shaven, the The
barbers.
other half long; for Barbers they use their women, who with 2 shells will
grate away the hair, of any fashion they please. The women are cut in many
fashions agreeable to their years, but ever some part remains long. They are
The constitution
very strong, of an able body and full of agilitie, able to endure to lie in
the woods under a tree by the fire, in the worst of winter, or in the weeds
and grass, in Ambuscado in the Summer. They are inconstant in every The
disposition.
thing, but what fear constrains them to keep. Crafty, timorous, quick of
apprehensio^ and very ingenuous. Some are of disposition fearful, some bold,
most cautelous, all Savage. Generally covetous of coppeer, beads, and such like
trash. They are soon moved to anger, and so malicious, that they seldom
forget an injury: they seldom steal one from another, least their coniurers
should reveal it, and so they be pursued and punished. That they are thus
feared is certain, but that any can reveal their offenses by coniuration I am
doubtful. Their women are careful not to be suspected of dishonesty without
the leave of their husbands. Each household knows their own lands and
gardens, and most live of their own labors. For their apparel, The
possessions
they are some time covered with the skins of wild beasts, which in winter
are dressed with the hair, but in summer without. The better sort use large
ma^tels of dear Their attire.
skins not much differing in fashion from the Irish mantels. Some imbrodered
with white beads, some with copper, other painted after their manner. But the
common sort have scarce to cover their nakedness but with grass, the leaves
of trees, or such like. We have seen some use mantels made of Turkey feathers,
so prettily wrought and wouen with threeds that nothing could be discerned but
the feathers. That was exceeding warm and very handsome. But the women are
always covered about their midles with a skin and very shamefast to be seen
bare. They adorn themselves most with copper beads and paintings. Their women
some Their ornaments
have their legs, hands, breasts and face cunningly imbrodered with diverse
works, as beasts, serpents, artificially wrought into their flesh with black
spots. In each ear commonly they have 3 great holes, whereat they hang
chains bracelets or copper. Some of their men wear in those holes, a small
green and yellow colored snake, near half a yard in length, which crawling
and lapping her self about his neck often times familiarly would kiss his
lips. Others wear a dead Rat tied by the tail. So^e on their heads wear the
wing of a bird, or some large feather with a Rattell. Those Rattels are
somewhat like the chape of a Rapier but less, which they take from the tail
of a snake. Many have the whole skin of a hawke or some strange soul,
stuffed with the wings abroad. Others a broad piece of copper, and some the
hand of their enemy dried. Their heads and shoulders are painted red with the
root Bocone braied to powder mixed with oil, this they hold in somer to
preserve them from the heat, and in winter from the cold. Many other forms of
paintings they use, but he is the most gallant that is the most monstrous to
behold.

Their buildings and habitations are for the most part by Their buildings
the rivers or not far distant from some fresh spring. Their houses are built
like our Arbors of small young springs bowed and tied, and so close covered
with mats, or the barks of trees very handsomely, that notwithstanding either
wind, rain or weather, they are as warm as stooues, but very smoaky, yet at
the top of the house there is a hole made for the smoke to go into right
over the fire.

Against the fire they lie on little hurdles of Reeds covered Their lodgings.
with a mat borne from the ground a foot and more by a hurdle of wood. On
these round about the house they lie heads and points one by that her against
the fire, some covered with mats, some with skins, and some stark naked lie on
the ground, from 6 to 20 in a house. Their houses are in the midst of their
fields or gardens which are small plots Their garden.
of ground. Some 20, some 40. some 100. some 200. some more, some less, some
times from 2 to 100 of those houses together, or but a little separated by
groves of trees. Near their habitations is little small-wood or old trees on
the ground by reason of their burning of them for fire. So that a man may
gallop a horse amongst these woods any way, but where the creekes or Rivers
shall hinder.

Men women and children have their several names according How they use their
children.
to the several humor of their Parents. Their women (they say) are easily
delivered of child, yet do they love children very dearly. To make them
hardy, in the coldest mornings they the^ wash in the rivers and by painting and
ointments so can their skins, that after a year or two, no weather will hurt
them.

The men bestow their times in fishing, hunting, wars and The industry of
their women.
such manlike exercises, scorning to be seen in any woman like exercise, which
is the cause that the women be very painful and the men often idle. The
women and children do the rest of the work. They make mats, baskets, pots,
morters, pound their corn, make their bread, prepare their victuals, plant
their corn, gather their corn, bear al kind of burdens and such like.

Their fire they kindle presently by chasing a dry pointed stick in a hole of
a little square piece of wood, that firing How they strike fire.
it self, will so fire moss, leaves, or any such like dry thing, that will
quickly burn. In March and April they live much upon their fishing, wears,
and feed on fish, Turkies Their order of diet.
and squirrels. In May and June they plant their fields and live most of
Acornes, walnuts, and fish. But to mend their diet, some disperse themselves in
small companies and live upon fish, beasts, crabs, oysters, land Torteyses,
strawberries, mulberries, and such like. In June, Iulie, and August they feed
upon the roots of Tocknough berries, fish and green wheat. It is strange to
see how their bodies alter with their diet, even as the dear and wild beasts
they seem fat and lean, strong and weak. Powhatan their great king and some
others that are provident, roast their fish and flesh upon hurdles as before is
expressed, and keep it till scarce times.

For fishing and hunting and wars they use much their bow and arrows. They
bring their bows to the form of How they make their bows and arrows.
ours by the scraping of a shell. Their arrows are made some of straight young
sprigs which they head with bone, some 2 or 3 inches long. These they use to
shoot at squirrels on trees. An other sort of arrows they use made of reeds.
These are peeced with wood, headed with splinters of crystal or some sharp
stone, the spurs of a Turkey, or the bill of some bird. For his knife he has
the splinter Their knives.
of a reed to cut his feathers in form. With this knife also, he will joint a
Dear or any beast, shape his shoes, buskins, mantels, etc. To make the noch
of his arrow he has the tooth of a Beuer, set in a stick, wherewith he
grateth it by degrees, His arrow head he quickly makes with a little bone,
which he ever wears at his bracer, of any splint of a stone, or glass in the
form of a heart and these they glue to the end of their arrows. With the
sinews of Dear, and the tops of Deares horns boiled to a ielly, they make a
glue that will not dissolve in cold water.

For their wars also they use Targets that are round and Their Targets and
Swords.
made of the barks of trees, and a sword of wood at their backs, but
oftentimes they use for swords the horn of a Dear put through a piece of wood
in form of a Pickaxe. Some a long stone sharpened at both ends used in the same
manner. This they were wont to use also for hatchets, but now by trucking they
have plenty of the same form of iron. And those are their chief instruments
and arms.

Their fishing is much in Boats. These they make of one Their boats.
tree by bowing and scratching away the coals with stons and shells till they
have made it in form of a Trough. Some of them are an elne deep, and 40 or 50
foot in length, and some will bear 40 men, but the most ordinary are smaller
and will bear 10, 20, or 30. according to their bigness. Instead of oars, they
use paddles and sticks with which they will row faster then our Barges. Betwixt
their hands and thighs, their women use to spin, the barks of trees, dear How
they spin.
sinews, or a kind of grass they call Pemmenaw, of these they make a thread
very even and readily. This thread serves for many uses. As about their
housing, apparel, as also they make nets for fishing, for the quantity as
formally braded as ours. They make also with it lines for angles. Their Their
fishooker.
hooks are either a bone grated as they nock, their arrows in the form of a
crooked pin or fishook or, of the splinter of a bone tied to the clift of a
little stick, and with the end of the line, they tie on the bate. They use also
long arrows tied in a line wherewith they shoot at fish in the rivers. But
they of Accawmack use staves like unto Iavelins headed with bone. With these
they dart fish swimming in the water. They have also many artificial wears in
which they get abundance of fish.

In their hunting and fishing they take extreme pains; yet it being their
ordinary exercise from their infancy, they esteem it a pleasure and are very
proud to be expert therein. And by their continual ranging, and travel, they
know all the advantages and places most frequented with Dear, Beasts, Fish,
Foul, Roots, and Berries. At their huntings they leave their habitations, and
reduce themselves into companies, as the Tartars do, and go to the most
desert How they hunt
places with their families, where they spend their time in hunting and fowling
up toward the mountains, by the heads of their rivers, where there is plenty
of game. For betwixt the rivers the grounds are so narrow, that little comes
there which they devour not. It is a marvel they can so directly pass these
deserts, some 3 or 4 days journey without habitation. Their hunting houses are
like unto Arbours covered with mats. These their women bear after them, with
Corn, Acornes, Morters, and all bag and baggage they use. When they come to
the place of exercise, every man does his best to show his dexterity, for by
their excelling in those quallities, they get their wives. Forty yards will
they shoot level, or very near the mark, and 120 is their best at Random. At
their huntings in the deserts they are commonly 2 or 300 together. Having found
the Dear, they enuiron them with many fires, and betwixt the fires they place
themselves. And some take their stands in the midst. The Dear being thus
feared by the fires and their voices, they chase them so long within that
circle that many times they kill 6, 8, 10, or 15 at a hunting. They use also to
drive them into some narrow point of land; when they find that advantage and
so force them into the river, where with their boats they have Ambuscadoes to
kill them. When they have shot a Dear by land, they follow him like blood
hounds by the blood and strain and oftentimes so take them. Hares, Pattridges,
Turkies, or Eggs, fat or lean, young or old, they devour all they ca^ catch
in their power. In one of these huntings they found Captain Smith in the
discovery of the head of the river of Chickahamania, where they slew his men,
and took him prisoner in a Bogmire, where he saw those exercises, and gathered
these observations.

One Savage hunting alone, uses the skin of a Dear One Savage hunting alone.
slit on the one side, and so put on his arm, through the neck, so that his
hand comes to the head which is stuffed, and the horns, head, eyes, ears, and
every part as arteficially counterfeited as they can devise. Thus shrowding his
body in the skin by stalking he approaches the Dear, creeping on the ground
from one tree to another. If the Dear chance to find fault, or stand at gaze,
he turns the head with his hand to his best advantage to seem like a Dear,
also gazing and licking himself. So watching his best advantage to approach,
having shot him, he chaseth him by his blood and strain till he get him.

When they intend any wars, the Werowances usually Their consultations.
have the advice of their Priests and Coniurers, and their Allies and ancient
friends, but chiefly the Priests determine their rosolution. Every Werowance,
or some lusty fellow, they appoint Captain over every nation. They seldom
make war for lands or goods, but for women and children, and principally for
revenge. They have many enemies, Their enemies
namely all their westernely Countries beyond the mountains, and the heads of
the rivers. Upon the head of the Powhatans are the Monacans, whose chief
habitation is at Russawmeake, unto whom the Mouhemenchughes, the
Massinnacacks, the Monahassanuggs, and other nations pay tributs. Upon the head
of the river of Toppahanock is a people called Mannahoacks. To these are
contributers the Tauxsnitanias, the Shackaconias, the Outponcas, the Tegoneaes,
the Whonkentyaes, the Stegarakes, the Hassinnungas, and diverse others, all
confederats with the Monacans though many different in language, and be very
barbarous living for most part of wild beasts and fruits: Beyond the mountains
from whence is the head of the river Patawomeke, the Savages report inhabit
their most mortal enemies, the Massawomekes upon a great salt water, which by
Massawomekes.
all likelihood is either some part of Commada some great lake, or some inlet
of some sea that falls into the South sea. These Massawomekes are a great
nation and very popu lous. For the heads of all those rivers, especially the
Pattawomekes, the Pautuxuntes. The Sasquesahanocks, the Tockwoughes are
continually tormented by them: of whose cruelty, they generally complained,
and very importunate they were with Captain Smith and his company to free
Their offer of subjection.
them from these tormentors. To this purpose they offered food, conduct,
assistance, and continual subjection. To which he concluded to effect, But the
counsel then present emulating his success, would not think it fit to spare
him 40 men to be hazarded in those unknown regions, having passed (as before
was spoken of) but with 12, and so was lost that opportunity. Seven boats
full of these Massawomeks the discouerers encountered at the head of the Bay;
whose Targets, Baskets, Swords, Tobaccopipes, Platters, Bows and Arrows, and
every thing showed, they much exceedeed them of our parts, and their dexterity
in their small boats made of the barks of trees sowed with bark and well
luted with gum, argues that they are seated upon some great water.

Against all these enemies the Powhatans are constrained sometimes to fight.
Their chief attempts are by Stratagems, trecheries, or surprisals. Yet the
Werowances, women and children they put not to death but keep them Captives,
They have a method in war and for our pleasures they showed it us, and it was
in this manner performed at Mattapanient.

Having painted and disguised themselves in the fiercest Their manner of
battle.
manner they could devise. They divided themselves into two Companies, near a
100 in a company. The one company Called Monacans, the other Powhatans. Either
army had their Captain. These as enemies took their stands a musket shot one
from another; ranked themselves 15 a breast and each rank from another 4 or 5
yards, not in fyle, but in the opening betwixt their fyles, So as the Rear
could shoot as conveniently as the Front. Having thus pit ched the fields: from
either part went a Messenger with these conditions, that whosoever were
vanquished, such as escape upon their submission in 2 days after should live,
but their wives and children should be prize for the Conquerers. The messengers
were no sooner returned, but they approached in their orders; On each flank a
Sarieant, and in the Rear an officer for levitenant, all duly keeping their
orders, yet leaping and singing after their accustomed tune which they use only
in wars. Upon the first flight of arrows they gave such horrible shouts and
screeches, as though so many infernal helhounds could not have made them more
terrible. When they had spent their arrows they joined together prettily,
charging and retiring, every rank seconding other. As they got advantage they
catched their enemies by the hair of the head, and down he came that was
taken. His enemy with his wooden sword seemed to beat out his brains, and
still they crept to the Rear, to maintain the skirmish. The Monacans
decreasing, the Powhatans charged them in the form of a half moon; they
unwilling to be enclosed, fled all in a troop to their Ambuscadoes on whom
they led them very cunninngly. The Monacans disperse themselves among the fresh
men, whereupon the Powhatans retired, with all speed to their seconds; which the
Monacans seeing, took that advantage to retire again to their own battle,
and so each returned to their own quarter. All their actions, voices and
gestures, both in charging and retiring were so strained to the hight of their
quallitie and nature, that the strangenes thereof made it seem very delightful.

For their music they use a thick cane, on which they pipe as on a Recorder.
For their wars they have a great Their Music
deep platter of wood. They cover the mouth thereof with a skin, at each
corner they tie a walnut, which meeting on the backside near the bottom, with
a small rope they twitch the^ together till it be so tought and stiff, that
they may beat upon it as upon a drum. But their chief instruments are
Rattels made of small gourds or Pu^pions shells. Of these they have Base, Tenor,
Countertenor, Mean and Trible. These mingled with their voices sometimes 20 or
30 together, make such a terrible noise as would rather affright then delight
any man. If any great comma^der arrive Their entertain meant.
at the habitation of a Werowance, they spread a mat as the Turks do a carpet
for him to sit upon. Upon an other right opposite they sit themselves. Then do
all with a tunable voice of showting bid him welcome. After this do 2. or more
of their chiefest men make an oration, testifying their love. Which they do
with such vehemence and so great passions, that they sweat till they drop, and
are so out of breath they can scarce speak. So that a man would take them to
be exceeding angry or stark mad. Such victual as they have, they spend
freely, and at night where his lodging is appointed, they set a woman fresh
painted red with Pocones and oil, to be his bedfellow.

Their manner of trading is for copper, beads, and such like, for which they
give such commodities as they have, Their trade.
as skins, foul, fish, flesh, and their country corn. But their victual is
their chiefest riches.

Every spring they make themselves sick with drinking the juice of a root they
call wighsacan, and water, whereof Their physic.
they power so great a quantity, that it purges them in a very violent manner;
so that in 3 or 4 days after they scarce recover their former health.
Sometimes they are troubled with dropsies, swellings, aches, and such like
diseases; for Their surgery.
cure whereof they build a stoue in the form of a douehouse with mats, so close
that a few coals therein covered with a pot, will make the pacient sweat
extremely. For swellings also they use swal pieces of touchwood, in the form
of cloves, which pricking on the grief they burn close to the flesh, and from
thence draw the corruption with their mouth. With this root wighsacan they
ordinarily heal green wounds. But to scarrifie a swelling or make incision
their best instruments are some splinted stone. Old ulcers or putrified hurtes
are seldom seen cured amongst the^. They have many professed Physicians, who
with their Their charms to cure.
charms and Rattels with an infernal rowt of words and actions will seem to
suck their inward grief from their navels or their grieved places; but of
our Chirurgians they were so conceipted, that they believed any Plaster would
heal any hurt.

Of their Religion.
There is yet in Uirginia no place discovered to be so Savage in which the
Savages have not a religion, Dear, and Bow, and Arrows. All things that were
able to do the^ hurt beyond their prevention, they adore with their kind of
divine worship; as the fire, water, lightning, thunder, our ordinance, pieces,
horses, etc. But their chief God they worship is the Devil. Him they call Oak
and serve him more Their God.
of fear then love. They say they have conference with him, and fashion
themselves as near to his shape as they can imagine. In their Temples they
have his image evil favouredly carved, and then painted and adorned with
chains copper, and beads, and covered with a skin, in such manner as the
deformity may well suit with such a God. By him is commonly the sepulcher of
their kings. Their bodies are How they bury their kings.
first bowelled, then dried upon hurdles till they be very dry, and so about
the most of their iointes and neck they hang bracelets or chains of copper,
pearl, and such like, as they use to wear, their inwards they stuff with
copper beads and covered with a skin, hatchets and such trash. Then lap they
them very carefully in white skins and so roll them in mats for their wineding
sheets. And in the Tomb which is an arch made of mats, they lay them orderly.
What remains of this kind of wealth their kings have, they set at their feet
in baskets. These Temples and bodies are kept by their Priests.

For their ordinary burials they dig a deep hole in the Their ordinary
burials.
earth with sharp stakes and the corpse being lapped in skins and mats with
their jewels, they lay them upon sticks in the ground, and so cover them with
earth. The burial ended, the women being painted all their faces with black
cole and oil, do sit 24 hours in the houses mourning and lamenting by
turns, with such yelling and howling as may express their great passions.

In every Territory of a werowance is a Temple and a Priest 2 or 3 or more.
Their principal Temple or place of superstition Their Temples.
is at Uttamussack at Pamavuke, near unto which is a house Temple or place of
Powhatans.

Upon the top of certain read sandy hills in the woods. There are 3 great
houses filled with images of their kings and Devils and Tombs of their
Predecessors. Those houses are near 60 foot in length built arbor wise after
their building. This place they count so holy as that but the Priests and
kings dare come into them; nor the Savages dare not go up the river in boats by
it, but that they sole^nly cast some piece of copper white beads or Pocones
into the river, for fear their Oak should be offended and reve^ged of them.

In this place commonly is resident 7 Priests. The chief differed from the
rest in his ornaments, but inferior Priests Their ornaments for their Priests
could hardly be known from the common people, but that they had not so many
holes in their ears to hang their jewels at. The ornaments of the chief
Priest was certain attires for his head made thus. They took a dosen or 16 or
more snake skins and stuffed them with moss, and of weesels and other vermin
skins a good many. All these they tie by their tails, so as all their tails
meet in the top of their head, like a great Tassell. Round about this
Tassell is as it were a crown of feathers, the skins hang round about his head
neck and shoulders and in a manner cover his face. The faces of all their
Priests are painted as ugly as they can devise, in their hands they had every
one his Rattell, some base, some smaller. Their devotion was most in songs
which the chief Priest begins and the rest followed him, sometimes he
makes invocations with broken sentences by starts and strange passions, and at
every pause, the rest give a short groan.

It could not be perceived that they keep any day as more holy then other;
But only in some great distress of want, fear of enemies, times of triumph
and gathering together Their times of solemnities.
their fruits, the whole country of men women and children come together to
solemnities. The manner of their devotion is, sometimes to make a great fire,
in the house or fields, and all to sing and dance about it with rattles and
shouts together, 4 or 5 hours. Sometime they set a man in the midst, and about
him they dance and sing, he all the while clapping his hands as if he would
keep time, and after their songs and dauncings ended they go to their Feasts.

They have also diverse coniurations one they made when Their coniurations.
Captain Smith was their prisoner (as they reported) to know if any more of
his countrymen would ariue there, and what he there intended. The manner of it
was thus. First they made a fair fire in a house; about this fire set 7
Priests setting him by them, and about the fire, they made a circle of meal.
That done the chief Priest attired as is expressed began to shake his rattle,
and the rest followed him in his song. At the end of the song, he laid down 5
or 3 grains of wheat and so continued counting his songs by the grains, till
3 times they incirculed the fire, then they divided the grains by certain
numbers with little sticks, laying down at the end of every song a little
stick. In this manner they sat 8, 10, or 12 hours without cease, with such
strange stretching of their arms, and violent passions and gestures as might
well seem strange to him they so coniured who but every hour expected his
end: not any meat they did eat till late in the evening they had finished this
work, and then they feasted him and themselves with much mirth, but 3 or 4
days they continued this ceremony.

They have also certain Altar stones they call Pawcorances, Their altars.
but these stand from their Temples, some by their houses, other in the woods
and wildernesses. Upon this they offer blood, dear suet, and Tobacco. These
they do when they return from the wars, from hunting, and upon many other
occasions. They have also another superstition that they use in storms, when
the waters are rough in Sacrifices to the water.
the rivers and sea coasts. Their Coniurers run to the water sides, or
passing in their boats, after many hellish outcries and invocations, they cast
Tobacco, Copper, Pocones or such trash into the water, to pacify that God
whom they think to be very angry in those storms. Before their dinners and
suppers the better sort will take the first bit, and cast it in the fire, which
is all the grace they are known to use.

In some part of the Country they have yearly a sacrifice of children. Such a
one was at Quiyoughcohanock some 10 miles from James Town and thus performed.
Fifteen Their solemn sacrifices of children.
of the properest young boys, between 10 and 15 years of age they painted
white. Having brought them forth the people spent the forenoone in dancing and
singing about them with rattles. In the afternoon they put those children to
the root of a tree. By them all the men stood in a guard, every one having a
Bastinado in his hand, made of reeds bound together. This made a lane between
them all along, through which there were appointed 5 young men to fetch these
children: so every one of the five went through the guard to fetch a child each
after other by turns, the guard fearelesly beating them with their
Bastinadoes, and they patiently enduring and receiving all, defending the
children with their naked bodies from the unmerciful blows that pay them
soundly though the children escape. All this while the women weep and cry out
very passionately, providing mats, skins, moss, and dry wood, as things
fitting their childrens funerals. After the children were thus passed the
guard, the guard tore down the trees, branches, and boughs, with such violence
that they rent the body, and made wreathes for their heads, or bedecked their
hair with the leaves. What else was done with the childron, was nonseene, but
they were all cast on a heap, in a valley as dead, where they made a great
feast for all the company. The Werowance being demanded the meaning of this
sacrifice, answered that the children were not al dead, but that the Oak or
Devil did suck the blood from their left breast, who chanced to be his by
lot, till they were dead, but the rest were kept in the wilderness by the young
men till nine months were expired, during which time they must not converse
with any, and of these were made their Priests and Coniurers. This sacrifice
they held to be so necessary, that if they should omit it, their Oak or Devil
and all their other Quiyoughcosughes which are their other Gods, would let them
have no Dear, Turkies, Corn, nor fish, and yet besides, he would make a
great slaughter amongst them.

They think that their Werowances and Priests which Their resurrection.
they also esteem Quiyoughcosughes, when they are dead, do go beyound the
mountains toward the setting of the sun, and ever remain there in form of
their Oak, with their heads painted with oil and Pocones, finely trimmed with
feathers, and shall have beads, hatchets, copper, and tobacco, doing nothing
but dance and sing, with all their Predecessors. But the common people they
suppose shall not live after death.

To divert them from this blind idolatry, many used their best endeavors,
chiefly with the Werowances of Quiyoughcohanock, whose devotion, apprehension,
and good disposition, much exceeded any in those Countries, who though we could
not as yet prevail withal to forsake his false Gods, yet this de did believe
that our God as much exceeded theirs, as our Gunnes did their Bows and Arrows
and many times did send to the President, at James town, men with presents,
entreating them to pray to his God for rain, for his Gods would not send him
any. And in this lamentable ignorance do these poor souls sacrifice them
selves to the Devil, not knowing their Creator.

Of the manner of the Virginians government.
Although the country people be very barbarous, yet have they amongst them
such government, as that their Magistrates for good commanding, and their
people for du subjection, and obeying, excel many places that would be counted
very civil. The form of their Common wealth is a monarchical government,
one as Emperor rules over many kings or governors. Their chief ruler is
called Powhatan, and takes his name of the principal place of dwelling called
Powhatan. But his proper name is Wahunsonacock. Some countries he has which
have been his ancestors, and came unto him by inheritance, as the country
called Powhatan, Arrohateck, Appamatuke, Pamavuke, Youghtanud, and
Mattapanient. All the rest of his Territories expressed in the Map, they report
have been his several conquests. In all his ancient inheritances, he has
houses built after their manner like arbours, some 30 some 40 yardes long, and
at every house provision for his entertainment according to the time. At
Werowcomoco, he was seated upon the Northside of the river Pamavuke, some 14
miles from James Town, where for the most part, he was resident, but he took
so little pleasure in our near neighborhood, that were able to visit him
against his will in 6 or 7 hours, that he retired himself to a place in the
deserts at the top of the river Chickahamania between Youghtanund and
Powhatan. His habitation there is called Orapacks A description of Powhatan.
where he ordinarily now resideth. He is of parsonage a tall well proportioned
man, with a sower look, his head somewhat gray, his beard so thin that it
seems none at al, his age near 60; of a very able and hardy body to endure
any labor. About his person ordinarily attends a guard of 40 or 50 of the
tallest men his Country does afford. Every His attendance and watch.
night upon the 4 quarters of his house are 4 Sentinels each standing from
other a flight shoot, and at every half hour one from the Corpse du guard does
hollow, unto whom every Sentinel does answer round from his stand; if any
fail, they presently send forth an officer that beats him extremely.

A mile from Orapakes in a thicket of wood he has a house in which he keeps
his kind of Treasure, as skins, His treasuris.
copper, pearl, and beads, which he storeth up against the time of his death
and burial. Here also is his store of red paint for ointment, and bows and
arrows. This house is 50 or 60 yards in length, frequented only by Priests.
At the 4 corners of this housestand 4 Images as Sentinels, one of a Dragon,
another a Bear, the 3 like a Leopard, and the fourth like a giantlike man, all
made euillfauordly, according to their best workmanship.

He has as many women as he will, whereof when he His wives.
lies on his bed, one sits at his head, and another at his feet, but when
he sits, one sits on his right hand and another on his left. As he is
weary of his women, he bestows them on those that best deserve them at his
hands. When he dineth or suppeth, one of his women before and after meat,
brings him water in a woden platter to wash his hands. Another waits with a
bunch of feathers to wipe them instead of a Towell, and the feathers when he
has wiped are dried again. His kingdom descends not to his sons nor
children, but first to his brethren, whereof he has 3. namely Opitchapan,
Opechancanough, His successors
and Catataugh, and after their decease to his sisters. First to the eldest
sister then to the rest and after the^ to the heirs male and female of the
eldest sister, but never to the heirs of the males.

He nor any of his people understand any letters whereby to write or read, only
the laws whereby he rules is custom. Yet when he lists his will is a law
and must be obeyed: not only as a king but as half a God they esteem Their
authority
him. His inferior kings whom they call werowances are tied to rule by
customs, and have power of life and death as their command in that nature. But
this word Werowance which we call and conster for a king, is a common word
whereby they call all commanders for they have but few words in their
language, and but few occasions to use any officers more then one commander,
which commonly they call werowances. They all know their several lands, and
The tenor of their lands.
habitations, and limits, to fish, soul, or hunt in, but they hold all of
their great Werowances Powhatan, unto whom they pay tribute of skins,
beads, copper, pearl, dear, turkies, wild beasts, and corn. What he
commands they dare not disobey in the least thing. It is strange to see with
what great fear and adoration all these people do obey this Powhatan. For at
his feet they present whatsoever he commands, and at the least frown of his
browe, their greatest spirits will tremble with fear: and no marvel, for he
is very terrible and tyrannous in punishing such as offend him. For example he
caused certain malefactors to be bound hand and foot, then having of many
fires gathered His manner of punishments.
great store of burning coals, they rake these coals round in the form of a
cockpit, and in the midst they cast the offenders to broyle to death. Sometimes
he causes the heads of them that offend him, to be laid upon the altar or
sacrificing stone, and one with clubbes beats out their brains. When he would
punish any notorious enemy or malefactor, he causes him to be tied to a tree,
and with muscle shells or reeds, the executioner outteth of his ioints one after
another, ever casting what they cut of into the fire; then does he proceed with
shells and reeds to case the skin from his head and face; then do they rip
his belly and so burn him with the tree and all. Thus themselves reported they
executed George Cassen. Their ordinary correction is to beat them with
cudgels. We have seen a man kneeling on his knees, and at Powhatans command,
two men have beat him on the bare skin, till he has fallen senseless in a
sound, and yet never cry nor complained.

In the year 1608, he surprised the people of Payankatank his near
neighbors and subjects. The occasion was to us unknown, but the manner was
thus. First he sent diverse of his men as to lodge amongst them that night,
then the Ambuscadoes environed al their houses, and at the hour appointed,
they all fell to the spoil, 24 men they slew, the long hair of the one side
of their heads with the skin cased off with shells or reeds, they brought
away. They surprised also the women and the children and the Werowance. All
these they present to Powhatan. The Werowance, women and children became his
prisoners, and do him service. The locks of hair with their skins he
hanged on a line unto two trees. And thus he made oftentation of as great a
triumph at Werowocomoco, showing them to the Emglish men that then came unto
him at his appointment, they expecting provision, he to betray them, supposed
to half conquer them by this spectacle of his terrible cruelty.

And this is as much as my memory can call to mind worthy of note; which I
have purposely collected, to satisfy my friends of the true worth and quality
of Virginia. Yet some bad natures will not stick to slander the Country; that
will slovenly spit at all things, especially in company where they ca^ find
none to contradict them. Who though they were scarce ever 10 miles from James
Town, or at the most but at the falls; yet holding it a great disgrace that
amongst so much action, their actions were nothing, exclaim of all things,
though they never adventured to know any thing; nor ever did any thing but
devour the fruits of other men's labors. Being for most part of such tender
educations and small experience in martial accidents, because they found not
English cities, nor such fair houses, nor at their own wishes any of their
accustomed dainties, with feather beds and down pillowes, Tavernes and
alehouses in every breathing place, neither such plenty of gold and silver and
dissolute liberty as they expected, had little or no care of any thing, but to
pamper their bellies, to fly away with our Pinnaces, or procure their means to
return for England. For the Country was to them a misery, a ruin, a death, a
hell, and their reports here, and their own actions there according.

Some other there were that had yearly stipends to pass to and again for
transportation: who to keep the mystery of the business in themselves, though
they had neither time nor means to know much of themselves; yet al men's
actions or relations they so formally tuned to the temporizing times
simplicity, as they could make their ignorances seem much more, then all the
true actors could by their experience. And those with their great words deluded
the world with such strange promises as abused the business much worse then
the rest. For the business being builded upon the foundation of their fained
experience, the planters, the money, tin, and means have still miscarried: yet
they ever returning, and the Planters so far absent, who could contradict
their excuses? which still to maintain their vaineglory and estimation, from
time to time they have used such diligence as made them pass for truths,
though nothing more false. And that the adve^turers might be thus abused, let
no man wonder; for the wisest living is soonest abused by him that has a fair
tongue and a dissembling heart.

There were many in Virginia merely proiecting, verbal and idle
contemplatours, and thoseso devoted to pure idle nesse, that though they had
lived two or three years in Virginia, lordly, necessity it self could not
compel them to pass the Peninsula, or Pallisadoes of James Town, and those
witty spirits, what would they not affirm in the behalf of our transporters
to get victual from their ships, or obtain their good words in England to get
their passes. Thus from the clamors and the ignorance of false informers, are
sprung those disasters that sprung in Virginia, and our ingenious verbalists
were no less plague to us in Uirginia, then the Locusts to the Egyptians. For
the labor of 30 of the best only preserved in Christianity by their indu
strie the idle livers of near 200 of the rest: who living near 10 months of
such natural means, as the Country naturally of it self afforded,
notwithstanding all this, and the worst fury of the Savages, the extremity of
sickness, mutinies, faction, ignorances, and want of victual; in all that
time I lost but 7 or 8 men, yet subjected the Savages to our desired obedience,
and received contribution from 35 of their kings, to protect and assist the^
against any that should assalt them, in which order they continued true and
faithful, and as subjects to his Majesty, so long after as I did govern there,
until I left the Country: since, how they have revolted, the Country lost,
and again replanted, and the businesses has succeeded from time to time, I
refer you to the relations of them returned from Virginia, that have bin more
diligent in such observations.

FINIS.
THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE ENGLISH COLONIE IN Virginia since their first beginning
from England in the year of our Lord 1606, till this present 1612, with all
their accidents that befell them in their Iournies and Discoveries.

Also the Salvages discourses, orations and relations of the Bordering
neighbors, and how they became subject to the English.

Unfolding even the fundamental causes from whence have sprang so many
miseries to the undertakers, and scandals to the business: taken faithfully as
they were written out of the writing of Thomas Studley the first prevant
master, Anas Todkill, Walter Russell Doctor of Physic, Nathaniell Powell,
William Phettyplace. Richard Wiffin, Thomas Abbay, Tho: Hope, Rich: Polts and
the labor of diverse other diligent observers, that were residents in
Virginia.

And perused and confirmed by diverse now resident in England that were actors
in this business.

By W. S.



AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1612.

TO THE READER.
LOng has the world longed, but to be truly satisfied what Virginia is, with
the truth of those proceedings, from whence has flowne so many reports of
worth, and yet few good effects of the charge, which has caused suspicion in
many well willers that desire yet but to be truly satisfied therein. If any
can resolve this doubt it is those that have lived residents in the land: not
salers, or passengers, nor such mercinary contemplators, that only bedeck
themselves with others plumes. This discourse is not from such, neither am I
the author, for they are many, whose particular discourses are signed by their
names. This solid treatise, first was compiled by Richard Pots, since passing
the hands of many to pervse, cha^cing into my hands, (for that I know them
honest men, and can partly well witness their relations true) I could do no
less in charity to the world the^ reveal; nor in conscience, but approve. By
the advice of many grave and understanding gentlemen, that have pressed it, to
the press, it was thought fit to publish it, rather in it own rude phrase
then other ways. For that nothing can so purge that famous action from the
infamous scandal some ignorantly have conceited, as the plain simple and naked
truth. For defect whereof the business is still suspected, the truth unknown,
and the best deservers discouraged, and neglected, some by false reports,
others by conjecture, and such power has flattry to engender of those, hatred
and affection, that one is sufficent to beguile more, then 500 can keep from
being deceived.

But this discourse is no Judge of men's manners, nor catalogue of their former
courses; only a reporter of their actions in Virginia, not to disgrace any,
accuse any, excuse any, nor flatter any; for which cause there is no wrong done
but this, shortness in complaining, and so sparing in commending as only the
reader may perceive the truth for his pains, and the action purged of foul
slander; it can detract from none that intends there to adventure their
fortunes; and to speak truly of the first planters, that brake the ye and
beat the path, howsoever many difficulties obscured their indevours, he were
worse then the worst of Ingrates, that would not spare them memory that have
buried themselves in those foreign regions. From whose first adventures may
spring more good blessings then are yet conceived. So I rest thine, that will
read, pervse, and understand me. If you find false orthography or broken
English, they are small faults in soldiers, that not being able to write
learnedly, only strive to speak truly, and be understood without an
Interpreter.

T. ABBAY.

THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE ENGLISH Colony in Virginia, taken faithfully out of the
writings of Thomas Studly Cape-marchant, Anas Todkill, Doctor Russell,
Nathaniel Powell, William Phetiplace, and Richard Pot, with the labors of
other discreet observers, during their residences.
CHAP. 1.
IT might well be thought, a country so fair (as Virginia is) and a people so
tractable, would long ere this have been quietly possessed, to the
satisfaction of the adventurers, and the eternizing of the memory of those
that affected it. But because all the world do see a defailement; this
following Treatise shall give satisfaction to all indifferent readers, how the
business has been carried, where no doubt they will easily understand and
answer to their question, how it came to pass there was no better speed and
success in those proceedings.

Captain Bartholomew Gosnold, the first mover of The first mouer of the action.
this plantation, having many years solicited many of his friends, but found
small assistants; at last prevailed with some Gentlemen, as Mr Edward-maria
Wingfield, Captain John Smith, and diverse others who depended a year upon
his proiects, but nothing could be effected, till by their great charge and
industry it came to be apprehended by certain of the Nobility, Gentry, and
Merchants, so that his Majesty by his letters patents, gave commission for
establishing Councels, to direct here, and to govern, and to execute there; to
effect this, was spent another year, and by that time, three ships were
provided, one of 100 Tonns, another of 40. and a Pinnace of 20. The
transportation of the company was committed to Captain Christopher Newport, a
Mariner well practiced for the western parts of America. But their orders for
government were put in a box, not to be opened, Orders for government.
nor the governors known until they arived in Virginia.

On the 19 of December, 1606. we set sail, but by unprosperous winds, were
kept six weeks in the sight of England; all which time, Mr Hunt our Preacher,
was so weak and sick, that few expected his recoverie. Yet although he were
but 10 or 12 miles from his habitation (the time we were in the downs) and
notwithstanding the stormy weather, nor the scandalous imputations (of some
few, little better then Atheists, of the greatest rank amongst us) suggested
against him, all this could never force from him so much as a seeming desire to
leave the business, but preferred the service of God, in so good a voyage,
before any affection to contest with his godless foes, whose disasterous
designs (could they have prevailed) had even then overthrown the business,
so many discontents did then arise, had he not with the water of patience, and
his godly exhortations (but chiefly by his true devoted examples) quenched
those flames of envy, and dissension.

We watered at the Canaries, we traded with the Salvages at Dominica; three
weeks we spent in refreshing ourselus amongst these West India Isles; in
Gwardalupa we found a bath so hot, as in it we boiled porck as well as over the
fire. And at a little I Will called Monica, Monica an unfrequented I Will full of
birds.
we took from the bushes with our hands, near 2 hogshheads full of birds in 3
or 4 hours. In Mevis, Mona, and the Virgin Isles, we spent some time, wherewith
a loathsome beast like a Crocadil, called a Gwayn, Tortoses, Pellicans, Parrots,
and fishes, we daily feasted. Gone from thence in search of Virginia, the
company was not a little discomforted, seeing the Mariners had three days
passed their reckoning and found no land, so that Captain Ratcliffe (Captain
of the Pinnace) rather desired to bear up the helm to return for England,
then make further search. But God the guider of all good actions, forcing the^
by an extreme storm to hul all night, did drive them by his providence to
their desired port, bey and all their expectations, for never any of them had
seen that coast. The first land they made they called Cape Henry; where
anchoring, Their first landing.
Mr Wingfeild, Gosnoll, and Newport, with 30 others, recreating themselves on
shore, were assalted by 5 Salvages, who hurt 2 of the English very dangerously.
That night was the box opened, and the orders read, in which Barthelomew
Gosnoll, Edward Wingfeild, Christopher Newport, John Smith, John Ratliffe, John
Martin, and George Kendall, were named to be the Council, and to choose a
President amongst them for a year, who with the Council should govern.
Matters of moment were to be examined by a Jurie, Matters of government.
but determined by the mayor part of the Council in which the Precedent had 2
voices. Until the 13 of May they sought a place to plant in, then the Council
was sworn, M. Wingfeild was chosen Precident, and an oration made, why
Captain Smith was not admitted of the Council as the rest.

Now falls every man to work, the Council contriue the Fort, the rest cut
down trees to make place to pitch their Tents; some provide clapbord to relade
the ships, some make gardens, some nets, etc. The Salvages often visited us
kindly. The Precidents overweening jealousy would admit no exeroise at arms,
or fortification, but the boughs of trees cast together in the form of a half
moon by the extraordinary pains and diligence of Captain Kendall, Newport,
with Smith, and 20 others, were sent to discover The discovery of the Falls
and Powhatan.
the head of the river: by diverse small habitations they passed, in 6 days they
arrived at a town called Powhatan, consisting of some 12 houses pleasantly
seat don a hill; before it 3 fertile Isles, about it many of their cornefields,
the place is very pleasant, and strong by nature, of this place the Prince is
called Powhatan, and his people Powhatans, to this place the river is
navigable, but higher within a mile, by reason of the Rocks and Isles, there is
not passage for a small boat, this they call the Falls, the people in all parts
kindly entreated them, til being returned within 20 miles of James town, they
gave just cause of jealousy, but had God not blessed the discoverers otherwise
then those at the fort, there had then been an end of that plantation; for at
the fort, where they arived the next day, they found 17 men hurt, and a boy
slain by the Salvages, and had it not chanced a cross bar shot from The
Fort assalted by the Salvages.
the ships struck down a bough from a tree amongst them that caused them to
retire, our men had all been slain, being securely all at work, and their
arms in dry fats.

Hereupon the President was contented the Fort should be pallisadoed, the
ordinance mounted, his me^ armed and exercised, for many were the assaults, and
Ambuscadoes of the Salvages, and our men by their disorderly straggling were
often hurt, when the Salvages by the nimblenesse of their heels well escaped.
What toil we had, with so small a power to guard our workme^ adays, watch al
night, resist our enemies and effect our business, to relade the ships, cut
down trees, and prepare the ground to plant our corn, etc.

I refer to the readers consideration. Six weeks being spent in this manner,
Captain Newport (who was hited only for our transportation) was to return with
the ships, now Captain Smith, who all this time from their departure from the
Canaries was restrained as a prisoner upon the scandalous suggestions of some
of the chief envying his repute) who fained he intended to usurp the
government, murder the Council, and make himself king, that his confederats
were dispearsed in all the three ships, and that diverse of his confederats that
revealed it, would affirm it, for this he was committed, 13 weeks he remained
thus suspected, and by that time the ships should return they pretended out of
their commisserations, to refer him to the Council in England to receive a
check, rather then by particulating his designs make him so odious to the
world, as to touch his life, or utterly overthrowe his reputation; but he much
scorned their charity, and publicly defied the uttermost of their cruelty,
he wisely prevented their policies, though he could not suppress their
envies, yet so well he demeaned himself in this business, as all the company did
see his innocence, and his adversaries malice, and those suborned to accuse
him, accused his accusers of subornation; many untruths were alleged against
him; but being so apparently disproved begat a general hatred in the hearts of
the company against such unjust commanders; many were the mischiefs that daily
sprung from their ignorant (yet ambitious) spirits; but the good doctrine and
exhortation of our preacher Mr Hunt reconciled them, and caused Captain Smith
to be admitted of the Council; the next day all received the Communion, the
day following the Salvages voluntarily desired peace, and Captain Newport
returned for England with news; leaving in Cap. Newports return for Eng land.
Virginia 100. the 15 of June 1607.

The names of them that were the first planters, were these following.
Mr Edward Maria Wingfield. Captain Bartholomew Gosnoll. Cap. John Smyth. Cap.
John Ratliffe. Cap. John Martin. Cap. George Kendall.
Council.
Mr Robert Hunt Preacher. Mr George Percie. Anthony Gosnoll. Cap. Gabriell
Archer. Rob. Ford. William Bruster. Dru Pickhouse. John Brooks. Thomas Sands.
John Robinson. Vstis Clovill. Kellam Throgmorton. Nathaniell Powell. Robert
Behethland. Jeremy Alicock. Thomas Studley. Richard Crofts. Nicholas Houlgraue.
Thomas Web: John Waler. William Tankard. Francis Snarsbrough. Edward Brooks.
Richard Dixon. John Martin. George Martin. Anthony Gosnold: Thomas Wotton,
Sierg. Thomas Gore. Francis Midwinter.
Gent.
William Laxon. Edward Pising. Tho. Emry. Rob. Small.
Carpenters.
Anas Todkill. John Capper. James Read, Blacksmith. Jonas Profit, Sailer. Tho.
Couper, Barber. John Herd, Brick layer. William Garret, Bricklayer Edward
Brinto, Mason. William Love, Tailor. Nic. Skot, Drum. John Laydon. William
Cassen. George Cassen. Tho. Cassen. William Rods. William White. Old Edward.
Henry Tauin. George Golding. John Dods. William Johnson. Will. Vnger. Will.
Wilkinson. Surgeon
Laborers.
Samuel Collier. Not. Pecock. James Brumfield. Rich. Mutton.
Boys.
with diverse others to the number of 105.
CHAP. 2.
What happened till the first supply.

BEing thus left to our fortunes, it fortuned that within tennedaies The
occasion of sickness.
scarce ten amongst'vs could either go, or well stand, such extreme weakness
and sickness oppressed us. And thereat none need morvaile, if they consider the
cause and reason, which was this; whilst the ships stayed, our allowance was
somewhat bettered, by a daily proportion of biscuit which the sailers would
pilser to sell, give or exchange with The sailers abuses.
us, for money, saxesras, surres, or love. But when they departed, there
remained neither tavern, beere-house nor place of relife but the common
kettell. Had we been as free from all sins as gluttony, and drunkenness, we
might have bin canonized for Saints; But our President would never have bin
admitted, for engrossing to his private, Otemeale, sack, oil, aquavitae, beef
eggs, or what not, but the kettel; that indeed he allowed equally to be
distributed, and that was half a pint of wheat and as much barley boiled with
water for a man a day, and this having fried some 26. weeks in the ships-hold,
contained as many worms as grains; so that we might truly call it rather so
much bran then corn, our drink was water, our lodgings castles in air, with
this lodging and diet, our extreme toil in bearing and planting pallisadoes,
so strained and bruised us, and our continual labor in the extremity of the
heat had so weakened us, as were cause sufficient to have made us as miserable
in our native country, or any other place in the world. From May, to September,
those that escaped; lived upon Sturgion, and sea-Crabs, 50. in this time we
buried, The rest seeing the Preside^ts proiects to escape these miseries in our
Pinnas Abad Precide^t.
by flight (who all this time had neither felt want nor sickness) so moved our
dead spirits, as we deposed him; and established Ratcliffe in his place,
(Gosnoll being dead) Kendall deposed, Smith newly recovered, Martin and
Ratliffe was by his care preserved and relieved, but now was all our provision
spent, the Sturgeon gone, all helps abandoned each hour expecting the fury of
the Salvages; when God the patron of all good endeavors in that desperate
extremity so changed the hearts of the Salvages, that they brought such plenty
of their fruits, and provision as no man wanted. Plenty unexpected.


And now where some affirmed it was ill done of the Council to send forth men
so badly provided, this incontradictable reason will show them plainly they
are too ill advised to nourish such il conceits; first the fault of our going
was our own, what could be thought fitting or necessary we had, but what
we should find, what we should want, where we should be, we were all
ignorant, and supposing to make our passage in two months, with victual to
live, and the advantage of the spring to work; we wear at sea 5. months
where we both spent our victual and lost the opportunity of the time, and
season to plant.

Such actions have ever since the worlds beginning been subject to such
accidents, and every thing of worth is found full of difficulties, but nothing
so difficult as to establish a common wealth so far remote from men and
means, and where men's minds are so untoward as neither do well themselves nor
suffer others; but to proceed.

The new President, and Martin, being little beloved; of weak judgment in
dangers, and less industry in peace, committed the managing of all things
abroad to captain Smith: who by his own example, good words, and fair
promises, set some to mow, others to The building of James Town.
bind thatch, some to build houses, others to thatch them, himself always
bearing the greatest task for his own share, so that in short time, he
provided most of them lodgings neglecting any for himself. this done, seeing
the Salvages superfluity begin to decrease (with some of his workmen)
shipped himself in the shallop to search the country for trade, the want of
the language, knowledge to ma^nage his boat with out sailers, the want of a
sufficient power, (knowing the multitude of the Salvages) apparel for his men,
and other necessaries, were infinite impediments, yet no discourageme^t. Being
but 6 or 7 in company he went down the river to Kecoughtan, where at first they
scorned him, as a starved man, yet he so dealt with them, that the next day
they loaded his boat with corn, and in his return he discovered and kindly
traded with the The beginning of trade abroad,
Weraskoyks, in the mean time those at the fort so glutted the Salvages with
their commodities as they became not regarded.

Smith perceiving (notwithstanding their late misery) not any regarded but
from hand to mouth, (the company being well recovered) caused the Pinas to be
provided with things fitting to get provision for the year following; but in
the interim he made 3. or 4. iournies and discovered the people of Chickahamine
yet what he carefully provided the rest carelessly spent. Wingfield and Kendall
living in disgrace, seeing althings at random in the absence of Smith, The
companies dislike of their Presidents weakness, and their small love The
discovery of Chickahamine.
to Martins never-mending sickness, strengthened themselves with the sailers,
and other confederates to regaine their former credit and authority, or at
least such means abord the Pinas, (being fitted to sail as Smith had
appointed for trade) to alter her course and to go for England. Smith
unexpectedly returning had the plot discovered to him, much trouble he had to
prevent it till with store of fauken and musket shot he forced them stay or
sink in the rivers, which action cost the life of captain Kendall. These
brawles are so disgustfull, as some will say they were better forgotten, yet
all men of good judgment will conclude, it were better their baseness should be
manifest to the world, then the business bear the scorn and shame of their
excused disorders. The President and captain Archer not long after intended
also to have abandoned the country, which project also was curbed, and
suppressed by Smith. The Spanyard never more greedily desired Another project
to abandon the Country.
gold then he victual, which finding so plentiful in the river of Chickahamine
where hundreds of Salvages in diverse places stood with baskets expecting his
coming. And now the winter approaching, the rivers be came so covered with
swans, geese, duckes, and cranes, that we daily feasted with good bread,
Virginia pease, pumpions, and putchamins, fish, soul, and diverse sorts of
wild beasts as fat as we could eat them: so that none of our Tustaffaty
humorists desired to go for England. But our comaedies never endured long
without a Tragedy; so^e idle exceptio^s being muttered against Captain Smith,
for not discovering the head of Chickahamine river, and taxed by the Council,
to be too slow in so worthy an attempt. The next voyage he proceeded so
far that with much labor by cutting of trees in sunder he made his passage,
but when his Barge could pass no farther, he left her in a broad bay out of
danger of shot, commanding none should go ashore till his return, himself
with 2 English and two Salvages went up higher in a Canowe, but he was not
long absent, but his me^ went ashore, whose want of government, gave both
occasion and opportunity to the Salvages to surprise one George Casson, and
much failed not to have cut of the boat and all the rest, Smith little dreaming
of that accident, being got to the mar shes at the rivers head, 20 miles in the
desert, had his 2 men slain (as is supposed) sleeping by the Canowe, whilst
himself by fowling sought them victual, who finding he was beset with 200
Salvages, 2 of them he slew, still defending himself with the aid of a Salvage
his guide, (whom he bound to his arm and used as his buckler, till at last
slipping into a bogmire they took him prisoner: when this news came to the
fort much was their sorrow for his loss, few expecting what ensued. A month
those Barbarians kept him prisoner, many strange triumphs and coniurations
they made of him, yet he so demeaned himself amongst them, as he not only
diverted them from surprising the Fort, but procured his own liberty, and got
himself and his company such estimation amongst them, that those Salvages
admired him as a demi God. So returning safe to the Fort, once more stayed the
Pinnas her flight for England, which till his return, could not set sail, so
extreme was the weather, and so great the The 3 project to abando the fort
frost.

His relation of the plenty he had seen, especially at Werowocomoco, where
inhabited Powhatan (that till that time was unknown) so revived again their
dead spirits as all men's fear was abandoned, Powhatan having sent with this
Captain diverse of his men loaded with provision, he had co^ditioned, and so
appointed his trusty messengers to bring but 2 or 3 of our great ordenances,
but the messengers being satisfied with the sight of one of the^ discharged,
ran away amazed with fear, till means was used with gifts to assure them our
loves. Thus you may see what difficulties still crossed any good endeavor, and
the good success of the business, and being thus often brought to the very
period of destruction, yet you see by what strange means God has still
delivered it. As for the insufficiency of them admitted in commission, that
error could not be prevented by their electors, there being no other choice,
and all were strangers each to others education, A true proof of Gods love to
the action.
quallities, or disposition; and if any deem it a shame to our nation, to have
any mention made of these enormities, let them pervse the histories of the
Spanish discoveries and plantations, where they may see how many mutinies,
discords, and dissentions, have accompanied them and crossed their attempts,
which being known to be particular men's offenses, does take away the general
scorn and contempt, malice, and ignorance might else produce, to the scandal
and reproach of those, whose actions and valiant resolution deserve a worthy
respect. Now whether it had been better for Captain Smith to have concluded
with any of their several proiects to have abandoned the Country with some 10
or 12 of them we call the better sort, to have left Mr Hunt our preacher, M.
Anthony Gosnoll, a most honest, worthy, and industrious gentleman, with some
30 or 40 others his country men, to the fury of the Salvages, famine, and all
manner of mischiefs and inconveniences, or starved himself with them for
company, for want of lodging, or but Of two evils the lesser was chose^
adventuring abroad to make them provision, or by his opposition, to preserve
the action, and save all their lives, I leave to the censure of others to
consider.

Thomas Studley.

CHAP. 3.
The arrival of the first supply with their proceedings and return.

ALL this time our cares were not so much to abandon the Country, but the
Treasurer and Council in England were as diligent and careful to supply us.
Two tall ships they sent us, with near 100 men, well furnished with all things
could be imagined necessary, both for them and us. The one commanded by
Captain Newport: the other by Captain Nelson, an honest man and an expert
mariner, but such was the leewardnesse of his ship, (that though he were
within sight of Cape Henry) by stormy contrary winds, was The Phoenix from
Cape henry forced to the west Indies.
forced so far to sea, as the West Indies was the next land for the repair
of his Masts, and relief of wood and water. But Captain Newport got in, and
arived at James town, not long after the redemption of Captain Smith, to
whom the Salvages every other day brought such plenty of bread, fish,
turkies, squirrels, dear, and other wild beasts, part they gave him as
presents from the king; the rest, he as their market clarke set the price how
they should sell.

So he had incha^ted those poor souls (being their prisoner) in demonstrating
unto them the roundnesse of the world, the course of the moon and stars, the
cause of the day and night the largenes of the seas the quallities of our
ships, shot and powder, The devision of the world, with the diversity of
people, their complexions, customs and conditions. All which he fained How C.
Smith got his liberty.
to be under the command of Captain Newport, whom he termed to them his
father; of whose arrival, it chanced he so directly prophesied, as they
esteemed him an oracle; by these fictions he not only saved his own life, and
obtained his liberty, but had them at that command, he might command them what
he listed. That God that created al these things; they knew Their opinion of
our God.
he adored for his God, whom they would also term in their discourses, the
God of captain Smith. The President and Council so much envied his estimation
amongst the Salvages (though we all in general equally participated with him
of the good thereof) that they wrought it into their understandings, by their
great bounty in giving 4. times more for their commodities then he appointed;
that their greatness and authority, as much exceed his, as their bounty, and
liberality; Now the arrival of his first supply, so overioyed us, that we
could not devise too much to please the mariners. We gave them liberty to track
or trade at their pleasures. But in a short time, it followed, that could not
be had for a pound of copper, which before was sold for an ounce, Thus
ambition, and sufferance, cut the throat of our trade, but confirmed their
opinion of Newports greatness, (wherewith Smith had possessed Powhatan)
especially by the great presents Newport (often sent him, before he could
prepare the Pinas to go and visit him; so that this Salvage also desired to see
him. A great bruit there was to set him forward: when he went he was
accompanied, with captain Smith, and Mr Scrivener a very wise understanding
ge^tleman newly arrived, and admitted of the Council, and 30. or 40. chosen
men for that guarde. Arriving at Werowocomo Newports co^ceipt of this great
Salvage, bred many doubts, and suspicions of treacheries; which Smith, to make
appear was needless, which 20. men Smiths revisiting Powhatan
well appointed, undertook to encounter (with that number) the worst that
could happen there names were. Nathaniell Powell. Robert Beheathland. William
Phettiplace. Richard Wyffin. Anthony Gosnoll. John Taverner. William Dier.
Thomas Coe. Thomas Hope. Anas Todkell
with 10. others whose names I have forgotten, These being kindly received a
shore, with 2. or 300. Salvages were conducted to their town; Powhatan
strained Powhatans first entertainment of our men.
himself to the uttermost of his greatness to entertain us, with great shouts
of Joy, orations of protestatio^s, and the most plenty of victual he could
provide to feast us. Sitting upon his bed of mats, his pillow of leather
imbroydred (after their rude manner) with pearl and white beads, his attire a
fair Robe of skins as large as an Irish mantle, at his head and feet a
handsome young woman; on each side his house sat 20. of his concubines, their
heads and shoulders painted red, with a great chain of white beads about their
necks, before those sat his chiefest men in like order in his arbor-like
house. With many pretty discourses to renew their old acquaintance; the great
king and our captain spent the time till the ebb left our Barge a ground,
then renewing their feasts and mirth we quartred that night with Powhatan: the
next day Newport came a shore, and received as much content as those The
exchange of a Christian for a Salvage.
people could give him, a boy named Thomas Savage was then given unto Powhatan
who Newport called his son, for whom Powhatan gave him Namontacke his trusty
servant, and one of a shrewd subtle capacity, 3. or 4. days were spent in
feasting dancing and trading, wherein Powhatan carried himself so prowdly, yet
discreetly (in his Salvage manner) as made us all admire his natural gifts
considering his education, as scorning to trade as his subjects did, he bespake
Newport in this manner.

Captain Newport it is not agreeable with my great Powhatas speech.
nes in this pedling manner to trade for trifles, and I esteem you a great
werowans, Therefore lay me down all your commodities together, what I like I
will take, and in recompense give you that I think fitting their value.
Captain Smith being our interpreter, regarding Newport as his father, knowing
best the disposition of Powhatan told us his intent was but to cheat us; yet
captain Newport thinking to out brave this Salvage in ostentation of greatness,
and so to bewitch him with his bounty, as to have what he listed, but so it
chanced Powhatan having his desire, valued his corn at such a rate, as I
think it better cheap in Spain, for we had not 4. bushels for that we
expected 20. hogsheads, This bred some unkindness between our two captains,
Newport seeking to please the humor of the insatiable Salvage; Smith to cause
the Salvage to Difference of opinions.
please him, but smothering his distaste (to avoid the Salvages suspicion)
glaunced in the eyes of Powhatan many Trifles who fixed his humor upon a few
blew beads; A long time he importunatly desired them, but Smith seemed so much
the more to affect the^, so that ere we departed, for a pound or two of blew
beads he brought over my king for 2 or 300 bushels of corn, yet parted good
friends. The like entertainment we found of Spechanchynough king of Pamaunke
whom also he in like manner fitted, (at the like rates) with blew beads: and so
we returned to the fort. Where this new supply being lodged with the rest,
accidently fired the quarters, and so the Town, which being but thatched with
reeds the fire was so fierce as it burnt their pallizadoes (though 10. or 12
yardes distant) with their James town burnt.
arms, bedding, apparel, and much private provision. Good Mr Hunt our
preacher lost all his library, and all that he had (but the clothes on his
back,) yet none ever see him repine at his loss. This happened in the winter,
in that extreme frost, 1607. Now though we had victual sufficient, I mean
only of Oatemeale, meal, and corn, yet the ship staying there 14. weeks when
she might as well have been gone in 14. days, A ship idly loitring 14 weeks.
spent the beef, porke, oil, aquavitae, fish, butter, and cheese, beer and
such like; as was provided to be landed us. When they departed, what their
discretion could spare us, to make a feast or two with biscuit, pork beef,
fish, and oil, to relish our mouths, of each somewhat they left us, yet I must
confessed those that had either money, spare clothes, credit to give bills of
payment, gold rings, furs, or any such commodities were ever welcome to this
removing tavern, such was our patience to obey such vile commanders, and buy
our own provision at 15 times the value, suffering the^ feast (we bearing the
charge) yet must not repine, but fast, and then leakage, ship-rats, and other
casualties occasioned the loss, but the vessel and remnants (for totals) we
were glad to receive with all our hearts to make up the account, highly
commending their providence for preserving that. For all this plenty our
ordinary was but meal and water, so that this great charge little relieved
our wants, whereby with the extremity of the bitter cold air more then half
of us died, and took our deaths, in that piercing winter I cannot deny, but
both Skrivener and Smith did their best to amend what was amiss, but with the
Presidents went the mayor part, that their horns were too short. But the worst
mischief was, our gilded refiners with their golden promises, made all men
their slaves in hope of recompense, there was no talk, no The effect of mere
verbalists.
hope, no work, but dig gold, wash gold, refine gold, load gold, such a brute
of gold, as one mad fellow desired to be buried in the sands, least they
should by their art make gold of his bones, little need there was and less
reason, the ship should stay, their wages run a needles charge
on, our victual consume, 14 weeks, that the Mariners might say, they built
such a golden Church, that we can say, the rain washed near to nothing in 14
days. Were it that Captain Smith would not applaud all those golden
inventions, because they admitted him not to the sight of their trials, nor
golden consultations I know not; but I heard him question with Captain Martin
and tell him, except he would show him a more substantial trial, he was not
inamored with their durtie skill, breathing out these and many other passions,
never any thing did more torment him, then to see all necessary business
neglected, to fraught such a drunken ship with so much gilded dirt; till then
we never accounted Captain Newport a refiner; who being fit to set sail for
England, and we not having any use of Parliaments, plays, petitions, A
return to England.
admirals, recorders, interpreters, chronologers, courts of plea, nor Justices
of peace, sent M. Wing field and Cap. Archer with him for England to seek some
place of better imploiment.

CHAP. 4.
The arivall of the Phoenix, her return, and other accidents.

THE authority now consisting in resining, Captain Martin and the still
sickly President, the sale of the stores commodities maintained their estates
as inheritable revenews. The spring approaching, and the ship departed, M.
Skriuener and Capt. The repairing of James town
Smith divided betwixt the^, the rebuilding our town, the repairing our
pallisadoes, the cutting down trees, preparing our fields, planting our corn,
and to rebuild our Church, and recover our storehouse; al men thus busy at
their several labors, M. Nelson arived with his lost Phoenix (lost I say, for
that al men deemed him lost) landing safely his men; so well he had managed
his ill hap, causing the Indian Isles to feed his company that his victual (to
that was left us before) was sufficient for half a year, he had nothing but
he freely imparted it, which honest dealing (being a mariner) caused us admire
him, we would not have wished so much as he did for us. Now to relade this
ship with some good tidings. The President (yet notwithstanding with his
dignity to leave the sort) gave order to Captain Smith and M. Skriuener to
discover and search the commodities of Monacans country beyound the Falls, 60
able men was allotted their number, the 60 appointed to discover Monacan.
which within 6 days exercise, Smith had so well trained to their arms and
orders, that they little feared with whom they should encounter. Yet so
unseasonable was the time, and so opposite was Capt. Martin to every thing, but
only to fraught his ship also with his fantastical gold, as Captain Smith
rather desired to relade her with Cedar, which was a present dispatch; then
either with dirt, or the reports of an uncertain discovery. Whilst their
conclusion was resolving, this happened.

Powhatan to express his love to Newport, when he departed, presented him with
20 Turkies, conditionally to return him 20 Swords, which immediately were An
ill example to sell swords to Salvages.
sent him; Now after his departure he presented Captain Smith with the like
luggage, but not finding his humor, obaied in sending him weapons he caused his
people with 20. devises to obtain them, at last by ambuseadoes at our very
ports they would take them per Powhatans treachery.
force, surprise us at work, or any way, which was so long permitted that they
became so insolent, there was no rule, the command from England was so straight
not to offend the^, as our authority bearers (keeping their houses) would
rather be any thing the^ peace breakers: this charitable humor prevailed, till
well it chanced they meddled with captain Smith, who without farther The
governors weakness.
deliberation gave the^ such an encounter, as some he so hunted up and down
the I Will, some he so terrified with whipping, beating and imprisonment, as for
revenge they surprised two of his forraging disorderly Smiths attempt to
suppress the Salvages insolences.
soldiers, and having assembled their forces, boldly threatened at our ports to
force Smith to redeliver 7. Salvages which for their villainies he detained
prisoners, but to try their furies, in less then half an hour he so hampered
their insolences, that they brought the 2. prisoners desiring peace without
any farther composition for their prisoners, who being threatened and examined
their intents and plotters of their villainies confessed they were directed only
by Powhatan, to obtain him our own weapons to cut our own throats, with the
manner how, where, and when, which we plainly found most true and apparent,
yet he sent his messengers and his dearest Daughter Pocahuntas to excuse
Powhatans excuses.
him, of the injuries done by his subjects, desiring their liberties, with the
assurance of his love, after Smith had given the prisoners what correction he
thought fit, used them well a day or two after, and then delivered the^
Pocahu^tas, for whose sake only he fained to save their lives and grant them
liberty. The patient council, that nothing would move to war with the
Salvages, would gladly have wrangled with captain Smith for his cruelty, yet
none was slain to any man's knowledge but it brought them in such fear and
obedience, as his very name would, sufficiently affright them. The fraught of
this ship being concluded to be A ship fraught with Cedar.
Cedar, by the diligence of the Master, and captain Smith she was quickly
reladed; Mr Scrivener was neither Idle nor slow to follow all things at the
fort, the ship falling to the Cedar I Will, captain Martin having made shift to
be sick near a year, and now, neither pepper, sugar, cloves, mace, nor
^^gmets, ginger nor sweet meats in the country (to enjoy the credit of his
supposed art) at his earnest request, was most willingly admitted to return
for England, yet having been there but a year, and not past half a year
since the ague left him (that he might say somewhat he had seen) he went
twice by water to Paspahegh a place near 7. miles from James town, but lest
the dew The adventure of Capt. Mart^^
should distemper him, was ever forced to return before night, Thus much I
thought fit to express, he expressly comma^ding me to record his iournies, I
being his man, and he sometimes my master.

Thomas Studly. Anas Todkill.


Their names that were landed in this supply:
Matthew Scriviner, appointed to be of the Council. Michaell Phetyplace.
William Phetyplace. Ralfe Morton. William Cantrill. Richard Wyffin. Robert
Barnes. George Hill. George Pretty. John Taveruer. Robert Cutler. Michaell
Sickelmore. Thomas Coo. Peter Pory. Richard Killingbeck. William ^ausey. Doctor
Russell. Richard Worley. Richard Prodger. William ^^yley. Richard Molynex.
Richard Pots. Iefrey Abots. John Harper. Timothy Leds. Edward Gurganay. George
Forest. John Nicholes. William Gryvill.
Gent.
Daniell Stalling Iueller. William Dawson Refiner. Abraham Ransacke Refiner.
William Johnson Goldsmith. Peter Keffer a Gunner. Robert Alberton a Perfumer.
Richard Belfield Goldsmith. Ramon Goodyson. John Speareman. William Spence.
Richard Brislow. William Simons. John Bouth. William Burket. Nicholas Ven.
William Perce. Francis Perkins. Francis Perkins. William Bentley. Richard
Gradon. Rowland Nelstrop Richard Salvage. Thomas Salvage. Richard Miler.
William May. Vere. Michaell. Bishop Wyles.
Laborers.
John Powell. Thomas Hope. William Beckwith. William Young. Laurence Towtales.
William Ward.
Tailer.
Christopher Ro^es. James Watkings. Richard Fetherstone. James Burn. Thomas
Feld. John Harford.
Apot hecaries.
Post Gittnat a Curgion. John Jews a Couper. Robert Cotton a
Tobaco-pipe-maker. Richard Dole a black Smith and diverse others to the number
of 120.
CHAP. 5.
The accidents that happened in the Discovery of the bay.

THe prodigality of the Preside^ts state went so deep in the store that Smith
and Scrivener had a while tied both Martin and him to the rules of proportion,
but now Smith being to depart, the Presidents authority so overswayed Mr
Scriveners discretion as our store, our time, our strength and labors was
idly consumed to fulfill his fantasies. The second of June 1608. Smith left
the fort to perform his discovery; with this company.

Walter Russell Doctor of Physic. Ralph Morton. Thomas Momford. William
Cantrill. Richard Fetherstone. James Bourne. Michael Sicklemore.
Gent.
Anas Toakill. Robert Small. James Watkins. John Powell.
Sold.
James Read blackesmith. Richard Keale fishmonger. Jonas Profit fisher.
These being in an open barge of two tons burden leaving the Phoenix at
Cape-Henry we crossed the bay to the Eastern shore and fell with the Isles
called Smiths, Isles the first people we saw were 2. grimme and stout Salvages
upon Cape-Charles with long Cape Charles.
poles like Iavelings, headed with bone, they boldly demanded what we were, and
what we would, but after many circumstances, they in time seemed very kind,
Acawmacke.
and directed us to Acawmacke the habitation of the We rowans where we were
kindly entreated; this king was the comliest proper civil Salvage we
incountred: his country is a pleasant fertile clay-soile. He cold us of a
strange accident lately happened him, and it was Two dead children by the
extreme passions of their parents, or some dreaming visions, fantasy, or
affection moved the^ again to revisit their dead carkases, A strange
mortality of Saluages.
whose benumbed bodies reflected to the eyes of the beholders such pleasant
delightful countenances, as though they had regained their vital spirits. This
as a miracle drew many to behold them, all which, (being a great part of his
people) not long after died, and not any one escaped. They spoke the language
of Powhata^ wherein they made such descriptions of the bay, Isles, and rivers
that often did us exceeding pleasure. Passing along the coast, searching every
inlet, and bay fit for harbors and habitations seeing many Isles in the midst
of the bay, we bore up for them, but ere we could attain them such an
extreme gust of wind, rain, thu^der, and lightning happened, that with great
danger we escaped the unmerciful raging of that ocean-like An extreme gust.
water. The next day searching those inhabitable Isles (which we called Russels
Isles) to provide fresh water, Russels Isles.
the defect whereof forced us to follow the next Eastern channel, which
brought us to the river Wighcocomoco, Wighcocomoco.
the people at first with great fury, seemed to assault us, yet at last with
songs, daunces, and much mirth, became very tractable, but searching their
habitations for water, we could fill but 3, and that such An extreme want of
fresh water.
puddle that never til then, we ever knew the want of good water, we dug
and searched many places but ere the end of two days we would have refused
two barricoes of gold for one of that puddle water of Wighcocomoco. Being past
these Isles, falling with a high land upon the maine we found a great pond of
fresh water, but so exceeding hot, that we supposed it some bath: that place we
called Point ployer, being thus refreshed in crossing over from the maine to
other Isles, the wind and waters so much increased with thunder, lightning, and
rain, that our foremast blew overbord and such mighty waves overwrought us
in that small The barge near sunk in a gust.
barge, that with great labor we kept her from sinking by freeing out the
water, 2 days we were enforced to inhabit these uninhabited Isles, which (for
the extremity of gusts, thunder, rain, storms, and il weather) we called
Limbo. Repairing our fore sail with our shirts, we set sail for the maine and
fell with a fair river on the East called Kuskaranaocke, by it inhabit the
people of Soraphanigh, Nause, Arsek, and Nauta quake that much extolled a great
nation called Massawomekes, The first notice of the Massawomecks.
in search of whom we returned by Limbo, but finding this eastern shore
shallow broken Isles, and the maine for most part without fresh water, we passed
by the straights of Limbo for the weasterne shore So broad is the bay here,
that we could scarce perceive the great high Cliffes on the other side, by them
we ancored that night, and called them Richards Cliffes. 30 leagues we sailed
more Northwards, not finding any inhabitants, yet the coast well watered, the
mountains very barre^, the valleys very fertile, but the woods extreme thick,
full of Woolues, Bears, Dear, and other wild beasts. The first inlet we
found, we called Bolus, for that the clay (in many places) was like (if not)
Bole-Armoniacke: when we first set sail, some of Bolus river.
our gallants doubted nothing, but that our Captain would make too much have
home; but having lien not above 12 days in this small Barge, often tired at their
oars, their bread spoiled with wet, so much that it was rotten (yet so good
were their stomachs that they could digest it) did with continual complaints
so importune him now to return, as caused him bespeake them in this manner.
Gentlemen if you would remember the memorable history of Sir Ralfe Lane, how
his Smiths speech to his soldiers.
company importuned him to proceed in the discovery of Morattico, alleging,
they had yet a dog, that being boiled with Saxafras leaves, would richly feed
the^ in their returns; what a shame would it be for you (that have been so
suspicious of my tenderness) to force me return with a months provision
scarce able to say where we have bin, nor yet heard of that we were sent to
seek; you cannot say but I have shared with you of the worst is past; and for
what is to come of lodging, diet, or whatsoever, I am contented you allot the
worst part to my self; as for your fears, that I will lose my self in these
unknown large waters, or be swallowed up in some stormy gust, abandon those
childish fears, for worse then is past cannot happen, and there is as much
danger to return, as to proceed forward. Regaine therefore your old spirits;
for return I will not, (if God assist me) til I have seen the Massawomekes,
found Patawomeck, or the head of this great water you conceit to be endless. 3
or 4 days we expected wind and weather, whose adverse extreamities added such
discouragements to our discontents as 3 or 4 fell extreme sick, whose pitiful
complaints caused us to return, leaving the bay some 10 miles broad at 9 or 10
fadome water.

The 16 of June we fell with the river of Patawomeck: The discovery of
Patawomeck.
fear being gon^, and our men recovered, we were all contented to take some
pains to know the name of this 9 mile broad river, we could see no
inhabitants for 30 miles sail; then we were conducted by 2 Salvages up a
little bayed creek toward Onawmament where all the woods were laid with
Ambuscadoes to the number of 3 or 400 Salvages, but so Ambuscados of Salvages.
strangely painted, grimed, and disguised, showting, yelling, and crying, as we
rather supposed them so many devils, they made many bravadoes, but to appease
their fury, our Captain prepared with a seeming willingness (as they) to
encounter them, the grazing of the bullets upon the river, with the ecco of the
woods so amazed them, as down went their bows and arrows; (and exchanging
hostage) James Watkins was sent 6 miles up the woods to their kings habitation:
we were kindly used by these Salvages, of whom we understood, they were
commanded to betray us, by Powhatans direction, and he so directed A
treacherous project.
from the discontents of James town. The like incounters we found at
Patawomeck Cecocawone and diverse other places, but at Moyaones Nacothtant and
Taux, the people did their best to content us. The cause of this discovery, was
to search a glistering metal, the Salvages told us they had from Patawomeck,
(the which Newport assured that he had tried to hold half silver) also to
search what furs, metals, rivers, Rocks, nations, woods, fishings, fruits,
victuals and other commodities the land afforded, and whether the bay were
endless, or how far it extended. The mine we found 9 or 10 miles up in the
country from the river, Antimony.
but it proved of no value: Some Otters, Beavers, Martins, Luswarts, and sables
we found, and in diverse places that abundance of fish lying so thick with
their heads above the water, as for want of nets (our barge driving amongst
them) we attempted to catch them with a frying pan, but we found it a bad
instrument to catch fish with. Neither better fish more plenty or variety An
abundant plenty of fish.
had any of us ever seen, in any place swimming in the water, then in the bay
of Chesapeack, but there not to be caught with frying-pans. To express al our
quarrels, treacheries and incounters amongst those Salvages, I should be too
tedious; but in brief at al times we so incou^tred the^ and curbed their
insole^cies, as they concluded with presents to purchase peace, yet we How to
deal with the Salvages.
lost not a man, at our first meeting our captain ever observed this order to
demand their bows and arrows swords mantles or furs, with some child for
hostage; whereby he could quickly perceive when they intended any villainy.
Having finished this discovery (though our victual was near spent) he
intended to have seen his imprisonments, acquaintance upon the river of
Toppahannock. But our boat (by reason of the ebb) chansing to ground upon a
many shoules lying in the entrance, we spied many fishes lurking amongst the
weeds on the sands, our captain sporting himself to catch them by nailing
the^ to the ground with his sword, set us all a fishing in that manner, by this
devise, we took more in an hour then we all could eat; but it chanced, the
captain taking a fish from his sword A Stingray very hurtful.
(not knowing her condition) being much of the fashion of a Thornebacke with a
longer tail, whereon is a most poisoned sting of 2. or 3. inches long, which
she struck an inch and half into the wrist of his arm the which in 4.
hours had so extremely swollen his hand, arm, shoulder, and part of his body,
as we al with much sorrow concluded his funeral, and prepared his grave in an
I Will hard by (as himself appointed) which then we called stingeray I Will after
the name of the fish. Yet by the help of a precious oil Doctor Russels
applied, ete night his tormenting pain was so well assuaged that he eat the
fish to his supper, which gave no less joy and content to us, then ease to
himself. Having neither Surgeo^ nor surgerie but that preservatiue oil, we
presently set sail for James Town; passing the mouth of pyankatanck, and
Pamavnke rivers, the next day we safely arrived at Kecoughtan. The simple
Salvages, seeing our captain hurt, and another bloody (which came by breaking
his shin) our number The Salvages affrighted with their own suspicion.
of bows, arrows, swords, targets, mantles and furs; would needs imagine we
had bin at wars, the truth of these accidents would not satisfy them) but
impaciently they importuned us to know with whom we fought, finding their
aptnes to believe, we failed not (as a great secret) to tell them any thing that
might affright them what spoil we had got and made of the Masawomeekes, this
rumor went faster up the river the^ our barge; that arrived at weraskoyack the
20. of Iulie, where trimming her with painted streamers, and such devises we
made the fort jealous of a Spanish frigot; where we all safely arrived the 21.
of July, there we found the last supply, al sick, the rest, some lame, some
bruised, al unable to do any thing, but complain of the A needless misery.
pride and unreasonable needless cruelty of their silly President, that had
riotously consumed the store, and to fulfill his follies about building him an
unnecessary palace in the woods had brought them all to that misery; That
had not we arrived, they had as strangely tormented him with revenge. But the
good news of our discovery, and the good hope we had (by the Salvages
relation) our Bay had stretched to the South Sea, appeased their fury; but
conditionally that Ratliffe should be deposed, and that captain Smith would
take upon him the government; their request being effected, he Substituted Mr
Scrivener his dear friend in the Presidencie, equally distributing those
private provisions the other had engrossed; appointing more honest officers to
assist Scrivener, (who then lay extremely tormented with a callenture) and in
regard of the weakness of the company, and heat of the year they being The
company left to live at ease.
unable to work; he left them to live at ease, but embarked himself to finish
his discovery.

Written by Walter Russell and Anas Todkill.


CHAP. 6.
What happened the second voyage to discover the Bay.

THE 20. of July Captain Smith set forward to finish the discovery with 12.
men their names were

Nathaniell Powell. Thomas Momford. Richard Faetherstone. Michaell Sicklemore.
James Bourne.
Gent.
Anas Toakill. Edward Pysing. Richard Keale. Anthony Bagnall. James Watkins.
Sold.
William Ward. Jonas Profit.
The wind being contrary caused our stay 2. or 3: days at Kecoughta^ the
wer^^^^S feasting us with much mitth, his people were persuaded we went
purposely to be revenged of the Massawomeckes, in the evening we firing 2. or
3. rackets, so testified the poor Salvages, they supposed nothing impossible
we attempted, The Salvages admire fireworkes.
and desired to assist us. The first night we ancored at Stingeray I Will, the
next day crossed Palawomecks river, and hasted for the river Bolus, we went
not much farther before we might perceiueiue the Bay to devide in 2. heads,
and arriving there we found it The head of the Bay.
divided in 4, all which we searched so far as we could sail them; 2. of them
we found uninhabited, but in crossing the bay to the other, we incountered 7.
or 8. Canowes full of Massawomecks, we seeing them prepare An encounter with
the Massawomecks.
to (...) us left our oars and made way with our sail to incou^ter them, yet
were we but five (with our captain) could stands or within a days after we
left Kecoughtan, the rest (being all of the last supply) were sick almost to
death, (until they were seasoned to the country) having shut them under our
tarpawling, we put their hats upon sticks by the barge side to make us seem
many, and so we think the Indians supposed those hats to be men, for they
(...) with all possible speed to the shore, and there stayed, staring at the
sailing of our barge, till we anchored right against them. Long it was ere we
could draw them to come unto us, at last they sent 2 of their company unarmed
in a Conowe, the rest all followed to second them if need required; These a
being but each presented with all bell, brought aborde all their fellows,
presenting the captain with venison bears flesh, fish, bows, arrows, clubs,
targets, and bear skins; we understood them nothing at all but by signs,
whereby they signified un to us they had been at wars with the Tockwoghs the
which they confirmed by showing their green wounds; but the night parting us,
we imagined they appointed the next morning to meet, but after that we never
saw them.

Entering the River of Tockwogh the Saluages all armed An encounter with the
Tockwoghs.
in a fleere of Boats round environed us; it chanced one of them could speak
the language of Powhatan who persuaded the rest to a friendly parley: but when
they see us furnished with the Massawomeckes weapons, and we faining the
invention of Kecoughtan to have taken them perforce; they conducted us to their
pallizadoed town, mantelled with the barks of trees, with Scaffolds like
mounts, brested about with Barks very formally, their men, women, and children,
with dances, songs, fruits, fish, furs, and what they had kindly entertained
us, spreading mats for us to sit on, stretching their best abilities to
express their loves.

Many hatchets, knives, and pieces of iron, and brass, we see, which they
reported to have from the Sasquesahanockes Hatchets from Sasquesahanock
a mighty people, and mortal enemies with the Massawomeckes; The
Sasquesahanocks, inhabit upon the chiese spring of these 4. two days journey
higher then our Barge could pass for rocks. Yet we prevailed with the
interpreter to take with him an other interpreter to persuade the
Sasquesahanocks to come to visit us, for their language are different: 3. or 4.
days we expected their return then 60 of these giant like people came down
with presents of venison, Tobacco pipes, Baskets, Targets, Bows and Arrows, 5
of their Werowances came boldly abord us, to cross the bay for Tockwogh,
leaving their men and Canowes, the wind being so violent that they durst not
pass.

Our order was, daily to have prayer, with a psalm, at which solemnity the
poor Salvages much wondered: our prayers being done, they were long busied,
with consultation till they had contrived their business; then they began in
most passionate manner to hold up their hands to the sun with a most fearful
song, then embracing the Captain, they began to adore The Sasquesahanocks
offer to the English.
him in like manner, though he rebuked them, yet they proceeded til their song
was finished, which don with a most strange furious action, and a hellish voice
began an oration of their loves; that ended, with a great painted bears skin
they covered our Captain, then one ready with a chain of white beads
(waighing at least 6 or 7 pound) hung it about his neck, the others had 18
mantles made of diverse sorts of skins sowed together, all these with many
other toys, they laid at his feet, stroking their ceremonious hands about his
neck for his creation to be their governor, promising their aids, victuals,
or what they had to be his, if he would stay with them to defend and revenge
them of the Massawomecks; But we left them at Tockwogh, they much sorrowing
for our departure, yet we promised the next year again to visit them; many
descriptions and discourses they made us of Atquanahucke, Massawomecke, and
other people, signifying they inhabit the river of Cannida, and from the French
to Cannida.
have their hatchets, and such like tools by trade, these know no more of the
territories of Powhatan then his name, and he as little of them.

Thus having sought all the inlets and rivers worth noting, we returned to
discover the river of Pawtuxunt, these people we found very tractable, and more
ci Pawtuxunt. R.
vill then any, we promised them, as also the Patawomecks, the next year to
revenge them of the Massawomecks. Our purposes were crossed in the discovery
of the river of Toppahannock, for we had much wrangling Toppahanock. R
with that peevish nation; but at last they became as tractable as the rest. It
is an excellent, pleasant, well inhabited, fertile, and a goodly navigable
river, toward the head thereof; it pleased God to take one of our sick (called
M. Fetherstone) where in Fetherstons bay we buried him in the night with a
volly of shot; the rest Fetherstone baried.
(notwithanding their ill diet, and bad lodging, crowded in so small a barge in
so many dangers, never resting, but always tossed to and again) al well
recovered their healthes; then we discovered the river of Payankatank, and set
sail for James Town; but in crossing Payankatanke discovered.
the bay in a fair calm, such a sudden gust surprised us in the night with
thunder and rain, as we were half employed in freeing out water, never
thinking to escape drowning yet running before the wind, at last we made land
by the flashes of fire from heaven, by which light only we kept from the
splitting shore, un til it pleased God in that black darkness to preserve us by
that light to find Point comfort, and arived safe at James Town, the 7 of
September, 1608. where we found M. Skriuener and diverse others well
recovered, Their proceedings at James Town.
many dead, some sick. The late President prisoner for muteny, by the honest
diligence of M. Skriuener the harvest gathered, but the stores, provision, much
spoiled with rain. Thus was that year (when nothing wanted) consumed and
spent and nothing done; (such was the government of Captain Ratcliffe) but only
this discovery; wherein to express all the dangers, accidents, and incounters
this small number passed in that small barge, with such watrie diet in these
great waters and barbarous Countries (til then to any Christian utterly
unknown) I rather refer their merit to the censure of the courteous and
experienced reader, then I would be tedious, or partial, being a party;

By Nathaniell Poell, and Anas Todkill.


CHAP. 7.
The Presidencie surrendered to Captain Smith, the arrival and return of the
second supply: and what happened.

THe 10. of September 1608. by the election of the Council, and request of the
company Captain Smith received the letters patents, and took upon him the
place of President, which till then by no means he would accept though he
were often importuned thereunto. Now the building of Ratcliffes pallas staide
as a thing needless; The church was repaired, the storehouse recovered;
building prepared for the supply we expected. The fort reduced to the QVERE, ^
form of this figure, the order of watch renewed, the squadrons (each setting
of the watch) trained. The whole company every Satturday exercised in a field
prepared for that purpose; the boats trimmed for trade which in their Journey
encountered the second supply, that brought them back to discover the country of
Monacan, how, or why, Captain Newport obtained such a private commission as
not to return without a lump of gold, a certainty of the south sea or one of
the lost company of Sr Walter Rawley I know not, nor why he brought such a 5.
pieced barge, not to bear us to that south sea, till we had borne her over the
mountains: which how far they extend is yet unknown) as for the coronation
of Powhatan and his presents of Basin, Ewer, Bed, Clothes, and such costly
novelties, they had bin much better well spared, then so ill spent. For we had
his favor much better, only for a poor piece of Copper, till this stately
kind of Powbatans scorn when his curtefie was most deserved
soliciting made him so much overvalue himself, that he respected us as much
as nothing at all; as for the hiring of the Poles and Dutch to make pitch and
tar, glass, milles, and sope-ashes, was most necessary and well. But to
send them and seauenty more without victual to work, was not so well
considered; yet this could not have hurt us, had they bin 200. (though the^ we
were 130 that wanted for our selves.) For we had the Salvages in that Decorum,
(their harvest being newly gathered) that we feared not to get victual
sufficient had we bin 500. Now was there no way to No way but one to
overthrowe the business.
make us miserable but to neglect that time to make our provision, whilst it
was to be had; the which was done to perform this strange discovery, but
more strange coronation; to loose that time, spend that victual we had, tire
and starve our men, having no means to carry victual, munition, the hurr or
sick, but their own backs, how or by whom they were invented I know not;
But Captain Newport we only accounted the author, who to effect these
proiects had so gilded all our hopes, with great promises, that both company
and Council concluded his resolution. I confess we little understood then our
estates, to conclude his conclusion, against all the inconveniences the
foreseeing President all eadged. There was added to the counsel one Captain
Waldo, and Captain Win two ancient soldiers and valiant gentlemen, but
ignorant of the business (being newly arrived) Rateliffe was also permitted to
have his voice, and Mr Scrivener desirous to see strange countries, so that
although Smith was President, yet the Council had the authority, and ruled it
as they listed; as for clearing Smiths objections, how pitch, and tar,
wanscot, clapbord, glass, and soap ashes, could be provided to relade the
ship; or provisiongot to live withal, when none was in the Country and that
which we had, spent before the ships departed; The answer was, Captain Newport
undertook to fraught the Pinnace with corn, in going and returning in his
discovery, and to refraught her again from Werawocomoco; also promising a
great proportion of victual from his ship, inferring that Smiths propositions
were only devises to hinder his journey, to effect it himself; and that the
crucltie Smith had used to the Salvages, in his absence, might occasion them to
hinder his designs; For which, al works were left; and 120 chosen men were
appointed for his guard, and Smith, to make clear these seeming suspicions,
that the Salvages were not so desperate, as was pretended by Captain Newport,
and how willing he was to further them to effect their proiects, (because the
coronation Captain Smith with 4 goes to Powbatan.
would consume much time) undertook their message to Powhatan; to entreat him
to come to James Town to receive his presents, accompanied only with Captain
Waldo, M. Andrew Buckler, Edward Brinton, and Samuel Collier; with these 4 he
went over land, against Werawacomoco, there passed the river of Pamavuke in the
Salvages Canowes, Powhatan being 30 miles of, who, presently was sent for, in
the mean time his women entertained Smith in this manner.

In a fair plain field they made a fire, before which The women's
entertainment at Werawcomoco
he sitting upon a mat; suddenly amongst the woods was heard such a hideous
noise and shriking, that they betook them to their arms, supposing Powhatan
with all his power came to surprise them; but the beholders which were many,
men, women, and children, satisfied the Captain there was no such matter,
being presently presented with this anticke, 30 young women camenaked out of
the woods (only covered behind and before with a few green leaves) their
bodies al painted, some white, some red, some black, some party color, but
every one different, their leader had a fair pair of stagges horns on her
head, and an otter skin at her girdle, another at her arm, a quiver of
arrows at her back, and bow and arrows in her hand, the next in her hand a
sword, another a club, another a pot-stick, all hornd alike, the rest every one
with their several devises. These feindes with most hellish cries, and shouts
rushing from amongst the trees, cast themselves in a ring about the fire,
singing, and dancing with excellent ill variety, often falling into their
infernal passions, and then solemnly again to sing, and dance. Having spent
near an hour, in this maskarado, as they entered; in like manner departed;
having reaccommodated themselves, they solemnly invited Smith to their
lodging, but no sooner was he within the house, but all these Nymphs more
tormented him then ever, with crowding, and pressing, and hanging upon him,
most tediously crying, love you not me. This salutation ended, the feast was
set, consisting of fruit in baskets, fish, and flesh in wooden platters, beans
and pease there wanted not (for 20 hogs) nor any Salvage dainty their
invention could devise; some attending, others singing and dancing about them;
this mirth and banquet being ended, with firebrands (instead of torches) they
conducted him to his lodging.

The next day, came Powhatan; Smith delivered his Captain Smiths message.
message of the presents sent him, and redelivered him Namontack, desiring him
come to his Father Newport to accept those presents, and conclude their revenge
against the Monacans, whereunto the subtle Salvage thus replied.

If your king have sent me presents, I also am a king, Powhatans answer.
and this my land, 8 days I will stay to receive them, your father is to come
to me, not I to him, nor yet to your fort, neither will I bite at such a bait:
as for the Monacans, I can revenge my own injuries, and as for Atquanuchuck,
where you say your brother was slain, it is a contrary way from those parts you
suppose it. But for any salt water beyond the mountains, the relations you
have had from my people are false, whereupon he began to draw plots upon the
ground (according to his discourse) of all those regions; many other discourses
they had (yet both desirous to give each other content in Complementall
courtesies) and so Captain Smith returned with this answer.

Upon this Captain Newport sent his presents by Powhatans Coronation.
water, which is near 100 miles, with 50 of the best shot, himself went by
land which is but 12 miles, where he met with our 3 barges to transport him
over. All things being fit for the day of his coronation, the presents were
brought, his basin, ewer, bed and furniture set up, his scarlet cloak and
apparel (with much ado) put on him (being persuaded by Namontacke they would
do him no hurt.) But a foul trouble there was to make him kneel to receive
his crown, he neither knowing the majesty, nor meaning of a Crown, nor
bending of the knee, endured so many persuasions, examples, and instructions,
as tired them all. At last by leaning hard on his shoulders, he a little
stooped, and Newport put the Crown on his head. When by the warning of a
pistol, the boats were prepared with such a volly of shot, that the king
start up in a horrible fear, till he see all was well, then remembering
himself, to congratulate their kindness, he gave his old shoes and his mantle
to Captain Newport. But perceiving his purpose was to discover the Monacans,
he labored to divert his resolution refusing to lend him either men, or
guids, more then Namontack, and so (after some complementall kindness on both
sides) in requital of his presents, he presented Newport with a heap of wheat
ears, that might co^tain some 7 or 8 bushels, and as much more we bought ready
dressed in the town, wherewith we returned to the fort.

The ship having disburdened her self of 70 persons, with the first
gentlewoman, and woman servant The discovery of Monacan.
that arrived in our Colony; Captain Newport with all the Council, and 120
chosen men, set forward for the discovery of Monacan, leaving the President at
the fort with 80. (such as they were) to relade the ship. Arriving at the
falls, we marched by land some forty miles in 2 days and a half, and so
returned down to the same path we went. Two towns we discovered of the
Monacans, the people neither using us well nor ill, yet for our security we
took one of their petty Werowances, and lead him bound, to conduct us the
way. And in our return searched many places we supposed mines, about which we
spent some time in refining, having one William Callicut a refiner, fitted for
that purpose, from that crust of earth we dug he persuaded us to believe
he extracted some small quan titie of silver (and not unlikely better stuff
might be had for the digging) with this poor trial being contented to leave
this fair, fertile, well watered country. Coming to the Falls, the Salvages
fained there were diverse ships come into the Bay to kill them at James Town.
Trade they would not, and find their corn we could not, for they had hid it in
the woods, and being thus deluded we arrived at James Town, half sick, all
complaining, and tired with toil, famine, and disco^tent, to have only but
discovered our gilded hopes, and such fruitless certaineties, as the President
foretold us.

No sooner were we landed, but the President dispersed many as were able, some
for glass, others for pitch, tar and soap ashes, leaving them, (with the
fort) to the Councels oversight. But 30 of us he co^ducted 5. miles from the
fort to learn to make clapbord, cut down trees, and ly in woods; amongst the
rest he had chosen Gabriell Beadell, and John Russell the only two gallants of
this last supply, and both proper gentlemen: strange were these pleasures to
their conditions, yet lodging eating, drinking, working, or playing they doing
but as the President, all these things were carried so pleasantly, as within a
week they became Masters, making it their delight to hear the trees thunder
as they fell, but the axes so often blistered there tender fingers, that commonly
every third blow had a loud oath to drown the echo; for remedy of which sin
the President devised how to have every man's oaths numbered, and at night,
for every oath to have a can of water povvred down his sleeue, with A
punishment for swearing.
which every offender was so vvashed (himself and all) that a man should
scarce hear an oath in a week.

By this, let no man think that the President, or these gentlemen spent their
times as common wood-hackers at felling of trees, or, such like other labors,
or that they were pressed to any thing as hirelings or common slaves, for what
they did (being but once a little inured) it seemed, and they conceited it only
as a pleasure and a recreation. Yet 30 or 40 of such voluntary Gentlemen would
do more in a day then 100 of One gentleman better then 20 lubbers.
the rest that must be pressed to it by compulsion. Master Scrivener, Captain
Waldo, and Captain Win at the fort, every one in like manner carefully
regarded their charge. The President returning from amongst the woods, seeing
the time consumed, and no provision gotten, (and the ship lay Idle, and would
do nothing) presently embarked himself in the discovery barge, giving order to
the Counsel, to send Mr Persey after him with the next barge that arrived at
the fort; 2. barges, he had himself, and 20. me^, but arriving at Chickahamina
that dogged nation, was too well acquainted with our wants, refusing to trade,
with as much scorn and insolency as they could express. The President
perceiving it was Powhatans policy to starve us, told them he came not so much
for The Chickahamines forced to contribution,
their corn, as to revenge his imprisonment, and the death of his men murdered
by them, and so landing his men, and ready to charge them, they immediately
fled; but then they sent their imbassadours, with corn, fish, fowl, or what
they had to make their peace, (their corn being that year bad) they complained
extremely of their own wants, yet fraughted our boats with 100 bushels of
corn, and in like manner Mr Persies, that not long after us arrived; they
having done the best they could to content us, within 4. or 5. days we
returned to James Town.

Though this much contented the company (that then feared nothing but starving)
yet some so envied his good success, that they rather desired to starve, the^
A bad reward for well doing.
his pains should prove so muchmore effectual then theirs; some proiects
there was, not only to have deposed him but to have kept him out of the fort,
for that being President, he would leave his place, and the fort without their
consents; but their horns were so much too short to effect it, as they
themselves more narrowly escaped a greater mischief.

All this time our old tavern, made as much of all A good tavern in Virginia.
them that had either money or ware as could be desired; and by this time they
were become so perfect on all sides (I mean Soldiers, Sailers, and Salvages,)
as there was ten-times more care, to maintain their damnable and private
trade, then to provide for the Colony things that were necessary, neither was
it a small policy in the mariners, to report in England we had such plenty
and bring us so many men without victual, when they had so many private
factors in the fort, that within 6. or 7. weeks after the ships return, of 2.
or 300. hatchets, chissels, mattocks, and pickaxes searce 20. could be found,
and for pike-heads, knives, shot, powder, or any thing (they could steal from
their A bad trade of masters and sailers.
fellows) was vendible; They knew as well (and as secretly) how to convay them
to trade with the Salvages, for furs, baskets, mussaneekes, young beasts or
such like commodities, as exchange them with the sailers, for butter, cheese,
biefe, porke, aquavitae, beer, biscuit, and oatmeale; and then feign, all was
sent the^ from their friends. And though Virginia afford no furs for the store,
yet one mariner in one voyage has got so many, as he has confessed to have
sold in England for 30l.

Those are the Saint-seeming worthies of Virginia, that have notwithstanding
all this, meat, drink, and pay, but now they begin to grow weary, their trade
being both perceived and prevented; none has bin in Virginia (that has
observed any thing) which knows not this to be true, and yet the scorn, and
shame was the poor soldiers, gentlemen and careless governors, who were all
thus bought and sold, the adventurers cousened, and the action overthrown by
their false excuses, informations, and directions, by this let all the world
Judge, how this business could prosper, being thus abused by such pilfering
occasions.

The proceedings and accidents, with the second supply.
Mr Scrivener was sent with the barges and Pinas to Werawocomoco, where he
found the Salvages more ready Skriueners voyage to Werawocomoco.
to fight then trade, but his vigilance was such, as prevented their proiectes,
and by the means of Namontack got 3. or 4. hogsheads of corn, and as much Red
paint which (then) was esteemed an excellent die.

Captain Newport being dispatched with the trials of pitch, tar, glass,
frankincense, and soap ashes, with that clapoord and wainscot could be
provided met with Mr Scrivener at point Comfort, and so returned for England,
leaving us in all 200. with those he brought us.

The names of those in this supply are these.
Captain Peter Win. Captain Richard Waldo.
were appointed to be of the Council.
Mr Francis West. Thomas Graves. Rawley Chroshaw. Gabriell Bedle. John Russell.
John Bedle. William Russell. John Gudderington. William Sambage. Henry
Collings. Henry Ley. Harmon Haryson. Daniell Tucker. Hugh Wollystone. John
Hoult. Thomas Norton. George Yarington. George Burton. Henry Philpot. Thomas
Maxes. Michaell Lowicke. Mr Hunt. Thomas Forest. William Dowman. John Dauxe.
Thomas Abbay.
Gent.
Thomas Phelps. John Part. John Clarke. Iefry Shortridge. Dius Oconor. Hugh
Win. Davi Vphu. Thomas Bradley. John Burras. Thomas Lavander. Henry Bell. Mr
Powell. Davi Else. Thomas Gipson.
Tradsin.
Thomas Dowse. Thomas Mallard. William Taler. Thomas Fox. Nicholas Hancock.
Walker. Williams. Morrell. Rose. Scot. Hardwin.
Laborers.
Milman. Hellyard.
Boys.
Mistress Forest and Anne Buras her maid, 8. Dutchmen, and Poles with diverse
to the number of 70. persons.
Those poor conclusions so affrighted us all with famine; that the President
provided for Nansamund, Nansamund forced to contribution.
took with him Captain Win and Mr Scrivener (the^ returning from Captain
Newport), these people also long denied him trade, (excusing themselves to be
so commanded by Powhatan) til we were constrained to begin with them perforce,
and then they would rather sell us some, then we should take all; so loading
our boats, with 100. bushels we parted friends, and came to James Town, at
which time, there was a marriage between John Laydon and Anna Burrowes, being
the first marriage we had in Virginia.

Long he stayed not, but fitting himself and captain Waldo with 2. barges,
from Chawopo, weanocke and all parts there, was found neither corn nor
Salvage, but all fled (being Jealous of our intents) till we discovered the
river and people of Appametuck, where we found Appamatucke discovered.
little that they had, we equally divided, betwixt the Salvages and us (but
gave them copper in consideration) Mr Persie, and Mr Scrivener went also abroad
but could find nothing.

The President seeing this procastinating of time, was no course to live,
resolved with Captain Waldo, (whom he knew to be sure in time of need) to
surprise Powhatan, and al his provision, but the unwillingness of Captain
Win, and Mr Scrivener (for some private respects) did their best to hinder
their project: But the President whom no persuasions could persuade to starve,
being invited by Powhatan to come unto him, and if he would send him but men to
build him a house, bring him a grinstone, 50. swords, foam pieces, a cock and a
hen, with copper and beads, he would load his ship with corn, the President
not ignorant of his devises, yet unwilling to neglect any opportunity,
presently sent 3. Dutchmen and 2. English (having no victuals to employ them,
all for want thereof being idle) knowing there needed no better castle, the^
that house to surprise Powhata^, to effect this project he took order with
Captain Waldo to second him if need required; Scrivener he left his
substitute; and set forth with the Pinnas 2. barges and six and forty men which
only were such as volentarily offered themselves for his iourny, the which (by
reason of Mr Scriveners ill success) was censured very desperate, they all
knowing Smith would not return empty howsoever, caused many of those that he
had appointed, to find excuses to stay behind.

CHAP. 8.
Captain Smiths journey to Pamavnke.

THE 29 of December he set forward for Werawocomoco, his company were these.

In the Discovery barge, himself.
Robert Behethland. Nathaniell Powell. John Russell. Rawly Crashaw. Michaell
Sicklemore. Richard Worlie.
Gent.
Anas Todkill. William Love. William Bentley. Geoffery Shortridge. Edward
Pising. William Ward.
Sold.

In the Pinnace.
Mr George Persie, brother to the Earl of Northumber. land, Mr Frauncis West,
brother to the Lord De-la-Ware. William Phetiplace Captain of the Pinnas.
Jonas Profit Master. Robert Ford clarcke of the council. Michaell Phetiplace.
Geoffery Abbot Serg. William Tankard. George Yarington. James Bourne. George
Burton. Thomas Coe.
Gent.
John Dods. Edward Brinton. Nathaniel Peacocke. Henry Powell. David Ellis.
Thomas Gipson. John Prat. George Acrigge. James Read. Nicholas Hancocke. James
Watkins. Anthony Baggly Serg. Thomas Lambert. Edward Pising Serg.
Sold.
4. Dutchmen and Richard Salvage were sent by land, to build the house for
Powhatan against our arrival.
This company being victualled but for 3. or 4. days lodged the first night at
Weraskoyack; where the President took sufficient provision; This kind Salvage
did his best to divert him from seeing Powhatan, but perceiving he could not
prevail, he advised in this manner The good counsel of Weraskoyack.
Captain Smith, you shall find Powhatan to use you kindly, but trust him not,
and be sure he have no opportunity to seize on your arms, for he has sent
for you only to cut your throats; the Captain thanked him for his good
counsel, yet the better to try his love, desired guides to Chowanoke, for he
would send a present to that king to bind him his friend. To perform this
journey, was sent Michael Sicklemore, a very honest, valiant, and painful
soldier, with him two guids, and directions how to search for the lost
company of Sr Walter Rawley, and silk grass: then we departed thence, the
President assuring the king his perpetual love, and le^ft with him Samuel
Collier his page to learn the language.

The next night being lodged at Kecoughtan 6017 days, the extreme wind,
rain, frost, and snow, caused us to keep Christmas amongst the Salvages,
Plenty of victual.
where we were never more merry, nor fed on more plenty of good oysters,
fish, flesh, wildfoule, and good bread, nor never had better fires in England
the^ in the dry warm smokie houses of Kecoughtan, But departing thence, when
we found no houses, we were not curious in any weather, to lie 3 or 4 nights
together upon any shore under the trees by a good fire, 148 fowls the
President, Anth. Bagly, and Edward Pising, did kill at 3 shoots. At Kiskiack
the frost forced us 3 or 4 days also to suppress the insolency of those 148
Fowls killed at 3 shoots.
proud Salvages; to quarter-in their houses, and guard our barge, and cause
them give us what we wanted, yet were we but 12 with the President, and yet we
never wanted harbor where we found any houses. The 12 of January we arrived
at Werawocomoco, where the river was frozen near half a mile from the shore;
but to neglect no time, the President with his barge, so far had approached
by breaking the Ice as the eb left him amongst those oozie shoules, yet rather
then to lie there frozen to death, by his own example he taught the^ to march
middle deep, more then a flight shot through this muddie froze^ ooze; when the
barge An ill march.
sloted the appointed 2 or 3 to return her abord the Pinnace, where for want
of water in melting the salt Ice they made fresh water, but in this march M.
Russell (whom none could persuade to stay behind) being somewhat ill, and
exceeding heavy, so overtoiled him self, as the rest had much ado (ere he
got a shore) to regaine life, into his dead benumbed spirits, quartering in the
next houses we found, we sent to Powhatan for provision, who sent us plenty of
bread, Turkies, and Venison. The next day having feasted us after his ordinary
manner, he began to ask, when we would beegon, faining he sent not for us,
neither had he any corn, and his people much less, yet for 40 swords he
would procure us 40 bushels. The President showing him the men there present,
that brought him the message and conditions, asked him how it chanced he
became so forgetful thereat the king concluded the matter with a merry
laughter, asking for our commodities, but none he liked without gunnes and
swords, Powhatans subteltic.
valuing a basket of corn more precious then a basket of copper, saying he
could eat his corn, but not his copper.

Captain Smith seeing the intent of this subtle Salvage; Capt. Smithes
discourse to Powhatan.
began to deal with him after this manner, Powhatan, though I had many courses
to have made my provision, yet believing your promises to supply my wants, I
neglected all, to satisfy your desire, and to testify my love, I sent you my
men for your building, neglecting my own: what your people had you have
engrossed, forbidding them our trade, and now you think by consuming the
time, we shall consume for want, not having to fulfill your strange demandes,
as for swords, and gunnes, I told you long ago, I had none to spare And you
shall know, those I have, can keep me from want, yet steal, or wrong you I
will not, nor dissolve that friendship, we have mutually promised, (except you
constrain me by your bad usage.

The king having atte^tiuely listened to this discourse; Powhatans reply and
flattery.
promised, that both he and his Country would spare him what they could, the
which within 2 days, they should receive, yet. Captain Smith, (says the
king) some doubt I have of your coming hither, that makes me not so kindly
seek to relieve you as I would; for many do inform me, your coming is not
for trade, but to invademy people and possess my Country, who dare not come to
bring you corn, seeing you thus armed with your men. To clear us of this
fear, leave abord your weapons, for here they are needless we being all
friends and for ever Powhatans.

With many such discourses they spent the day, quartring that night in the
kings houses, the next day he reviewed his building, which he little intended
should proceed; for the Dutchmen finding his plenty, and knowing our want, and
perceived his preparation to surprise us, little thinking we could escape,
both him, and famine, (to obtain his favor) revealed to him as much as they
knew of our estates and proiects, and how to prevent them; one of them being of
so good a judgment, spirit, and resolution, and a hireling that was certain
of wages for his labor, and ever well used, both he and his countrymen, that
the President knew not whom better to trust, and not knowing any fitter for
that imploiment, had sent him as a spy to discover Powhatans intent, then
little doubting his honesty, nor could ever be certain of his villainy, till
near half a year after.

Whilst we expected the coming in of the country, we wrangled out of the king
10 quarters of corn for a copper kettle, the which the President perceived him
much to effect, valued it at a much greater rate, but (in regard of his
scarcety) he would accept of as much more the next year, or else the country
of Monacan, the king exceeding liberal of that he had not yielded him
Monacan. Wherewith each seeming well contented; Powhatan began to expostulate
the difference betwixt peace and war, after this manner.

Captain Smith you may understand, that I, having seen the death of all my
people thrice, and not one living Powhatan^^ course of peace and war.
of those 3 generations, but my self, I know the difference of peace and
war, better then any in my Country. But now I am old, and ere long must die,
my brethren, namely Opichapam, Opechankanough, and Kekataugh, my two sisters,
and their two daughters, are distinctly each others successors, I wish their
experiences no less then mine, and your love to them, no less then mine to
you; but this brute from Nansamu^d that you are come to destroy my Country, so
much affrighteth all my people, as they dare not visit you; what will it avail
you, to take that perforce, you may quietly have with love, or to destroy them
that provide you food? what can you get by war, when we can hide our provision
and fly to the woods, whereby you must famish by wronging us your friends;
and why are you thus jealous of our loves, seeing us unarmed, and both do,
and are willing still to feed you with that you cannot get but by our labors?
think you I am so simple not to know, it is better to eat good meat, lie
well, and sleep quietly with my women and children, laugh and be merry with
you, have copper, hatchets, or what I want, being your friend; then be forced
to fly from al, to lie cold in the woods, feed upon acorns roots, and such
trash, and be so hunted by you, that I can neither rest, eat, nor sleep; but
my tired men must watch, and if a twig but break, every one cry there comes
Captain Smith, then must I fly I know not whether, and thus with miserable
fear end my miserable life; leaving my pleasures to such youth as you, which
through your rash vnadvisednesse, may quickly as miserably end, for want of
that you never know how to find? Let this therefore assure you of our loves
and every year our friendly trade shall furnish you with corn, and now also
if you would come in friendly manner to see us, and not thus with your gunnes
and swords, as to invade your foes. To this subtle discourse the President thus
replied.

Seeing you will not rightly conceive of our words, we strive to make you
know our thoughts by our deeds. The vow I made you of my love, both my self
C. Smiths reply
and my men have kept, as for your promise I find it every day violated, by
some of your subjects, yet we finding your love and kindness (our custom is
so far from being ungrateful) that for your sake only, we have curbed our
thirsting desire of revenge, else had they known as well the cruelty we use to
our enemies as our true love and curtefie to our friends. And I think your
judgment sufficient to conceive as well by the adventures we have undertaken,
as by the advantage we have by our arms of yours: that had we intended you
any hurt, long ere this we could have effected it; your people coming to me
at James town, are entertained with their bows and arrows without exception;
we esteeming it with you, as it is with us, to wear our arms as our apparel.
As for the dangers of our enemies, in such wars consist our chiefest
pleasure, for your riches we have no use, as for the hiding your provision, or
by your flying to the woods, we shall so unadvisedly starve as you conclude,
your friendly care in that behalf is needless; for we have a rule to find
beyond your knowledge.

Many other discourses they had, til at last they began to trade, but the king
seeing his will would not be admitted as a law, our guard dispersed, nor our
men disarmed, he (sighing) breathed his mind, once more in this manner.

Captain Smith, I never used any of Werowances, so kindly as your self; yet
from you I receive the least Powhatans importunity for to have them unarmed,
to betray them.
kindness of any. Captain Newport gave me swords, copper, cloths, a bed,
tools, or what I desired, ever taking what I offered him, and would send away
his gunnes when I entreated him: none does deny to lay at my feet (or do)
what I desire, but only you, of who^ I can have nothing, but what you regard
not, and yet you will have whatsoever you demand. Captain Newport you call
father, and so you call me, but I see for all us both, you will do what you
list, and we must both seek to content you: but if you intend so friendly as
you say, send hence your arms that I may believe you, for you see the love I
bear you, does cause me thus nakedlie forget my self.

Smith seeing this Salvage but trifled the time to cut his throat: procured the
Salvages to break the ice, (that his boat might come to fetch both him and his
corn) and gave order for his men to come ashore, to have surprised the king,
with whom also he but trifled the time till his men landed, and to keep him
from suspicion, entertained the time with this reply.

Powhatan, you must know as I have but one God, C Smiths discourse to delay
time, that he might surprise Powhatan.
I honor but one king; and I live not here as your subject, but as your
friend, to pleasure you with what I ca^: by the gifts you bestow on me, you
gain more then by trade; yet would you visit me as I do you, you should
know it is not our customs to sell our courtesy as a vendible commodity.
Bring all your Country with you for your guard, I will not dislike of it as
being over jealous. But to content you, to morrow I will leave my arms, and
trust to your promise. I call you father indeed, and as a father you shall see
I will love you, but the small care you had of such a child, caused my men
persuade me to shift for my self.

By this time Powhatan having knowledge, his men Powhatans plot to have
murdered Smith.
were ready: whilst the ice was breaking, his luggage women, and children
fled, and to avoid suspicion, left 2 or 3 of his women talking with the
Captain, whilst he secretly fled, and his men as secretly beset the house,
which being at the instant discovered to Capt. Smith, with his Pistol, Sword
and Target, he made such a passage amongst those naked devils, that they fled
be sore him some one way some another, so that without hurt he obtained the
Corpse du-guard; when they perceived him so well escaped, and with his 8 men
(for he had no more with him) To the uttermost of their skill, they sought by
excuses to dissemble the matter, and Powhatan to excuse his flight, and the
sudden coming of this multitude, sent our Captain a great A chain of perle
for a present.
bracelet, and a chain of pearl, by an ancient Orator that bespoke us to this
purpose, (perceiving then from our Pinnace, a barge and men departing and
coming unto us.) Captain Smith, our Werowans is fled, fearing His excuse.
your guns, and knowing when the ice was broken there would come more men, sent
those of his to guard his corn from the pilfrie, that might happen without
your knowledge: now though some be hurt by your misprision, yet he is your
friend, and so will continue: and since the ice is open he would have you send
away your corn; and if you would have his company send also your arms,
which so affrighteth this people, that they dare not come to you, as he has
promiseed they should: now having provided baskets for our men to carry the
corn, they kindly offered their service to guard our arms, that none should
steal them. A great many they were, of goodly well appointed Pretending to
kill our men loded with baskets we forced the Salvages carry them.
fellows as grim as devils; yet the very sight of cocking our matches against
them, and a few words, caused them to leave their bows and arrows to our
guard, and bear down our corn on their own backs; we needed not importune
them to make quick dispatch. But our own barge being left by the ebb, caused us
to stay, till the midnight tide carried us safe abord, having spent that half
night with such mirth, as though we never had suspected or intended any thing,
we left the Dutchmen to build, Brinton to kill foul for Powhatan (as by his
messengers he importunately desired) and left directions with our men to give
Powhatan all the content they could, that we might enjoy his company at our
return from Pamaunke.

CHAP. 9.
How we escaped surprising at Pamavnke.

WE had no sooner set sail, but The dutchmen deceive C Smith
Powhatan returned, and sent Adam and Francis (2. stout Dutch men) to the fort,
who faining to Captain Win that al things were well, and that Captain
Smith had use for their arms, wherefore they requested new (the which were
given them) they told him their coming was, for some extraordinary tools and
shift of apparel, by this colorable excuse, they obtained 6. or 7. more to
their confederacy, such expert theefes, that presently furnished the^ with a
great many swords, pike-heads, pieces, shot, powder and such like, they had
Salvages at hand ready to carry it away, the next day they returned
unsuspected, leaving their confederates to follow, and in the interim, to
convay them a competencie of all things they could, for which service they
should live with Powhatan as his chief affected: free from those miseries that
would happen the Colony. Samuel their other consort, Powhatan kept for their
pledge, whose diligence had provided them, 300. of their kind of hatchets, the
rest. 50. swords, 8. pieces, and 8. pikes: Brinton, and Richard Salvage seeing
the Dutchmen so strangly diligent to accommodate the Salvages these weapons
attempted to have got to James Town, but they were apprehended; within 2. or
3. days we arrived at Pamavnke, the king as many days, entertained us with
feasting and much mirth: and the day he appointed to begin our trade, the
President, with Mr Persie, Mr West, Mr Russell, Mr Beheathland, M Powell, Mr
Crashaw, Mr Ford, and some others to the number of 15. went up to
Opechancanougs house (near a quarter of a mile from the river,) where we found
Opechancanoughs abandoned.
nothing, but a lame fellow and a boy, and all the houses about, of all things
abandoned; not long we staide ere the king arrived, and after him came diverse
of his people loaded with bows and arrows, but such pinching commodities, and
those esteemed at such a value, as our Captain began with him in this manner.

Opechancanough the great love you profess with your tongue, seems mere
deceit by your actions; Smiths speech to Opechancanough.
last year you kindly fraughted our ship, but now you have invited me to
starve with hunger. You know my want, and I your plenty, of which by some
means I must have part, remember it is fit for kings to keep their promise,
here are my commodities, whereof take your choices; the rest I will proportion,
fit bargains for your people.

The king seemed kindly to accept his offer; and the better to color his
project, sold us what they had to our own co^te^t; promising the next day, more
company, better provided; (the barges, and Pinnas being committed to the charge
of Mr Phetiplace) the President with his old 15 marched up to the kings house,
where we found 4 or 5 men newly come with great baskets, not long after came
the king, who with a strained cheerefulnes held us with discourse, what pains
he had taken to keep his promise; til Mr Russell brought us in news that we
were all betrayed: for at least 6. or 700. of well appointed Indians had
environed the house and beset 700 Salvages beset the English being but 16.
the fields. The king coniecturing what Russell related, we could well perceive
how the extremity of his fear bewrayed his intent: whereat some of our
company seeming dismaide with the thought of such a multitude; the Captain
encouraged us after this manner.

Worthy countrymen were the mischiefs of my Smiths speech to his company.
seeming-friends, no more then the danger of these enemies, I little cared,
were they as many more, if you dare do, but as I. But this is my torment, that
if I escape them, our malicious council with their open mouthed minions, will
make me such a peace-breaker (in their opinions) in England, as will break my
neck; I could wish those here, that make these seem Saints, and me an
oppressor. But this is the worst of all, where in I pray aid me with your
opinions; should we begin with them and surprise this king, we cannot keep him
and defend well our selves, if we should each kill our man and so proceed with all in this house; the rest will all fly, then shall we get no more, then the
bodies that are slain, and then starve for victual: as for their fury it is
the least danger; for well you know, (being alone assaulted with 2 or 300 of
them) I made them co^ pound to save my life, and we are now 16 and they but
700. at the most, and assure your selves God will so assist us, that if you dare
but to stand to discharge your pieces, the very smoke will be sufficient to
affright them; yet howsoever (if there be occasion) et us fight like men, and
not die like sheep; but first I will deal with them, to bring it to pass, we
may fight for some thing, and draw them to it by conditions. If you like this
motion, promise me you will be valiant. The time not permitting any argument, all
vowed, to execute whatsoever he attempted, or die; whereupon the captain,
approaching the king bespoke him in this manner.

I see Opechancanough your plot to murder me, but I Smiths offer to
Opechancanough.
fear it not, as yet your men and mine, have done no harm, but by our
directions. Take therefore your arms; you see mine; my body shall be as naked as
yours; the I Will in your river is a fit place, if you be contented: and the
conqueror (of us two) shall be Lord and Master over all our men; otherways draw
all your men into the field; if you have not enough take time to fetch more,
and bring what number you will, so every one bring a basket of corn, against
all which I will stake the value in copper; you see I have but 15 men, and our
game shall be the conqueror take all.

The king, being guarded with 50 or 60 of his chief Opechancanoughs devise to
betray Smith.
men, seemed kindly to appease Smiths suspicion of unkindness, by a great
present at the door, they entreated him to receive. This was to draw him
without the door where the present was guarded with (at the least 200 men and 30
lying under a great tree (that lay thwart as a Barricado) each his arrow
nocked ready to shoot; some the President commanded to go and see what kind of
deceit this was, and to receive the present, but they refused to do it, yet
diverse offered whom he would not permit; but commanding Mr Persie and Mr West
to make good the house, took Mr Poell and Mr Beheathland to guard the door,
and in such a rage snatched the king by his vambrace in the midst of his men,
with his pistol ready bent against his breast: thus he led the trembling king,
(near dead with fear) amongst all his people, who delivering the Captain his
bow and arrows, all his men were easily entreated to cast down their arms,
little dreaming any durst in that manner have used their king; who then to
escape himself, bestowed his presents in goodsadnesse. And having caused all
his multitude to approach difarmed; the President argued with them to this
effect.

I see you Pamavnkies the great desire you have to Smiths discourse to the
Pamaunkies.
cut my throat; and my long suffering your injuries, have inboldened you to
this presumption. The cause I have forborne your insole^cies, is the promise I
made you (before the God I serve) to be your friend, till you give me just
cause to be your enemy. If I keep this vow, my God will keep me, you cannot
hurt me; if I break it he will destroy me. But if you shoot but one arrow, to
shed one drop of blood of any of my men, or steal the least of these beads,
or copper, (I spurn before me with my foot) you shall see, I will not cease
revenge, (if once I begin) so long as I can hear where to find one of your
nation that will not deny the name of Pamavnke; I am not now at Rasseneac
(half drowned with mire) where you took me prisoner, yet then for keeping your
promise, and your good usage, and saving my life, I so affect you, that your
denials of your treachery, does half persuade me to mistake my self. But if I
be the mark you aim at, here I stand, shoot he that dare. You promised to
fraught my ship ere I departed, and so you shall, or I mean to load her with
your dead carkases; yet if as friends you will come and trade, I once more
promise not to trouble you, except you give me the first occasion. Upon this
away The Salvages dissemble their intens.
went their bows and arrows, and men, women, and children brought in their
commodities, but 2 or three hours they so thronged about the President, and so
overwearied him, as he retired himself to rest, leaving Mr Beheathland and Mr
Powel to accept their presents; but some Salvage perceiving him fast asleep,
and the guard carelessly dispersed, 40 or 50 of their choice me^ each with an
English sword in his hand, began to enter the house, with 2 or 300 others that
pressed to second them. The noise and have they made in, did so shake the
house, as they awoke him from his sleep, and being half amazed with this
sudden sight, betook him straight to his sword and target, Mr Crashaw and
some other charging in like manner, they thronged faster back, then before
forward. The house thus Their excuse and reconcilement.
cleansed, the king and his ancients, with a long oration came to excuse this
intrusion. The rest of the day was spent with much kindness, the company
again renewing their presents of their best provision. And what soever we gave
them, they seemed well contented with it.

Now in the mean while since our departure, this happened at the fort, Mr
Scriuener willing to cross the surprising of Powhatan; 9 days after the
Presidents departure, would needs visit the I Will of hogs, and took with him
Captain Waldo (though the President had appointed him to be ready to second
his occasions) with Mr Anthony Gosnoll and eight others; but so violent was the
wind (that extreme frozen time) that the boat sunk, but where or how, none
does know, for they were all drowned; only this was known, that the Skiffe
was much overloaded, and would scarce have The loss of Mr Skriuener and others
with a Skiffe.
lived in that extreme tempest, had she been empty; but by no persuasion he
could be diverted, though both Waldo and 100 others doubted as it happened. The
Salvages were the first that found their bodies, which so much the more
encouraged them to effect their proiects. To advertise the President of this
heavy news, none could be found would undertake it, but the journey was
often refused of all in the fort, until Mr Wiffin undertook alone, the
performance thereof; wherein he was encountered with many dangers and Mr Wiffin
his journey to the President.
difficulties, and in all parts as he passed (as also that night he lodged
with Powhatan) perceived such preparation forwarre, that assured him, some
mischief was intended, but with extraordinary bribes, and much trouble, in
three days travel at length he found us in the midst of these turmoiles.
This unhappy news, the President swore him to conceal from the rest, and so
dissembling his sorrow, with the best countenance he could, when the night
approached, went safely abord with all his company.

Now so extremely Powhatan had threatened the Powhatan constrains his me^ to
be treacherous
death of his men, if they did not by some means kill Captain Smith, that the
next day they appointed the Country should come to trade unarmed: yet
unwilling to be treacherous, but that they were constrained hating fighting,
almost as ill as ha^ging, such fear they had of bad success. The next morning
the sun had not long appeared, but the fields appeared covered with people,
and baskets to tempt us ashore. The President determined to keep abord, but
nothing was to be had without his presence, nor they would not endure the
sight of a gun; then the President seeing many Their third attempt to betray us.
depart, and being unwilling to lose such a booty, so well contrived the
Pinnace, and his barges with Ambuscadoes, as only with Mr Persie, Mr West, and
Mr Russell armed, he went ashore, others unarmed he appoin ted to receive what
was brought; the Salvages flocked before him in heaps, and (the bancke serving
as a trench for retreat) he drew them fair open to his ambuscadoes, for he
not being to be persuaded to go to visit their king, the King came to visit him
with 2 or 300 men, in the form of two half moons, with some 20 men, and many
women loaded with great painted baskets; but when they approached somewhat
near us, their women and children fled; for when they had environed and beset
the fields in this manner, they thought their purpose fure; yet so trembled
with fear as they were scarce able to nock their arrows; Smith standing with
his 3 men ready bent beholding them, till they were within danger of our
ambuscado, who, upon the word discovered themselves, and he retiring to the
bank; which the Salvages no sooner perceived but away they fled, esteeming
their heels for their best advantage.

That night we sent to the fort Mr Crashaw and Mr Foard, who (in the midway
between Werawocomoco and the fort) met 4 or 5. of the Dutch men's confederates
going to Powhatan, the which (to excuse those gentlemen's Suspicion of their
running to the Salvages returned to the fort and there continued.

The Salvages hearing our barge depart in the night were so terriblie affraide,
that we sent for more men, (we having so much threatened their ruin, and the
rasing of their houses, boats, and canowes) that the next day the king, sent
our Captain a chain of pearl to A chain of pearl sent to obtain peace.
alter his purpose; and stay his men, promising (though they wanted themselves)
to fraught our ship, and bring it abord to avoid suspicion, so that 5 or 6
days after, from al parts of the country within 10 or 12 miles, in the
extreme cold frost, and snow, they brought us provision on their naked backs.

Yet notwithstanding this kindness and trade; had their art and poison bin
sufficient, the President with Mr West and some others had been poisoned; it
made the^ sick, but expelled it self; Wecuttanow a stout young The President
Poisoned. The offender pu nished.
fellow, knowing he was suspected for bringing this present of poison, with 40
or 50. of his choice companions (seeing the President but with a few men at
Potavncat --) so prowdlie braved it, as though he expected to encounter a
revenge; which the President perceiving, in the midst of his company did not
only beat, but spurned him like a dog, as scorning to do him any worse
mischief; whereupon all of them fled into the woods, thinking they had done a
great matter, to have so well escaped; and the townsmen remaining, presently
fraughted our barge, to be rid of our companies, framing many excuses to
excuse Wecuttanow (being son to their chief king but Powhatan) and told us if
we would show them him that brought the poison, they would deliver him to us to
punish as we pleased.

Men may think it strange there should be this stir for a little corn, but
had it been gold with more ease we might have got it; and had it wanted, the
whole collonie had starved. We may be thought very patient, to endure all
those injuries; yet only with fearing the^, we got what they had. Whereas if
we had taken revenge, the^ by their loss we should have lost our selus. We
searched also the countries of Youghtanund and Mattapamient, where the people
imparted that little they had, with such complaints and tears from women The
Salvage want and po^^rty
and children; as he had bin too cruel to be a Christian that would not have
bin satisfied, and moved with compassion. But had this happened in October,
Nove^ber, and December, when that unhappy discovery of Monacan was made, we
might have fraughted a ship of 40 tuns, and twice as much might have bin had;
from the rivers of Toppahannock, Patawomeck, and Pawtuxunt. The maine occasion
of our temporizing with the Salvages was to part friends, (as we did) to give
the less cause of suspision to Powhatan to fly; by whom we now The Dutchmen
did much hurt.
returned, with a purpose, to have surprised him and his provision, for
effecting whereof, (when we came against the town) the President sent Mr
Wiffin and Mr Coe, a shore to discover and make way for his intended project.
But they found that those damned Dutchmen had caused Powhatan to abandon his
new house, and werawocomoco, and to carry away all his corn and provision;
and the people, they found (by their means so ill affected, that had they not
stood well upon their guard, they had hardly escaped with their lives. So the
President finding his intention thus frustrated, and that there was nothing now
to be had, and therefore an unfit time to revenge their abuses, held on his
course for James Town; we having in this Iornie (for 25l of copper 50l of Iron
and beads) kept 40 men 6. weeks, and daily feasted with bread, corn, flesh
fish, and foul, every man having for his reward (and in consideration of his
commodities) a months provision; (no trade being allowed but for the store;)
and we delivered at James Town to the Cape-Marchant 279 bushels of corn.

Those temporal proceedings to some may seem too charitable; to such a
daily daring treacherous people: to others unpleasant that we washed not the
ground with their bloods, nor showed such strange in ventions, in mangling,
murdering, ransaking, and destroying, (as did the Spaniards) the simple bodies
of those ignorant souls; nor delightful because not stuffed with relations of
heaps, and mines of gold and silver, nor such rare commodities as the Portugals
and Spaniards found in the East and West Indies. The want whereof has begot us
(that were the first undertakers) no less scorn and contempt, then their
noble conquests and valiant adventures (beautified with it) praise and honor.
Too much I confess the world cannot attribute to their ever memorable merit.
And to clear us from the worlds blind ignorant censure, these few words may
suffice to any reasonably understanding.

It was the Spaniards good hap to happen in those parts, where were infinite
numbers of people, who had manured the ground with that providence, that it
afforded victual at all times: and time had brought them to that perfection,
they had the use of gold and silver, and the most of such commodities, as their
countries afforded, so that what the Spaniard got, was only the spoil and
pillage of those country people, and not the labors of their own hands. But
had those fruitful Countries, been as Salvage as barbarous, as ill peopled,
as little planted, labored and manured as Virginia, their proper labors (it
is likely) would have produced as small profit as ours. But had Virginia bin
peopled, planted, manured, and adorned, with such store of precious Jewels, and
rich commodities, as was the Indies: then had we not gotten, and done as much
as by their examples might be expected from us, the world might then have
traduced us and our merits, and have made shame and infamy our recompense and
reward.

But we chanced in a land, even as God made it. Where we found only an idle,
improvident, scattered people; ignorant of the knowledge of gold, or silver, or
any commodities; and careless of any thing but from hand to mouth, but for
bables of no worth; nothing to encourage us, but what accidentally we found
nature afforded. Which ere we could bring to recompense our pains, defray our
charges, and satisfy our adventurers, we were to discover the country, subdue
the people, bring them to be tractable, civil, and industrious, and teach them
trades, that the fruits of their labors might make us recompense, or plant
such colonies of our own that must first make provisio^ how to live of
themselves, ere they can bring to perfection the commodities of the country,
which doubtless will be as commodious for England, as the west Indies for
Spain, if it be rightly managed; notwithstanding all our homebred opinions,
that will argue the contrary, as formerly such like have done, against the
Spaniards and Portugals. But to conclude, against all rumor of opinion, I only
say this, for those that the three first years began this plantation,
notwithstanding al their factions, mutenies, and miseries, so gently corrected,
and well prevented) pervse the Spanish Decades, the relations of M. Hacklut,
and tell me how many ever with such small means, as a barge of 2 Tons;
sometimes with 7. 8. 9, or but at most 15 men did ever discover so many fair
and navigable rivers; subject so many several kings, people, and nations, to
obedience, and contribution with so little blood shed.

And if in the search of those Countries, we had happened where wealth had
been, we had as surely had it, as obedience and contribution, but if we have
overskipped it, we will not envy them that shall chance to find it. Yet can
we not but lament, it was our ill fortunes to end, when we had but only
learned how to begin, and found the right course how to proceed.

By Rich. Wiffin, William Phettiplace, and Anas Todkill.


CHAP. 10.
How the Salvages became subject to the English.

WHen the ships departed, all the provision of the store (but that the
President had gotten) was so rotten with the last summers rain, and eaten with
rats, and worms, as the hogs would scarsely eat it, yet it was the soldiers
diet, till our returns: so that we found nothing done, but victual spent,
and the most part of our tools, and a good part of our arms convayed to the
Salvages. But now, casting up the store, and finding sufficient till the next
harvest, the fear of starving was abandoned; and the company divided into
tennes, fifteenes, or as the business required. 4 hours each day was spent in
work, the rest in pastimes and merry exercise; but the untowardness of the
greatest number, caused the President to make a general assembly, and then he
advised them as follows.

Countrymen, the long experience of our late miseries, The Presidents advise to
the company.
I hope is sufficient to persuade every one to a present correction of
himself; and think not that either my pains, or the adve^turers purses, will
ever maintain you in idleness and sloth; I speak not this to you all, for
diverse of you I know deserve both honor and reward, better then is yet here to
be had: but the greater part must be more industrious, or starve, howsoever
you have bin heretofore tolerated by the authority of the Council from that I
have often commanded you, yet seeing now the authority rests wholly in my
self; you must obey this for a law, that he that will not work shall not eat
(except by sickness he be disabled) for the labors of 30 or 40 honest and
industrious men, shall not be consumed to maintain 150 idle varlets. Now
though you presume the authority here is but a shadow, and that I dare not
touch the lives of any, but my own must answer it; the letters patents each
week shall be read you, whose co^tents will tell you the contrary. I would wish
you therefore without contempt seek to observe these orders set down: for
there are now, no more Counsels to protect you, nor curb my indeauors.
Therefore he that offends let him assuredly expect his due punish meant. He
made also a table as a public memorial of every man's deserts, to encourage
the good, and with shame to spurn on the rest to amendment. By this many
became very industrious, yet more by severe punishment performed their
business; for all were so tasked that there was no excuse could prevail to
deceive him, yet the Dutchmens consorts so closely still convaid powder, shot,
swords, and tools, that though we could find the defect, we could not find by
whom it was occasioned, till it was too late.

All this time the Dutchmen remaining with Powhatan, The Dutchmens plot to
murder Capt. Smith.
received them, instructing the Salvages their use. But their consorts not
following them as they expected, (to know the cause, they sent Francis their
companion (a stout young fellow) disguised Salvage like) to the glasse-house,
(a place in the woods near a mile from James Town) where was the randavus for
all their unsuspected villainy, 40 men they procured of Powhatan to lie in
Ambuscadoe for Captain Smith, who no sooner heard of this Dutchman, but he
sent to apprehend him, who found he was gone, yet to cross his return to
Powhatan, Captain Smith presently dispatched 20 shot after him, and then
returning but from the glasse-house alone, he incountred the king of
Paspaheigh, a most strong stout Salvage, whose persuasions not being able to
persuade him to his ambush, seeing him only armed but with a fauchion,
attempted to have shot him; but the President prevented his shot by grapling
with him, and the Salvage as well prevented him for drawing his fauchion, and
perforce bore him into the river to have drowned him; long they struggled in
the water, from whence the king perceiving two of the Poles upon the sands
would have fled; but the President held him by the hair and throat Smith
takes the king of Paspaheigh prisoner
til the Poles came in; then seeing how pitifully the poor Salvage begged
his life, they conducted him prisoner to the fort. The Dutchman ere long was
also brought in, whose villainy, though all this time it was suspected, yet he
fained such a formal excuse, that for want of language, Win had not rightly
understood them, and for their dealings with Powhatan, that to save their lives
they were constrained to accommodate his arms, of whom he extremely
complained to have detained them perforce; and that he made this escape with
the hazard of his life, and meant not to have returned, but only walked in the
woods to gather walenuts: yet for all this fair tale (there was so small
appearance of truth) he went by the heels; the king also he put in fetters;
purposing to regaine the Dutchmen, by the saving his life; the poor Salvage
did his best, by his daily messengers to Powhatan, but all returned that the
Dutchmen would not return, neither did Powhatan stay them, and bring them
fifty miles on their backs they were not able; daily this kings wives
children, and people, came to visit him with presents, which he liberally
bestowed to make his peace, much trust they had in the Presidents promise, but
the king finding his guard negligent (though fettered) yet escaped; Captain Win
thinking to pursue him, found such troops of Salvages to hinder his passages,
as they exchanged many volies of shot for flights of arrows. Captain Smith
hearing of this, in returning to the fort took two Salvages prisoners, the one
called Kemps, the other Kinsock, the two most exact villains in the country;
with those, Captain Win, and 50 chosen men attempted that night to have
regained the king, and revenged his injury (and so had done if he had followed
his directions, or bin advised by those two villains, that would have betrayed
both their king and kindred for a piece of copper, but he trifling away the
night, the Salvages the next morning by the rising of the sun, braved him
come a shore to fight, a good time both sides let fly at other, but we heard
of no hurt, only they took two Canows, burnt the kings house and so returned.

The President fearing those bravadoes, would but encourage the Salvages, begun
himself to try his co^clusions; whereby 6 or 7 Salvages were slain, as many
The Salu^ges desire peace.
made prisoners; burnt their houses, took their boats with all their fishing
wears, and planted them at James Town for his own use; and now resolved not
to cease till he had revenged himself upon all that had injured him, but in his
journey passing by Paspaheigh toward Chickahamina, the Salvages did their best
to draw him to their ambuscadoes; but seeing him regardlesly pass their
Country, all showed themselves in their bravest manner, to rrie their valors,
he could not but let fly, and ere he could land, the Salvages no sooner knew
him, but they threw down their arms and desired peace; their Orator was a
stout young man called Ocanindge, whose worthy discourse deserves Geanindge
his Oration.
to be remembered; and this it was.

Captain Smith, my master is here present in this company thinking it Captain
Win, and not you; and of him he intended to have been revenged, having never
offended him: if he have offended you in escaping your imprisonment; the
fishes swim, the fowls fly, and the very beasts strive to escape the snare
and live; them blame not him being a man, he would entreat you remember, your
being a prisoner, what pains he took to save your life; if since he has
injured you he was compelled to it, but howsoever, you have revenged it with
our too-great loss, we perceive and well know you intend to destroy us, that
are here to entreat and desire your friendship, and to enjoy our houses and
plant our fields, of whose fruit you shall participate, otherwise you will have
the worst by our absence, for we can plant any where, though with more labor,
and we know you cannot live if you want our harvest, and that relief we bring
you; if you promise us peace we will believe you, if you proceed in reve^g, we
will abandon the Country. Upon these terms the President promised them
peace, till they did us injury, upon condition they should bring in provision,
so all departed good friends, and so continued till Smith left the Country.

Ariving at James Town, complaint was made to the President ihat the
Chickahaminos, who all this while A Saluage smothered at James Town, and was
recovered.
continued trade, and seemed our friends, by color thereof were the only
thieves, and amongst other things, a pistol being stolen, and the these fled,
there were apprehended 2 proper young fellows that were brothers, known to be
his co^federats. Now to regain this pistol, the one we imprisoned, the other
was sent to return again within 12 hours, or his brother to be hanged, yet
the President pitying the poor naked Salvage in the dungeon, sent him
victual and some charcole for fire; ere midnight his brother returned with the
pistol, but the poor Salvage in the dungeon was so smothered with the smoke
he had made, and so pittiously burnt, that we found him dead, the other most
lamentably bewailed his death, and broke forth in such bitter agonies, that the
President (to quiet him) told him that if herafter they would not steal. he
would make him alive again, but little thought he could be recovered, yet (we
doing our best with aquavitae and vinegar) it pleased God to restore him again
to life, but so drunk and affrighted that he seemed lunaticke, not
understanding any thing he spoke or heard, the which as much grieved and
tormented the other, as before to see him dead; of which malady (upon promise
of their good behavior afterward) the President promised to recover him and so
caused him to be laid by a fire to sleep, who in the morning (having well
slept) had recovered his perfect senses; and then being dressed of his burning,
and each a piece of copper given them, they went away so well contented, that
this was spread amongst all the Salvages for a miracle, that Captain Smith
could make a man alive that is dead; these and many other such pretty
accidents, so amazed and affrighted both Powhatan and all his people that from
all parts with presents they desired peace, returning many stolen things which
we neither demanded nor thought of. And after that, those that were taken
stealing (both Powhatan and his people) have sent them back to James Town to
receive their punishment, and all the country became absolutely as free for
us, as for themselves.

CHAP. 11.
What was done in three months having victual. The store devoured by rats,
how we lived 3 months of such natural fruits as the country afforded.

NOW we so quietly followed our business, that in 3 months we made 3 or 4
last of pitch and tar, and soap ashes, produced a trial of glass, made a
well in the forte of excellent sweet water (which till then was wanting) built
some 20 houses, recovered More done in 3 months then 3 years.
our Church, provided nets and wears for fishing (and to stop the disorders of
our disorderly thieves and the Salvages) built a block house in the neck of
our I Will, kept by a garrison to entertain the Salvages trade, and none to pass
nor repasse, Salvage, nor Christian, with out the Presidents order, 30 or 40
acres of ground we dug, and planted; of 3 sowes in one year increased 60
and od pigges, and near 500 chickens brought up themselves (without having any
meat given them) but the hogs were transported to hog I Will, where also we
built a block house with a garrison, to give us notice of any shipping, and
for their exercise they made clapbord, wainscot, and cut down trees against
the ships coming. We built also a fort for a retreat, near a convenient river
upon a high commanding hill, very hard to be assaulted, and easy to be
defended; but ere it was half finished this defect caused a stay; in searching
our casked corn, we found it half rotten, the rest so consumed with the many
thousand rats (increased first from the ships) that we knew not how to keep
that little we had. This did drive us all to our wits end, for there was
nothing in the country but what nature afforded. until this time Keinps and
Tassore, were fettered prisoners, and daily wrought, and taught us how to order
and plant our fields. Whom now (for want of victual) we set at liberty, but
so well were they used, that they little desired it; and to express their loves,
for 16 days continuance, the Country brought us (when least) 100 a day of
squirrils, Turkies, Dear, and other wild beasts; but this want of corn
occasioned the end of all our works, it being work sufficient to provide
victual. 60 or 80 with Ensign Laxon were sent down the river to live upon
oysters, and 20 with leiftenant Percie to try for fishing at pointcomfort, but
in 6 weeks, they would not agree once to cast out their net. Mr West with as
many went up to the falls, but nothing could be found but a few berries and
acornes; of that in the store every one had their equal proportion. Till this
present (by the hazard and endeavor of some 30 or 40) this whole number The
pains of 40 fed 150.
had ever been fed. We had more Sturgeon their could be devoured by dog and
man; of which the in dustrious, by drying and pownding, mingled with caviare,
sorrel, and other wholesome herbs, would make bread and good meat; others
would gather as much Tockwough roots in a day, as would make them bread a
week, so that of those wild fruits, fish and berries, these lived very well,
(in regard of such a diet) but such was the most strange condition of some 150,
that had they not been forced nolens volens perforce to gather and prepare
their victual they would all have star ved, and have eaten one another: of
those wild fruits the Salvages often brought us: and for that the President
would not fulfill the unreasonable desire of those distracted lubberly
gluttons, to sell, not only our kettles, howes, tools, and Iron, nay swords,
pieces, and the very ordenance, and houses, might they have prevailed but to
have been but idle, for those salvage fruits they would have imparted all to
the Salvages, especially for one basket of corn they heard of, to be at
Powhatans, 50 miles from our fort, though he bought near half of it to
satisfy their humors, yet to have had the other half, they would have sold
their souls, Their desire to destroy themselves.
(though not sufficient to have kept them a week) thousands were their
exclamations, suggestions, and devises, to force him to those base inventions,
to have made it an occasion to abandon the Country. Want perforce constrained
him to endure their exclaiming follies till he found out the author, one Dyer,
a most crafty knave, and his ancient maligner, whom he worthily punished, and
with the rest he argued the case in this manner.

Fellow soldiers, I did little think any so false to The Presidents speech to
the drones.
report, or so many so simple to be persuaded, that I either inte^d to starve
you, or that Powhatan (at this present) has corn for himself, much less for
you; or that I would not have it, if I knew where it were to be had. Neither
did I think any so malicious as now I see a great many, yet it shall not so
much passionate me, but I will do my best for my worst maligner. But dream no
longer of this vain hope from Powhatan, nor that I will longer forbear to
force you from your Idleness, and punish you if you rail, you cannotdeny but
that by the hazard of my life, many a time I have saved yours, when, might your
own wills have prevailed, you would have starued, and will do still whether I
will or no. But I protest by that God that made me, since necessity has not
power to force you togather for your selus those fruits the earth does yield,
you shall not only gather for your selves, but for those that are sick: as yet
I never had more from the store then the worst of you; and all my English
extraordinary provision that I have, you shall see me devide among the sick.
And this Salvage trash, you so scornfully repine at, being put in your mouths
your stomachs can digest it, and therefore I will take a course you shall
provide it. The sick shall not starve, but equally share of all our labors,
and every one that gathers not every day as much as I do, the next day
shall be set beyond the river, and for ever be banished from the fort, and
live there or starve.

This order many murmured, was very cruel, but it caused the most part so well
bestir themselves, that 200 men (except they were drowned) there died not past
7 or 8. As for Captain Win, and Mr Ley, they died But 7 of 200 died in 9 months
ere this want happened, and the rest died not for want of such as preserved
the rest. many were billitted among the Salvages, whereby we knew all their
passages, fields, and habitations, how to gather and use their fruits, as
well as themselves.

So well those poor Salvages used us, (that were thus Billited) as diverse of
the soldiers ran away, to The Salvages return our sugitiues.
search Kemps our old prisoner. Glad was this Salvage to have such an occasion
to testify his love for instead of entertaining them, and such things as they
had stolen with all the great offers and promises they made the^; to revenge
their injuries upon Captain Smith, First he made himself sport, in showing
his countrymen (by them) how he was used; feeding them with this law who would
not work must not eat, till they were near starved, continually threatening
to beat them to death, neither could they get from him, til perforce he
brought them to our Captain, that so we contented him, and punished them: as
many others that intended also to have followed them, were rather contented to
labor at home, then adventure to live Idle among the Salvages, (of whom there
was more hope to make better christians and good subjects, then the one half
of those that counterfeited themselves both.) For so afeard were all those
kings and the better sort of their people, to displease us, that some of the
baser sort that we have extremely hurt and punished for their villainies,
would hire us, we should not tell it to their kings or countrymen, who would
also repunish them, and yet return them to James Town to content the
President, by that testimony of their loves.

Mr Sicklemore well returned from chawonock, but Search so them sent by Sir
Walter Rawley.
found little hope and less certainetie of them were left by Sir Walter
Rawley. So that Nathaniell Powell and Anas Todkill, were also, by the
Quiyoughquohanocks, conducted to the Mangoages to search the^ there. But
nothing could we learn but they were all dead, this honest, proper, good
promis-keeping king, of all the rest did ever best affect us, and though to his
false Gods he was yet very zealous, yet he would confess, our God as much
exceeded his, as our guns did his bow and arrows, often sending our President
many presents to pray to his God for rain, or his corn would perish, for
his Gods were angry all this time. to reclaim the Dutchmen, and one Bentley
an other fugitive, we employed one William Volda (a Switzer by birth) with
pardons and promises to regaine them. Little we then suspected this double
villainy, of any villainy, who plainly taught us, in the most trust was the
greatest treason. For this wicked hypocrit, by the seeming hate he bore to the
lewd condition of his cursed cou^trime^, The Dutchmens proiects.
having this opportunity by his imploiment to regaine them, conveyed them
every thing they desired to effect their project to destroy the colonie. With
much devotion they expected the Spanyard, to whom they intended to have done
good service. But to begin with the first opportunity, they seeing necessity
thus enforced us to disperse our selves; importuned Powhatan to lend them but
his forces, and they would not only destroy our hogs, fire our town, and
betraie our Pinnas; but bring to his service and subjection the most part of
our companies. With this plot they had acquainted many discontents and many
were agreed to their divelish practice. But on Thomas Douese and Thomas
Mallard, whose christian hearts much relenting at such an unchristian act,
voluntarily revealed it to Captain Smith: who did his best it might be
concealed, persuading Douese and Malard to proceed in the confederacy: only
to bring the irreclamable Dutch men, and inconstant Salvages in such a manner
amongst his ambuscadoes, as he had prepared, as not many of them should ever
have returned from out our penisula. But this brute coming to the ears of the
impatient multitude, they so importuned the President to cut of those Dutchmen,
as amongst many that offered to cut their throats before the face of
Powhatan. Mr Wiffin and Iefra Abot were sent to stab or shoot them; but these
Dutch men made such excuses Two gentlemen sent to kill them.
accusing Volday whom they supposed had revealed their project, as Abbot would
not, yet Wiffin would, perceiving it but deceit. The king understanding of
this their imploiment, sent presently his messengers to Captain Smith to
signify it was not his fault to detain them, nor hinder his men from
executing his command, nor did he nor would he maintain them, or any to
occasion his displeasure. But ere this business was brought to a point, God
having seen our misery sufficient, sent in Captain Argall to fish for
Sturgion with a ship well furnished with wine and biscuit, which though it was
not sent us, such were our occasions we took it at a price, but left him
sufficient to return for England, still dissembling Valdo his villainy, but
certainly he had not escaped had the President continued.

By this you may see, for all those crosses, treacheries, and dissentions, how
he wrastled and overcame Note these inconveniences.
(without blood shed) all that happened. Also what good was done, how few died,
what food the country naturally affords, what small cause there is men
should starve, or be murdered by the Salvages, that have discretion to manage
this courage and industry. The 2. first years though by his adve^tures he had
often brought the Salvages to a tractable trade, yet you see how the envious
authority ever crossed him, and frustrated his best endeavors. Yet this
wrought in him that experience and estimation among the Salvages, as otherways
it had bin impossible he had ever effected that he did, though the many
miserable yet generous and worthy adventures, he had long, and often endured as
well in some parts of Africa, and America, as in the most parts of Europe and
Asia by land or sea had taught him much, yet in this case he was again to
learn his Lecture by experience. Which with thus much a do having obtained,
it was his ill chance to end, when he had but only learned how to begin. And
though he left these unknown difficulties, (made easy and familiar) to his
unlawful successors, who only by living in James Town, presumed to know
more then all the world could direct them though they had all his soldiers with
their triple power, and twice triple better means, by what they have done in
his absence, the world does see: and what they would have done in his presence,
had he not prevented their indiscretions: it does justly approve what cause he
had to send them for England. but they have made it more plain since their
return, having his absolute authority freely in their power, with all the
advantages, and opportunity that his labors had effected. As I am sorry their
actions have made it so manifest, so I am unwilling to say what reason does
compel me, to make apparent the truth, least I should seem partial,
reasonlesse, or malicious.

CHAP. 12.
The Arivall of the third supply.

TO redress those iarres and ill proceedings, The alteration of the
government.
the Council in England altered the government and devolved the authority to
the Lord De-la-ware. Who for his deputy, sent Sr Thomas Gales, and Sr George
Summers, with 9 ships and 500 persons. they set sail from England in May 1609 a
small catch perished at sea in a Herycano. The Admiral, with 150 men, with the
two knights, and their new commission, their bills of loading with all manner of
directions, and the most part of their provision arived not. With the other 7
(as Captains) arived Ratliffe, The loss of Virginia.
whose right name was Sickelmore, Martin, and Archer. Who as they had been
troublesome at sea, began again to mar all ashore. For though, as is said,
they vere formerly deposed and sent for England: yet now returning again,
graced by the title of Captains of the passengers, seeing the admiral
wanting, and great probability of her loss: strengthened themselves with those
new companies, so railing and exclaiming against Captain Smith, that they
mortally hated him, ere ever they see him. Who understanding by his scouts, the
arivall of such a fleet (little dreaming of any such supply) supposing them
Spaniards, he so determined and ordered his affairs, as we little feared
their arivall, nor the success of our incou^ter, nor were the Salvages any way
negligent or unwilling, to aid and assist us with their best power, had it so
been, we had been happy. For we would not have trused them The Salvages
offer to fight under o^r coulors.
but as our foes, whereas receiving those as our countriemen and friends, they
did their best to murder our President, to surprise the store, the fort, and
our lodgings, to vsurp the government, and make us all their servants, and
slaves to our own merit, to 1000 mischiefs Mutiny.
those lewd Captains led this lewd company, wherein were many unruly gallants
packed thither by their friends to escape il destinies, and those would dispose
and determine of the government, sometimes one, the next day another, to day
the old commission, to morrow the new, the next day by neither. In fine, they
would rule all or ruin all; yet in charity we must endure them thus to
destroy us, or by correcting their follies, have brought the worlds censure
upon us to have been guilty of their bloods. Happy had we bin had they never
arrived; and we for ever abandoned, and (as we were) left to our fortunes, for
on earth was never more confusion, or misery, then their factions occasioned.

The President seeing the desire those braues had to The planting Nansamund.
rule, seeing how his authority was so unexpectedly changed, would willingly
have left all and have returned for England, but seeing there was small hope
this new commission would ariue, longer he would not suffer those factious
spirits to proceed. It would be too tedious, too strange, and almost
incredible, should I particularly relate the infinite dangers, plots, and
practices, he daily escaped amongst this factious crew, the chief whereof he
quickly laid by the heels, til his lea sure better served to do them justice;
and to take away al occasions of further mischief, Mr Persie had his request
granted to return for England, and Mr West with 120 went to plant at the
falls. Martin with near as A plantation of the falls.
many to Nansamund, with their due proportions, of all provisions, according to
their numbers.

Now the Presidents year being near expired, he made Martin President, who
knowing his own insufficiency, and the companies scorn, and conceit of his
unworthiness, within 3 hours resigned it again to Captain Smith, and at
Nansamund thus proceeded. The people being contributers used him kindly: yet
The breach of peace with the Salvages.
such was his jealous fear, and cowardice, in the midst of his mirth, he did
surprise this poor naked king, with his monuments, houses, and the I Will he
inhabited; and there fortified himself, but so apparently distracted with
fear, as imboldned the Salvages to assalt him, kill his men, redeem their
king, gather and carry away more then 1000 bushels of corn, he not once
daring to intercept them. But sent to the President the^ the Falls for 30 good
shot, which from James town immediately were sent him, but he so well
imploid them, as they did just nothing, but returned, complaining of his
childishness, that with them fled from his company, and so left them to their
fortunes.

Mr West having seated his men at the Falls, presently returned to revisit
James Town, the President met him by the way as he followed him to the falls:
where he found this company so inconsiderately seated, in a place not only
subject to the rivers invndatio^, but round environed with many intolerable
inconveniences. For remedy whereof, he sent presently to Powhatan, to sell him
the place called Powhatan, promising Powhatan sold for copper.
to defend him against the Monacans, and these should be his conditions (with
his people) to resign him the fort and houses and all that country for a
proportion of copper: that all stealing offenders should be sent him, there to
receive their punishment: that every house as a custom should pay him a
bushel of corn for an inch square of copper, and a proportion of Pocones as a
yearly tribute to King James, for their protection as a duty: what else they
could spare to barter at their best discreation.

But both this excellent place and those good conditions did those furies
refuse, contemning both him, Mutinies.
his kind care and authority. the worst they could to show their spite, they
did. I do more then wonder to think how only with 5 men, he either durst, or
would adventure as he did, (knowing how greedy they were 5 suppress 120
of his blood) to land amongst them and commit to imprisonment the greatest
spirits amongst them, till by their multitudes being 120. they forced him to
retire, yet in that retreat he surprised one of the boats, wherewith he
returned to their ship, wherein was their provisions, which also he took.
And well it chanced he found the mariners so tractable and constant, or
there had been small possibility he had ever escaped. Notwithstanding there
were many of the best, I mean of the most worthy in Judgment, reason or
experience, that from their first landing hearing the general good report of
his old soldiers, and seeing with their eyes his actions so well managed with
discretion, as Captain Wood, Captain Web, Captain Moan, Captain
Phitz-Iames, Mr Partridge, Mr White, Mr Powell and diverse others. When they
perceived the malice and condition of Ratliffe, Martin, and Archer, left their
factions; and ever rested his faithful friends: But the worst was, the poor
Salvages that daily brought in their contribution to the President, that
disorderly company so tormented those poor naked souls, by stealing their
corn, robbing The breach of peace with the Salvages at the Falls.
their gardens, beating them, breaking their houses, and keeping some
prisoners; that they daily complained to Captain Smith he had brought the^
for protectors worse enemies then the Monocans themselves; which though till
then, (for his love) they had endured: they desired pardon, if hereafter they
defended themselves, since he would not correct them, as they had long expected
he would: so much they importuned him to punish their misdemeanores, as they
offered (if he would conduct them) to fight for him against them. But having
spent 9. days in seeking to reclaim them, showing them how much they did
abuse themselves, with their great gilded hopes, of seas, mines, commodities,
or victories they so madly conceived. Then (seeing nothing would prevail with
them) he set sail for James Town: now no sooner was the ship under sail but
the Salvages assaulted those 120 in their fort, finding An assault by the
Salvages
some straggling abroad in the woods they slew many, and so affrighted the
rest, as their prisoners escaped, and they scarce retired, with the swords and
cloaks of these they had slain. But ere we had sailed a league our ship
grounding, gave us once more liberty to summon them to a parlie. Where we
found them all so stranglie amazed with this poor simple assault, as they
submitted themselves upon any terms to the Presidents mercy. Who presently
put by the heels 6 or 7 of the chief offenders, the rest he seated galla^tlie
at Powhatan, in their Salvage fort they built and pre tilie fortified with
poles and barks of trees sufficient to have defended them from all their
Salvages in Virginia, dry houses for lodgings 300 acres of ground ready to
plant, and no place so strong, so pleasant and The planting of Nonsuch.
delightful in Virginia, for which we called it nonsuch. the Salvages also he
presently appeased; redelivering to every one their former losses. Thus al
were friends, New peace concluded.
new officers appointed to command, and the President again ready to depart.
But at that Instant arrived Mr West, whose good nature with the persuasions and
compassion of those mutinous prisoners was so much abused, that to regaine
their old hopes new turboiles arose. For the rest being possessed of al their
victual munition and every thing, they grow to that height in their former
factions, as there the President left them to their fortunes, they returning
again to the open air at west fort, abandoning Nonsuch, and he to James Town
with his best expedition, but this happened him in that Journey.

Sleeping in his boat, (for the ship was returned 2 C Smith blown up with
powder.
days before,) accidentally, one fired his powder bag, which tore his flesh
from his body and thighs, 9. or 10. inches square in a most pitiful manner;
but to quench the tormenting fire, frying him in his clothes he leaped over
board into the deep river, where ere they could recover him he was near
drowned. In this estat, without either Chirurgio^, or surgery he was to go
near 100. miles. Ariving at James Town causing all things to be prepared for
peace or wars to obtain provisio^, whilst those things were providing,
Martin, Ratliffe, and Archer, being to have their trials their guilty
consciences fearing a just reward for their deserts, seeing the President
unable to stand, and near bereft of his senses by reason of his torment, they
had plotted to have murdered him in his bed. But his heart did fail him that
should have given fire to that merciless A bloody intens
pistol. So, not finding that course to be the best they joined together to
vsurp the government, thereby to escape their punishment, and excuse themselves
by accusing him. The President, had notice of their proiects: the which to
withstand, though his old soldiers importuned him but permit the^ to take of
their heads that would resist his command, yet he would The government
usurped.
nor permit them, But sent for the masters of the ships and took order with
them for his return for England. Seeing there was neither surgeon, nor
surgery in the fort to cure his hurt, and the ships to depart the next day,
his commission to be suppressed he knew not why, himself and soldiers to be
rewarded he knew not how, and a new commission granted they knew not to whom,
the which so disabled that authority he had, as made them presume so often to
those mutinies and factions as they did. Besides so grievous were his wounds,
and so cruel his torment, few expected he could live, nor was he able to
follow his business to regaine what they had lost, suppress those factions
and range the countries for provision as he intended, and well he knew in those
affairs his own actions and presence was as requisite as his experience, and
directions, which now could not be, he went presently abord, resolving there to
appoint them governors, and to take order for the mutiners and their
confederates. Who seeing him gone, persuaded Mc Persie (to stay) and be their
President, and within less then an hour was this mutation begun and
concluded. For when the company understood Smith would leave them. and see the
rest in Arms called Presidents and counselors, diverse began to fawn on those
new commanders, that now bent all their wits to get him resign them his
commission, who after many salt and bitter repulses, that their confusion
should not be attributed to him for leaving the country without government and
authority; having taken order to be The causes why Smith left the country and
his Commission.
free from danger of their malice; he was not unwilling they should steal it
from him, but never consented to deliver it to any. But had that unhappy blast
not happened, he would quickly have quallified the heat of those humors and
factions, had the ships but once left them and us to our fortunes, and have
made that provision from among the Salvages, as we neither feared Spanyard,
Salvage, nor famine: nor would have left Virginia, nor our lawful authority,
but at as dear a price as we had bought it, and paid for it. What shall I say?
but thus we lost him, that in all his proceedings, made Justice his first guide,
and experience his second; ever hating baseness, sloth, pride, and indignity,
more then any dangers; that never allowed more for himself, then his soldiers
with him; that upon no danger would send them where he would not lead them
himself; that would never see us want what he either had, or could by any
means get us; that would rather want then borrow, or starve then not pay; that
loved actions more then words, and hated falsehood and cousnage worse then
death: whose adventures were our lives, and whose loss our deaths. Leaving us
thus with 3 ships, 7 boats, commodities ready to trade, the harvest newly
gathered, 10 weeks provision in the store, 490 and odd persons, 24 pieces of
ordinances, 300 muskets snaphanches, and fire locks, shot, powder, and match
sufficient, curats, pikes, swords, and moryons more then men: the Salvages
their language and habitations well known to 100 well trained and expert
soldiers; nets for fishing, tools of all sorts to work, apparel to supply
our wants, 6 mares and a horse, 5 or 600 swine, as many hens and chicken; some
goats, some sheep, what was brought or bread there remained, but they regarded
nothing but from hand to mouth, to consume that we had, took care for nothing
but to perfect some colorable complaints against Captain Smith, for effecting
whereof, 3 weeks longer they stayed the 6 ships til they could produce the^.
that time and charge might much better have been spent, but it suited well with
the rest of their discreations.

Now all those, Smith had either whipped, punished, Their complaints and proof
against him.
or any way disgraced, had free power and liberty to say or swear any thing,
and from a whole armefull of their examinations this was concluded.

The mutiners at the Falls, complained he caused the Salvages assalt them,
for that he would not revenge their loss, they being but 120, and he 5 men
and himself, and this they proved by the oath of one he had often whipped for
perjury and pilfering. The dutchmen that he had appointed to be stabd for
their treacheries, swore he sent to poison them with rats baine. The prudent
Council, that he would not submit himself to their stolen authority. Coe and
Drer, that should have murdered him, were highly preferred for swearing, they
heard one say, he heard Powhatan say, that he heard a man say: if the king
would not send that corn he had, he should not long enjoy his copper crown,
nor those robes he had sent him: yet those also swore he might have had corn
for tools but would not. The truth was, Smith had no such ingins as the king
demanded, nor Powhatan any corn. Yet this argued he would starve them. Others
complained he would not let them rest in the fort (to starve) but forced the^
to the oyster banks, to live or starve, as he lived himself. For though he
had of his own private provisions sent from England, sufficient; yet he gave
it all away to the weak and sick, causing the most untoward (by doing as he
did) to gather their food from the unknown parts of the rivers and woods, that
they lived (though hardly) that otherways would have starved, ere they would
have left their beds, or at most the sight of James Town to have got their own
victual. Some prophetical spirit calculated he had the Salvages in such
subjection, he would have made himself a king, by marrying Pocahontas,
Powhatans daughter. It Pocahontas Powhatans daughter.
is true she was the very nomparell of his kingdom, and at most not past 13 or
14 years of age. Very often she came to our fort, with what she could get for
Captain Smith, that ever loved and used all the Country well, but her
especially he ever much respected: and she so well requited it, that when her
father intended to have surprised him, she by stealth in the dark night came
through the wild woods and told him of it. But her marriage could no way have
entitled him by any right to the kingdom, nor was it ever suspected he had
ever such a thought, or more regarded her, or any of them, the^ in honest
reason, and discreation he might. If he would he might have married her, or
have done what him listed. For there was none that could have hindered his
determination. Some that knew not any thing to say, the Council instructed,
and advised what to swear. So diligent they were in this business, that what
any could remember, he had ever done, or said in mirth, or passion, by some
circumstantiall oath, it was applied to their fittest use, yet not past8 or 9
could ^^y much and that nothing but circumstances, which all men did know was
most false and untrue. Many got their passes by promising in England to say
much against him. I have ipresumed to say this much in his behalf for that I
never heard such foul slanders, so certainly believed, and urged for truths
by many a hundred, that do still not spare to spread them, say them and swear
them, that I think do scarce know him though they meet him, nor have they
either cause or reason, but their wills, or zeal to rumor or opinion. For the
honorable and better sort of our Virginian adventurers I think they understand
it as I have writ it. For instead of accusing him, I have never heard any give
him a better report, then many of those witnesses themselves that were sent
only home to testify against him. Richard Pots, VV. P.

When the ships departed C. Davis arived in a small Pinnace with some 16 proper
men more, to those The planting at point comfort.
were added a company from James Town under the command of Captain Ratliffe
to inhabit Point comfort. Martin and Mr West having lost their boats, and
near half their men amongst the Salvages, were returned to James Town, for
the Salvages no sooner understood of Captain Smiths loss, but they all
revolted, and did murder and spoil all they could encounter. Now were we all
constrained to live only of that which Smith had only for his own company, for
the rest had consumed their proportions. And now have we 20 Presidents with all
their appurtenances, for Mr Persie was so sick he could not go nor stand. But
ere all was consumed, M. West and Ratliffe each with a pinnace, and 30 or 40
men well appointed, sought abro^^ to trade, how they carried the business I
know not, but Ratliffe and his men were most slain by Powhatan, Ratliffe
slain by Powhatan.
those that escaped returned near starved in the Pinnace. And Mr West finding
little better success, set sail for England. Now we all found the want of
Captain Smith, yea his greatest maligners could then curse his loss. Now for
corn, provision, and contribution from the Salvages; we had nothing but
mortal wounds with clubs and arrows. As for our hogs, hens, goats, sheep,
horse, or what lived, our commanders and officers did daily consume them, some
small proportions (sometimes) we tasted till all was devoured then swords,
arrows, pieces; or any thing we traded to the Salvages, whose bloody fingers
were so imbrued in our bloods, that what by their cruelty, our Governors
indiscreation, and the loss of our ships; Of 500, within 6 months after there
remained not many more then 60. most miserable and poor creatures. It were to
vild to say what we endured; but the occasion was only our own, for want of
providence, industry, and government, and not the barrenness and defect of
the country, as is generally supposed, for till then in 3 years (for the
numbers were landed us) we had never landed sufficient provision for 6 months
such a glutton is the sea, and such good fellows the mariners, we as little
tasted of those great proportions The fruits of imp ovidences.
for their provisions, as they of our miseries, that notwithstanding ever swaid
and overruled the business: though we did live as is said, 3 years chiefly of
what this good country naturally affords: yet now had we been in Paradise
it self (with those governors) it would not have been much better with us,
yet was there some amongst us, who had they had the government, would surely
have kept us from those extremities of miseries, that in 10 days more would
have supplanted us all by death.

But God that would not it should be unplanted, sent Sir Thomas Gates, and Sir
George Summers, with a The arivall of Sr Tho. Gates with 150.
150 men, most happily preserved by the Berondoes to preserve us. strange it is
to say how miraculously they were preserved, in a leaking ship, in those
extreme storms and tempests in such overgrowne seas 3 days and 3 nights by
bapling out water. And having give^ themselus to death, how happily when least
expected that worthy Captain Sir George Summers, having line all that time
cuning the ship before those sawlowing waves, discovered those broken Isles,
where how plentifully they lived with fish and flesh, what a paradise this is
to inhabit, what industry they used to build their 2 ships, how happily they
did transport them to James Town in Virginia, I refer you to their own
printed relations.

But when those noble knights did see our miseries James Town abandoned.
(being strangers in the country) and could understand no more of the cause but
by their conjecture, of our clamors and complaints, of accusing or excusing one
an other, they embarked us with themselves, with the best means they could, and
abandoning James Town set sail for England.

But yet God would not so have it, for ere we left The arival of the Lo^d
Laware.
the river; we met the Lord de-la-ware, then governor for the country, with 3
ships exceeding well furnished with all necessaries fitting, who again returned
them to the abandoned James Town, the 9. of June, 1610. accompanied with Sir
Ferdinando Wainman, and diverse other gentlemen of sort. Sir George Summers, and
Captain Argall he presently dispatcheth to require the Bermondas to furnish
them with provision: Sir Thomas Gates for England to help forward their
supplies: himself neglected not the best was in his power for the furtherance
of the business and regaining what was lost. But eve^ in the beginning of his
proceedings, his Lordsh had such an encounter with a scurvy sickness, that
made him unable to weld the state of his body, much less the affairs of the
colonie, so that after 8. months sickness, he was forced to save his life by
his return for England.

In this time Argall not finding the Bermondas, having 2 Ships sent to the
Bermundas
lost Sir George Summers at sea, fell on the coast of Sagadahock, where
refreshing himself, found a convenient fishing for God. With a taste whereof
he returned to James town, from whence the Lord De-la-ware sent him to trade
in the river of Patawomecke, where finding an English boy those people had
preserved from the fury of Powhatan, by his acquaintance had such good usage
of those kind Salvages, that they fraughted his ship with corn, wherewith he
returned to James Town, and so for England with the Lord governor, yet before
his return, the adventurers had sent Sr Tho. Dale with 3 ships, men and
cattle, and all The arival of Sr Tho Dale.
other provisions necessary for a year, all which arived the 10 of May, 1611.

Again, to second him with all possible expedition there was prepared for Sr
Tho Gates, 6 tale ships with 300 men, and 100 kyne, with other cattle, with
munition and all manner of provision could be thought needful, and they
arived about the 1 of August next after safely at James town.

Sr George Summers all this time was supposed lost: but thus it happened missing
the Bermondas, he fell also as Sr George Summers arivall at the Bermondas and
dies.
did Argall with Sagadahock, where being refreshed, would not content himself
with that repulse, but returned again in the search; and there safely arived.
But overtoiling himself on a surfeit died. And in this Cedar ship built by his
own directions, and partly with his own hands, that had not in her any iron
but only one bolt in her keele, yet well endured thus tossed to and again in
this mighty Ocean, til with his dead boshe arived in England at line, and at
Whitchurch in Dorsetshire, his body by his friends was honorably buried, with
many volies of shot, and the rights of a soldier. And upon his Tomb was
bestowed this Epitaph

Hei mihi Virginia, quod tam cito praeterit aestas,
Autumnus sequitur, saeuiet inde and hyems.
At ver perpetuum nascetur, and Anglialaeta his Epitaph.

Decerpit flores, Floryda terra tuos. Alas Virginia Somer so soon past
Autumn succeeds and stormy winters blast,
Yet Englands joyful spring with April shewres,
O Floryda, shall bring thy sweetest flowers.


Since there was a ship fraughted with provision, and 40 men, and another since
then with the like number ber and provision to stay in the Country 12 months with
Captain Argall.

The Lord governor himself does confidently determine to go with the next,
or as presently as he may in his own person, with sundry other knights and
gentlemen, with ships and men so far as their means will extend to furnish:
as for all their particular actions since the return of Captain Smith, for
that they have been printed from time to time, and published to the world, I
cease farther to trouble you with any repetition of things so well known, more
then are necessary. To conclude the history, leaving this assurance to all
posterity, how vnprosperously things may succeed, by what changes or chances
soever, The action is honorable and worthy to be approved, the defect whereof
has only been in the managing the business; which I hope now experience has
taught them to amend, or those examples may make others to beware, for the land
is as good as this book does report it.

FINIS.
Captain Smith I return you the fruit of my labors, as Mr Croshaw requested
me, which I bestowed in reading the discourses, and hearing the relations of
such which have walked, and observed the land of Virginia with you. The pains I
took was great: yet did the nature of the argument, and hopes I conceived of
the expedition, give me exceeding content. I cannot find there is any thing,
but what they all affirm, or cannot contradict: the land is good: as there is
no cities, so no sons of Anak: al is open for labor of a good and wise
inhabitant: and my prayer shall ever be, that so fair a land, may be
inhabited by those that profess and love the Gospel.

Your friend W. S.


