The second part of the book called a Bucklar of the Catholyke fayeth,
conteyninge seven chapiters: Made by Rychard Smyth doctoure of divinity of
Oxforde, and reader of the same there..

EXCVSVM LONDINI IN aedibus Roberti Caly, Typographi Mense Ianuarii Anno. 1555.
Cum priuilegio ad impris mendum sol (...).

The contents of this second book, which is d^^ded into seven chapiters.
THat it is not ^aweful for a man to forsake his wife but only for aduoutrie,
and that, if he forsake her for that cause, yet he may not marrye again, as
long as ^e lives, although Peter Martyr, Johan Hoper, and such other did
^^ach the coutrarie, against Goods law and man's.

ii. A co^futation of an abominable ^^rour of Peter Martyr^ setti^g forth,
which William (...) yudal^ taught in his preface upon the Epistle to the
Romans before his translation, which ^s that our salvation consists only
in God, and nothing in us, which wicked opinion ^^keth clean away man's free
will from him.

iii. The baptism of children, against all the Swing^^ans, and not Peter
Martyr only, and the A^abaptistes.

iiii. That the souls of men departed do not s^eape, but either they go to
heaven for their good works, or e^s to Hell for their ^^ell before dom^s day.

v. That it is lawefull and good to put france, esperaunce, or trust in our
good works, next after God, as in his gifts, which thing Luther, Bu^er,
Peter Martyr, and semblable others ^eui^. Also that we may live godly for the
heavenly reward.

vi. That Baptism is not only a sign and a mark of our justification and
profession, nor only a seal and confirmation of the same, as Peter Martyr and
the authors of the catech^sme, and articles setfurthe in king Edward the.vi.
time falslye and wickedlye do^ say, and teach.

vii. That all godly vows, as the vow of virginity, of continual cha^titie,
promised by a wydow, the vow of wylfull or voluntary poverty, and semblables
ought* by Gods law to be observed under pain of euerlasty^ge damnation.

Finis.
The second book. The first chapter.
That it is not lawful for a man to forsake his wife but only for aduoutrie,
and that, if he forsake her for that cause, yet he may not marrye again, as
long as she lives, although Peter Martyr, Johan Hoper, and such other did
t^ache the contrary, against Gods law and man's.

Christ plainly says. Ego dico uobis Math. v.
etc But I say unto you, who soever put^eth away his wife (except it be for
fornication) causes her to commit aduoutrie, and who soever marries her, that
is deuorsed, breaks matrimony. Which thing Mark and Luke do expou^de Man.
(...).
after such sort, that we may Mar x. Luke. xvi.
perceive evidently that Christement, that if any man should leave his wife
for aduoutrie (for which cause only it is lawful to forsake her) yet he ought
not to marrye an other wife ^ora* Gloso interli. Haymo in, i. Cor. vii.
whiles she lives. For Mark says, who soever puts away his wife, and
marries an other, breaks matrimony against her, and if a woman forsake her
husband, and marrye an other, she commits aduoutrie. S. Luke declares the
same saying thus. Ois qui dimittit u^orem sua^* et aliam ducit, maechatur, and
qui d^^issam a uiro ducit, maechatur. Every man, that forsakes his wife and
marries an other, commits aduoutrie, and he that marries her, which is for
saken, commits ad^outrie.

The holy and great clerk S. Austen did writ against Poilentius, because
he said a man might lefullye marrye again, when he had forsaken his wife
for aduoutrie, and he did allege these two places of Mark, and Luke to prove
his purpose, which writes of that matter after this manner, expou^ding these
words of S. Paul. I say not to them that are married, i Cor. vii. Tom i^^i
lib. lxxxiii (...), ix, lxxxiii.
but our lord commands that the wife go not from her husband, if she do,
she should remain unmarried, or else be reconciled to her husband. Vbi etiam
oecumenus ide^ ^ab^t.
in telligitur, quod si una^lla causa, qua sola relictio co^iugij permittitur,
mulier a uiro recell^r^t, innupta perseuerare debet, aut si s^ no^ co^tinet,
uiro potius reco^ciliari, uel correctouel tolera^do, quam alteri nubere.
Sequitur aute^ and dicit. Idem habet Tom. iiii. lib^. de ser^. d^^^ (...) ^n
mon^^ ca. xxv, and xxvi.
Et uir uxore^ non dimittat, breuiter ^andem formam intimans in uiro, quam
precipiebat in foemina, que ex precepto dn^i insinuauit. Hae^ ille. In the
which saying of S. Paul it is understand, that if the wife go away from her
husband for that only cause, for the which alone the leaving of marriage is
permitted, she ought to continue unmarried, or if she live not continently,
she ought rather to be reconciled unto her husband, either amended, or e^s to
be tolerated, then to marry unto an other man. It follows in S. Paul,
saying: And let not the man leave his wife. By which words S. Paul do the
brieflye show, that the same form ought to be in the man which he did
command to be in the woman, that is to say, that he leave his wife only for
aduoutrie, and if he leave her for that cause, he marrye not again.

Saint Hierom also, is against Peter Martyr and Johan Hoper, Tom. ix. i^ Mat.
xix.
when he says thus. Quia poterat accidere, ut aliquis calumniam faceret
innocenti, and ob secundam nuptiarum copulam, veteri crimen impingeret, sic
iubetur pri orem dimittere uxorem, ut secu^^ dam, uiuente prima, non habeat.
For as much as it might have chanced, that some man should Note this against
John Hope^ the white m^ke
pick a quarrel against his wife, or falselye accuse her of aduoutrie, and
find fault with the first marriage, to be married again. He is so
commanded to forsake his first wife, that he may not have the second,
whiles the first is alive. The like he says of the woman, who is in this
point equal with her husband, as S. Paul me^t, i. Cor, vii.
saying, that the husband has not power of his body, nor the wife of hers.
He reproved a woman very sharplye because she In epi^aphio fa biole
forsook her husband for aduoutrie, and was married to an other man. Also he
says expou^ding S. Paul's words to the Corinthiens written of this matt^er.
Docet apostolus iux^^ Tom. ii. lib. i. contra Iouinia. i. Cor. vii.
sententiam domini, uxorem, excepta causa fornicationis, non esse repudiandam,
and repduiatam uiuo marito, alteri non nubere, aut uiro suo reco^ciliari
debere. Thapostle teaches (says he) that the wife ought not to be put away,
after the mind of our lord Christ, except for her aduoutrie, and that she
being so forsaken of her husband for that, ought not to marrye an other, while
her husband lives, or else she ought to be reconciled unto her husband.

Also he says, I found abriefe Tom. iii. epist. ad Amandu^.
letter joined unto thine Epistle, and thy commentary, in which these words
were written. Ask or demand of him, that is to say of me, whether a woman,
which, her husband being forsaken for aduoutrie, and another married through
force, may without penance be received in to the communion of the church
that man yet alive, which she had forsaken for his aduoutrie. The which thing
when I readde, I remembered this verse of David. Psalm. 140.


They do it to find excuses for the defense of their sins. We al are men
that favor our own vices, and do impute unto the necessity of nature, that
thing, which we do commit through our own frewyl. As if Ma^s free will.
a young man should sa^e: I suffer force, or violence of my body, the heat of
my fleashe drives or inforceth me to sin. The instruments of my privy
members, and the complexion of my body desire a woman's company. Answer
therefore to the sister, which asks of us touching her estate, not with
mine, but with the Apostles sentence. Mulier quae sub viro est, viuente viro,
astricta est leg^: quod si mortuus fuerit vir eius, liberata est a lege viri.
Ergo viuente viro, adultera est, si duxerit alterum virum. Mark this well,
reader.
Et in alio loco. Mulier alligata est legi quanto tempore viuit vir eius: si
autem dormierit vir Romans vii.
eius, liberata est, cui vult, nubat, tantum in domino. Omnes igitur
causationes Apostolus amputans definiuit apertissime, viuente viro, a dulteram
esse mu^ierem, si alteri nupserit. That is to say, the woman that is married,
is bound to the law, as long as her husband lives. But if her husband be
dead, she is fre from the law of him. She is then a breaker of wedlock, if
she be married to another husband, her first husband being alive. And in
another place S. Paul has the same, affirming that there is no cause, but
death (...). ^or.vii.
only, to break the bond of marriage. Wherefore the Apostle taking away all
causes, that can be alleged, determines most plainelye, that the woman
commits aduoutrie, if she do marrye another man, her husband living. S.
Hierome (...). Hierom.
adds these words there. I will not that thou bring for the to me the
rauishers violence, the mothers persuasion, the authority or styrringe of the
father, the company of the kin^folke, the deceit of the ser^tours, and the
contempt of them, or others, the endomages of the household goods. Quam diu
viuit vir eius* licet adulter sit, licet Sodomita, licet flagitijs omnibus
coopertus, and ab vxore propter haec seelera derelictus, maritus e^us
reputatur, cui alterum virum ascisere non licet. Nec Apostolus haec propria
authoritate decernit, sed Christo in ii. ^or. ^iii.
se loquente, Christi verba secutus est, qui in euangelio ai^. Qui dimit^it
Ma^h. xix.
vxorem suam, excepta fornicatione, facit eam maechari, et qui dimissam
accepiret adulter est. Animaduerte quid dicat, qui dimissam acceperit, adulter
est ^iue ipsa dim^serit virum, ^iue (...) viro dimissa sit, adulter est quieam
acceperit. As long as her husband lives (says S. H^erom aunsweringe to the
question before spoken of) although he be an aduouterer, although he be a
sinner against nature, or else Note this against all ye whole ra^iement of the
Lutherans and Swinglians.
full of all kinds of vices, and be also forsaken of his wife for these
sins, he is judged her husband, and she may not lawfully marrye another,
whiles he lives. And the Apostle decreed or determined not this thing of his
own authority, but he followed Christ's words, whiles he spoke in him, which
says in the Euangelie. He that puts away his wife, except it be for
aduoutrie, makes her commit aduoutrie, and he which marieth her, that is so
put away, is an aduouterer. Note well what Christ says. He that receives
her to his wife, that is put away from her husband, is an aduouterer,
whether she had forsaken her husband, or else her husband had forsaken her, he
which takes her, commits aduoutrie. Then S. Hierom making an end of this
doubt, in the which his judgment was required. Says: Ergo and ista soror,
quae vt dicit, vim passa est, vt alteri iungeretur, si vult corpus Christi
su^c^pere, non adultera repu^ari, agat poenitentiam, ita dumtaxat, vt secondo
viro, qui maritus appellatur, sed adulter est, a tempore poenitentiae non
copuletur. Wherefore, let this sister, which, as she says, was enforced and
compelled to marrye unto an other man, do penance, if she will receive
Christ's body, and be not counted an aduoutresse, but so only let her do
penance, that from the time of it, she be no more coupled with the second
man, which is called a husband, but he is an aduouterer. Heather to S. Hierom.
Is not this manifestly written in this mattier? What man that is wise, will not
be^eue S. Hierom following ye scriptures, rather the^ the lutherians hau^^ge
for their opinion no scripture rightlye taken?

S. B^de our countreye man judged the same, writynge thus: Nulla causa est, dei
lege Lib. ^in Marcu^ ^ol. xxx.
praescripta, vt viu^nte ea, quae relicta est al^a ducatur. There is no cause
written in Gods law, This was written above viij. (...). years past.
that another wife should be married whiles she lived, which was le^te or
forsaken. What madness was in Peter Martyr, John Hoper, and such other of that
sort, to teach and def^^de the contrary to this doctrine grounded upon the
holy Scriptures, the old godly Doctors, and the Counsels? Is this to
refou^^ne Christ's re^igion (as they pretend) to her pureness, which they
falsely affirm that she had lost here* But I will go forward, for the further
confutation of this opinion.

Adam by inspiration of the holy Ghost, said of his wife Eve. Hoc nunc os ex
ossibus meis and ce. This bone is of my bones, and this fleashe of my flesh,
for which thing the man shall forsake his father and mother, and he shall
clea^e fast to his wife, and they shall be two in one flesh. The which words
declare (as Christ witnesses) that marriage ought not to be broken for any
cause, touching Math. xix.
ye band and knot of it. Christ adds to these words of Ada^ and says: quod
Deus coniunxit, homo no^ separet. Man can not or ought not to divide the^,
which God has joined together in matrimonye. Then the Pharisees said to
Christ. Why then did Moses bydde the man to give his wife a byl of
diuorsement, and so to leave her? He answered to them and said: Moses did
permit you to forsake your wives for the hardness of your hearts, but it was
not so at the beginning. These words last written (but it was not so in the
beginning of marriage, declare plainly that Christ would marriage Peter ma^tyr
says that God badde them forsake their wiue^ i. ^or. vii.
should not be broken for any cause touching the bond of it, although for
aduoutrie it were broken concerning the man's and woman's keeping together, and
the use of marriage in rendering the duty one to an other. Moreover S. Paul
says Romans vii.
thus. The woman, which is under the man, or in subjection to him: is bound
to the man by the law, as long as he lives. If the man be dead, she is
losed from the law of him* wherefore whiles the man lives, if she be with an
other man, as her husband, she shall be judged a breaker of matrimony, but if
her husband were dead, she is free from the law of the man, so that she is
no wedlock breaker, though she be with another man, as her husband. This
text makes evidently against them that say, a man may put away his wife for
aduoutrye and marye an other. For he says that the wife is so bound to her
husband, during his natural life, that he being yet alive, if she marie to
another man, she breaks marriage, and she is an aduoutresse: he says not,
she is bound to him by the law until he commit aduoutrie, but as long as
he lives. Which is to be understand of the new law, and of the bond of
marriage of the same law, which can not be losed until death of the one
party, as saint Paul affirms, i. ^or. vii.
saying again: The wife is bound by the law to her husband, as long as her
husband lives. If her husband do sleep, that is to say, if he do dye, she
is at liberty, to marye with whom she will, only in our lord, that is, to
a Christen man and godly. Saint Hierom, saint Austen, saint Bede, and many
other great learned men, and more god^ye th^n Peter Martyr, Johan Hoper, and
such others are, so have (as it appears before) taken these places of saint
Paul, as I have used them here now. What can be moore plainlye spoken of
saint Paul, then this is, against Peter Martyr, John Hoper, and* such
others, that defend the contrary opinion in this matt^er? Again saint Paul
says i. ^or. v^^.
unto them, which are married, I command not but our lord does, that the
wife depart not i. Cor. vii^.
from her husband. If she be separated, let her abide unmarried, or let her be
reconciled unto her husband again. And let not the husband put away his wife
from him, except it be for aduoutrie (as Christ says) and if he put her
away for that cause, yet let him remain unmarried, as ye wife must neades
do. This mente saint Paul, as the letter it self declares evidently. And
also saint Austen, S^rm. dn^i in ^^onte, cap. xxv xxvi, xxvii.
saint Hierom, Chrysosto^, Origin, and many other ancient, and noble clerks.
Paul meant not of a woman's departing from her husband, for any lyghter cause
than for aduoutrye (as Peter Martyr says falslye that he did) for that was
the only cause which Christ did except, and it is not lawefull for any
other cause, the wife to forsake her husband, and to be from him, because she
is bound to clea^e unto him, and to render his duty to him (as Paul
witnesses) and not to defraude him of it.

A counsel called Mileuitane, at the which saint Austen was present,
determined this controversy, saying. Placuit ut secundum Cap. xvii.
euangelicam and apostolicam disciplinam, neque dimissus ab uxore, neque
dimissa a marito, alteri coniungatur, sed ita maneant, aut sibimet
reconcilientur, quod si contempserint, ad poenitentiam re digantur. It pleases
us, that according to thee learning or doctrine of the Gospel, and of Mat.
xix. i. Cor. vii.
thapostle, another the husband forsaken of his wife for aduoutrie, nor the
wife, which is put away of her husband for the like crime, be married to
another, but let them so remain unmarried, or be reconciled amongst them
selfs. The which law or act, if they do or shall despise, let them be
brought to do penance. This was also enacted of many other counsels, and
Aphricanum cap. lxix.
namelye in the counsel holden in Aphrica of. CCxvi^. bishops, at the which
saint Austen was present.

Origin was of the same Tom, iii. homi, vii, in Matthew.
mind and judgment, when he saie^. Scio quosdam qui praesu^^ eccles^s, extra
scriptura^ permisi^ se aliquam nubere, u^ro priori u^uente, and contra
scripturam quide^ i. Cor. vii.
fecerunt, dicentem: Mulier alligata est legi, quamdiu uiuit uir eius. Ite^
Romans vii.
uiuente uiro adultera uocabitur, si iuncta fuerit alteri uiro. I know Idem
habet. Augus. lib. ^i. cap. xii, de co^ ingus adultes rinis.
that certain rulers of the churches, have with out ye scripture suffered a
woman to marye, her first husband being alive, and they have done it, plain
against the scriptures, saying: A woman is bound to the law, as long as her
husband lives. Also Paul says, the woman shall be called a breaker of
wedlock if she marye an other manne, her husband being yet a live. Hither to
Origin, which wrote a bo^e thirtene hundredth years paste before our time.

Christ mente even the same thing, saying: Who soever puts away his wife,
except it Mat. 5. and. 19.
be for her aduoutrie, and marieth another wife, he breaks marriage, and
commits aduoutrie. And he which marieth her so put away for aduoutrie,
commits aduoutrie. For Christ teaches us here three leessons. The first
is, that a man may (...). L^^a.
not lawfullye put away his wife, and that concerning bed and bourde only,
but for her aduoutrie only, and for no other cause at all. The second is ^
that if he forsake his wife for aduoutrie committed of her, than he may not
marrye again, as long as she lives: as saint i. Cor. vii. Romans vii.
Paul intreatynge of the same mattier witnesses plainly. The third lesson
is, that who iii.
soever marieth a woman diuor sed from her husband, for aduoutrie, he
commits aduoutrie, because he marries another man's wife, for the band of
marriage remains still, and shall as long as both parties live. These three
things are directly against the belief of the Pharisees, which thought that
it was lawful for them to put away their wives for every light cause, and
to marrye again, and that he committed not aduoutrie, which married a woman
so put away from her husband. S. Austen answers to an argument made upon
Christ's words, after this ^om. vi, lib. ii. cap. viii. de ad ulterinis
^opti^s. cap. x. xi^.
manner. Who so ever puts away his wife, but for aduoutrie, and marries
another breaks matrimony, ergo, he that puts away his wife for
aduoutrie, and marieth another, breaks not matrimonye. To this reason S.
Austen (I said) answers refuting it, by another like made upon s. James
words, saying: scienti bonum et non facienti peccatum est Iaco. iiii.
illi. He sins that knows what is good, and does it not. This argument
made of the contrary sense, ergo, he sins not, that knows not what is
good, is naught: Because a man synneth through ignorance as Christ witnesses.
Wherefore Christ meant that he synneth (...). xii.
more greuouslye, which puts away his wife without aduoutrie, and marieth
another, than he does, which puts her away for aduoutrie, and marieth
again, like as he sins more that sins witting^^e, than he which synneth
ignorauntly, and yet both does offend God. This S. Austen Lib. 2. cap. 10, de
adulter^^ coniug^is.
gathers very godly and lernedlye out of the Euangelie of Mark and Luke,
which as it were, expoundinge Matthew, affirm absolutlye, that who soever for
any cause, puts away his wife, and marieth another, commits aduoutrie
in so doing.

S. Austen confirms this Lib. de bono co^^ iugali. cap. 3.
saying when he expounded S. Paul's sentence to the Romans above recited.
Confaederationem maris and feminae. etc. The scripture so does commend the
ioyninge together of man and man in marriage. That it is not lawful to the
woman to marry again another man as long as her husband lives, nor the man
may marye an other wife, as long as his wife deuorsed for her aduoutrye
lives. Interuenie^te deuortio, co^faederatio illa non aboletur nuptialis, i^a
vt sibi coniuges sint etiam se^parati, cum illis autem adulterium committant,
cum quibus fuerint post suum repudium copulati. The co^ioyning together of
marriage is not abolished or taken away through di^orcement between the man
and woman, in so much as that they are man and wife, yea when they are
separated. For they do commit aduoutrie with them, whom they have married,
since their diuorcement.

S. Austen has again, semel autem initum connubium in Lib de beno ee^ ^ugali
cap. xv.
ciuitate deinostri, vbi etiam exprima duorum hominum copula, quoddam
sacramentum nuptiae ge^^^^^^ quod nullo modo potest ni^i alicuius eorum morte,
disso^u^. The marryage once entered or begone in the city of our. GOD, where,
yea of the first couplynge together of man and woman, the marriage bears a
certain sacrament, or a sign of a holy thing, which band can not be
undone but by death of one of Tom. vi^ ^i. d^ nuptiis. ca. x. li. 2. ca. 13.
de com^ g^is adulter^^s e^ de sermon, dei in monte. ca 25^
them. He holds in many places of his works many festlye, that death only
of the man, or of the woman, and no other thing or cause, dissolueth and
breaks matrimony once perfited through carnal dealing, except they
consent to vow chastity.

Innocentius the first Pope of that name, which was in Libro decretorum suorum
cap. vi.
S. Austens time has the same. Wherefore we see euidentlye, that Peter Martyr,
and John Hoper, which was a white monk, and such others erred shamefullye,
when they did teach, preach, and set forth the contrary unto this doctrine
grounded upon the scriptures, the counsails, and old Doctors of the church.
But of this question let this be said.

The second Chapter.
A confutation of an abominable ^rroure of Peter Martyrs setting forth, which
William Tyndale taught in his preface upon the Epistle to the Romans before
his translation, which is that our salvation consists only in god, and
nothing in us, which wicked opinion takes clean away man's fre will from him.

This great Prophet of our new brethren, amongst many other detestable
opinions and sayings which he has in his commentaries written upon the
first Epistle to the Corynthians, thus he sets forth. Est prorsu^ vt
nostra, ita liberotum nostrorum salus ex mera dei electione, et misericordia,
etc. Both our salvation, and our childrens also is utterly of the only
election, and mercy of God.

Again he affirms the same with these words. Tantum ex Romans ix.
dei gratia at^ electione, sieve promissione (ut dicit Paulus: Non om For.
clxxvi.
nes, qui sunt ex Israel et c.) Nostra salus constat. Our salvation consists
only (says he) of or by the grace of God, and his election or promise, as S.
Paul says. All that are of Israel etc. Is not this a perilous doctrine,
and a pestilent error, which Wylliam Tyndall taught in his preface upon the
Epistle to the Romans, and one Barnardyne, an Italian in his book written in
the Italia^ tongue, and translated in to English by a young gentle woman.
This opinion is not only against man's free will, but also against many
euidente places of the scripture. For if our salvation stands only in Gods
election, Gods promise, mercy, and grace: than it consists not in any
work of man, not in the hearing of Gods word, not in his faieth, not in
his repentance, or penance, not in his prayinge to God for the pourchasinge
of it, not in geuinge of Faith only does not i^ stifie man.
alms, not in fasting, not in his fiaunce to God or hope of salvation, not in
the receiving of baptism, not in the dread of God, not in charitee, finally
not in good works, which all together are manistly against Gods holy word.
For touching the first, Peter said: Thou have, O Lord words of everlasting
life. Paul sa^ed: I have showed i. Cor. xv.
to you the Euangel^e, through the which ye are saved. Whereunto agrees, that
he says: I am not a shamed of the Euangelie, for it is the power of God Romans
x.
to the salvation of every man, that believes. Again he affirms the same
thing saying: This word is the word of fayeth, which we do preach, For
if thou confess with thye mouth that Jesus is our lord, and believe with thy
heart, that God raised up him from death, thou shall be saved. Cord enim With
his heart, that is to say, freely and volentarilie.
creditur ad iustitiam, ore fit confessio ad salutem. For a man does believe
with his heart, to receive righteousness, and confesses with his mouth to
obtain salvation. What can be more plainlye said against this erroneous Read
ye, that do th^^e. Peter Martyr is a great clerk.
opinion? For affirms he not here manifestlye that we do be^eue with our
heart to pourchase our justification* and with our mouth confess or
acknowledge Christ, and his truth, that we may be saved? Is it then true,
that our salvation depends only upon Gods election, promise, grace, and
mercy* Depends it not upon our faieth, and confession of it, and of Christ?
How often times Mat. xv. Man. x. Lu^. vii. Ephe. ii.
said Christ: Thy fayeth has saved the? Says not alsoo Paul: Ye are saved
by grace through faieth. Many times Peter Martyr affirms that only faieth
does justify man, and save him: and now he says that his salvation
consists only in Gods election, promise, mercy, and grace. What
disagreinge is this with himself? Is it any marvel that he agrees not with
us, Which agrees not with him self, what mad men are they, that will yet
follow his ungodly opinions, when he erreth thus plainly, and so shamefully
against the scriptures? David says: Thou, o Psalm. xvi. Psalm. xxxvi. Psalm.
xxxi.
Lord, sauest them, that trust or hope in the: And God saves them which
have their affiaunce in him: And they shall obtain mercy of God, which do
trust in him. S. Paul says, that Abraham did believe against hope under hope
to be justified, and saulued, and that hope is the helmet of salvation, and yet
Ephe. vi.
Peter Martyr was not ashamed to say that our salvation stands only upon
God. Christ said, who soever believes, and is baptized, shall be saved. Marci.
V^^imo. Tit. iii.
Saint Paul witnesses that God saved us by his mercy, through baptism. And
S. Peter affirms also, that baptism saves us, and Peter Martyr says that
our salvation comes only of God. O ignorant Baptism is not ama^ ^e only
of our justification, but a cause of it.
man: he says that only faieth saves us, and that baptism is but a sign,
mark, or seal of our justification, and salvation. But Christ, saint
Paul, and saint Peter, affirm that we are saved by baptism* What folly is
it then to give ^redence to Peter Martyr, or to any other of that se^te, the
Swinglians, and Sacramentaries, which are deceived after semblable manner.

David prayed to God, that Prayer saves us. Psalm. ^xxxv.
he might be saved, saying: Saluu^ me fac deus meus sperantem in ^e. Save me, o
my God, which do trust in the. Is this our salvation to depend only upon
God? How blind are they, which say, that Peter Martyr was a singular
learned man in diuinitee, and that his commentaries are very learned lie made?
Has not affection blinded them? But hear further the Prophet I^ell says.
Ioelis. (...). We obtain our salvation by pr^^er and by not fa^eth onl^e.


Who soever shall call upon thee name of God, shall be saved: declaringe thereby,
that our salvation consists in prayer: and Peter Martyr, Wylliam Tyndall, and
the Italian Barnardine, say, that it is only in God, and nothing in us, nor
in our doings. God says by his prophet. Conuertiminiad me, and salui Isaye.
x^v. We are saned by penance, and not by faith only. i. Lo^. v^.
eritis oe^s fines terrae. Turn ye to me, all the coasts of the earth, and
ye shall be saved. Saint Paul says that repentance works in us our
salvation. How ignoraunte are these men then?

Zacheus promised to Christ Luc. xix. We are justified by alms, and not by
faieth only.
to give half of his riches to the poor, and if he had done wrong to any
man, to restore to him four times so much. Than Christ said. Hodie salus
facta est huic domui, quia and hi^ filius Abrahe est. This day, health or
salvation is common to this house, because he is alsoo the child or son of
Abraham. Which our saviors words, declare that we are saved by restoring of
goods gotten wrongfully, and by alms, and not by only faith, and that our
salvation stands not only in god, as Pe. Martyr most falsely says that it
does.

Jonas the Prophet said. Quaecun (...) uoui, reddam prosalute mea domino. I
will render Uowes.
to our Lord for my salvation, every thing, that I have vowed. But Peter
Martyr said our salvation consists only in God, and that no man is bound
to perform his vow made unto God, that he may be saved. One of the causes
of this his error, was that he was a Chanon of saint Austens order and yet
married a wife, not withstanding he had vowed chastity. And God requires of
Psalm. ^xxv.
us the perfourmau^ce of all godly vows, as the holy scripture Eccle. v.
witnesses playnelye.

The prophet said I will show to the, o man, what thing Mi^h. vi.
is good, and what our Lord does require of the. Truly, to do right or
justice, to love mercy, and with care to walk before God, that is, to serve
him diligently. This is the voice of our lord to the city. Et salus We are
saved by the fear of god
^rit timentibus nomen eius. And health, or salvation shall be to them which
fear his name. Is this our salvation to confist only in faieth, or in God
only?

Malachie the prophet treating malach (...).
of Christ's coming, says. And the son of righteousness shall rise unto
you, that fear my name, and salvation in his feathers. Zachary said by the
inspiration of the holy ghost: (...).
His mercy shall be from progeny to progeny, unto the^ that fear his name.
Solomon said. Timor domini fons ui^^. The dread Prou. xiiii.
of our lord, is a fountain of life. Again, fear puts away sin. Was
not then Peter Martyr plainly ignorant, to say, that our salvation stands
only in God, or that only Faith does not only i^stifie us.
faieth is the mean to ob^ayne of God our justification and salvation? S.
Paul says Gala. v.
that, that faieth avails, which does work by charitee, and that with out
charitee, faieth can not sa^e us. He also says, the woman shall be saved through
i. Tim. (...).
bearing of children, if she do continue in faieth, charitee, and holiness with
sobriety. Also he said unto Timothe the bishop. i. Tim. iiii.
Take heed to thy self, and unto learning, or teachinge of the people, and
continue therein. For if thou so do, thou shalt save thy self, and them, that
hear thee. Brieflye, he says. Work ye your own salvation with fear and
tremblinge. O how blind then was Peter Martyr to say, that our salvation
consists only in God, or in faieth alone, and not in us, and the works of
our freewyll, aidid of God by his especial grace? But I will make now an
end of this trai^te, and in an other book set forth diverse other shameful
errors, and detestable heresies of this man, and of some others also. Moreover
Peter Martyr says. Ilico ut quis credit, and salutem habet, and iustificatur.
Strayghte after a man believes, he is boeth saved, and also justified. Which
his saying is clearlye against the scriptures alleged in the last
chapter, and these also.

Miserere mei deus etc. Have mercy upon me o God, according Psalm. I.
to thy great mercy, and after the multitude of thye merciful works, put
thou away mine iniquity. Who can deny but David the prophet believed when he
thus prayed, seeing S. Paul witnesses, that no man ^om. x.
can pray or call upon God for remission of his sins, and his salvation,
except he believe before, and yet David was not incontinente justified and saved.

Says not ye prophet Joel, that whosoever shall call upon thee Joel. (...).
name of GOD shall be saved? Which saying proves that a man must neades
first believe in Christ, before he can be saved through his prayer. The same
thing, appears most euidentlye, by the Publican, that believed Luc. xix.
before he went into the temple to pray, for to pourchase his justification
and salvation through his calling upon God to have mercy upon him.

Did not the Jews believe when S. Peter badde them Act. ii. and. (...)
turn to God, to repent, and to be baptized, that they might obtain their
justification, by remission of their sins? Says not Paul also, let us go
with an affiaunce, hope, or boldness, ^eb. iiii.
unto the seat of Gods grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace
for our help in due season? Who sees not then that we must needs believe, and
put our affiaunce and trust in God, to obtain of him mercy and grace,
through our prayers, before we do pray to him therefore? Said not likewise
Christ: Quecumque petieritis in oratione credentes, accipietis. What things
Math. xxi.
so ever ye shall ask in your prayers, ye shall have them, if ye do believe.
S. James says that we must ask in faith, if Iaco. i.
we will obtain our petition. Must we not then have first a belief in God,
and a confidence or hope to obtayn our petition, when we desire of God to
forgive us our trespasses, and to save us, and than after through our prayers,
and repentance purchase those benefits of him? S. Austen says in many
places of his books. Fides primum datur, ut caetera impetrentur.

Faith is first of al given to man, that other things necessary for his
salvation, may be gotten through it. But this is sufficient for ye confutasio^
of this gross and perilous error taught of Peter Martyr. Now I will refute
and improve another abominable heresy of his, which he defends in his
commentaries Fol, 273^
upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians. And it is of the baptisynge of
children, which he defends to be saved, if they were never baptized, but
departed without baptism.

The. iii. Chapter.
The baptism of children, against all the Swinglians, and not Peter Martyr
only, and the Ana^aptistes.

SAyn^t Austen in this matter ^^i. ^or. 7. Fol. 173. et 174. 175. 176.
is manifestlye against Peter Martyr, which defends in his commentaries He
made baptism but a sign or a mark of our justification. fol. 177, and, 178.
upon the Corinthians, that a christian man's child has remission of his
sin, and the spirit of God, before he be baptized, and shall be saved although
he were never baptized. Which doctrine is against the scriptures, and all the
old doctors sayings, and not only against these sentences folowinge. In
paruulis gratia Dei per Aug. lib. i. cap xxxix. de pecc^ ^orum et (...).
baptismum eius qui veni^ in similitudine carnis p^^^at^, id agitur, vt
euacuet^r caro peccati. That thing is done by the grace of Read you that
^auon^ Peter Martyr ou^^ much.
God, through the baptism of him, which came in the likeness of synneful
fleashe, that the fleashe of sin should be taken a way.

Item he says, because S. Paul affirms that through Epistol lxxxix. (...).
v.
one man's sin (Adam) all were condemned, the baptism of children is not
superfluous, for as much as they which were condemned through their birth,
should be delivered from that condemnation through baptism. Again he
says. Potest Lib. i. cap. xvi. de peccatorum.
recte di^i paruulos sine baptismo de corpore exeuntes, in damnatione omnium
mi^issima futuros. Multum enim fallit and fallitur, qui eos in damnatione
praedicat non futuros. It may be well said, that the children which do die
Than Peter Martyr deceived men, and he him self was much deceived.
without baptism shall be ^^moste easy damnation of all others. He is much
deceived himself, and no less deceyueth other, which says that they shall
not be damned. Also he says. Periturus erat paruulus, nec habiturus vitam
aeternam, si per Lib. i. (...). xxxiii. d^peccatorum.
sacramentum baptism^ no^ crederet in vnigenitum filium. The child should have
perished, and not have had everlasting life, if he had not believed through
the sacrament of baptism, in the only begotten son of god.

Item upon these words of Lib. i. cap. 27. de peccatorum. Joan. iii.
S. John, he that has the son, has everlasting life. Non igitur regnum
caelorum, sed nec vita^ aeternam habebunt paruuli, si filiu^ non habebunt, quem
nisi per baptismum habere non possunt.

Therefore young children shall not have the kingdom of heaven, Tha^ Peter
Martyr ^rreth shamefully and so do all that follow him.
nor yet everlasting life, if they have not the son of God (Christ) which
they can not have, but by baptism.

Omnino in remissionem peccatorum baptizantur et paruuli, alioquin non habebunt
in regno celorum uitam. Young children are Lib. v. Hypo^^.
baptized utterly for to obtain remission of their sins, or else they shall
not have life in ye kingdom of heaven. Likewise in the same book he says.
Paruulo nisi baptis mi gratia subuenerit, disperiet de populo suo. If the
sacrament of baptism shall not help the infant, he shall not be saved Tom.
iii. lib. i. cap. xxiii. de. p^ccatoru^ etc.
with other folk. Again he writes. Nulla ex nostro arbitrio, prete^
baptismum Christi salus eterna promittatur infantibus, quam non promitti^
scriptura, omnibus humanis inge^^^^s preferenda. Let not eternal salvation be
promised to infantes, after our own will, without the baptism of christ,
which salvation the scripture, which ought to be preferred before all men's
wits, promises Aug. Tom. ii. Epist. xxviii. et lib. de origin ^i^ae cap.
xviii. and xxi.
not to them. In an other place thus he says. Quisquis dixerit, quod in
Christo uiuificabu^ tur etiam paruuli, qui sine sacramenti eius participatione
de hacuita exeunt, hic profecto and co^tra apostolicam praedicationem uenit,
and totam condemnat ecclesiam. Vbi propterea cum baptizandis par uulis
festinatur, and curritur, quia sine dubio creditur eos aliter in christo
uiuificari non posse. Qui autem no^ uiuificatur in Christo, restat ut in eadem
condemnatione maneat, de qua dicit apostolus, per unius Romans v.
delictum in omnes homines in co^demnationem. Whosoever shall say, yea that
children shall be made alive in christ (spiritually) which do depart out of
this life, without any partaking of Christ's sacrament of baptism, he without
doubt does both against S. Paul's preachinge, and also he condemns the
whole church. When men and women therefore, do haste and run to have their
children baptized, because they without doubt believe, that other wise they can
not be made alive in Christ, but he that is not made alive in or by Christ,
it rests that he abides still in the same damnation of the which the
apostle speaks saying: Through Romans v.
one man's sin judgment came upon all men to their condemnation. Who sees
not now that Peter Martyr, and his disciples err manifestly in this matter,
and ought not therefore to be believed in other their naugh tie opinions.
Infa^tes a peceato originis Aug. ^pist. 89.
immunes esse non possun^, nisi ab eius reatu per Christi baptisma resoluantur.
Young children can not be without original sin, except they be absolved
from it, by the baptism of Christ. Noli credere, noli dicere, Lib. iii. cap.
ix. ai^a et ^ius orig. ad Vincentiu^.
noli docere, infantes antequam baptiz^ntur morte preuentos, posse ad
originalium peccatorum indulgentiam peruen^re: si uis esse catholicus. Believe
not says saint Austen, say not, teach not, that infantes which The Peter
Martyr was not catholyke. Lib. iii. car. xii de pe^catorum.
depart before they may be baptized, can have forgiveness of their sins, if
thou will be catholyke. Nec paruuli de quibus l^bet sanctis justice (...)
procreati, originalis peccatireatu absoluu^tur, nisi (...) christo fuerint
baptizati, pro quibusta^to impensius loqui debemus, quanto pro se ipsis minus
possu^t. Young children that be borne of never so holy and righteous
parents, are not absolved from original sin, except they be Peter Martyr
teaches the contrary
baptized in Christ, for whom so much the moore we ought to speak, because
they can not speak for them self.

Nos dicimus, aliter infantes salutem Aug. To^. x. Sermon. x^iii. de v^rb^s ap^^^.
and uita^ eternam non habituros, nisi baptizentur in Chr^sto. We say, that
young children shall not have otherwise salvation and life everlasting,
except they be baptized in Christ. Par uulus non baptizatus pergit in
da^natione^. Apostoli enim sunt uerba: Ex uno etc. Et dominiest se^ten^^: Romans
v. Joan. iii. Lib. de g^ne. x. cap. xliiii. Lege, Aug* ^pi. ^7. ^07. 157. 90.
^0^.
nisi quis renatus fuerit etc. (...) resistit, nisi non christianus. The young
child not christened goes into damnation. For Paul says: Through one man's
syn all are damned, and our lord says. Except a man be borne again of the
holy ghost, and Tract. xxxviii. in Ioa^ de g^r. ad ^^^^ram (...). x. cap.
xiiii. se^. de te^p x^v.
water, he can not enter into heaven. The which thing, no man again says,
but he that is no christen man. How blind is then Peter Martyr to say that a
christen man's child is justified, before it be borne a^^ christened, and that
it shal^^ (...) ued if it were not christen (...) membred he not, that (...)
and saint Paul says: (...) ^
borne originallye the (...) Gods wrath, and in (...) any person which is
(...) through Adams offe^^^ Paul witnesses all m^n (...) be made alive, with
(...) own faieth in Christ, or (...) says of his God fathers (...) the
church, applied to him by (...) s^^ament of faieth (baptis^^^^ Saint Austen
testifies euide^tlie in sondrie places of his works, Lib. i. cap. xii^.
contra duos. Pelag. Lib. d^. peccat. cap. xxvii.
that original sin hurts al children, not yet baptized, and that they are
not gotten of christen parents, in that, that their parents are baptized,
which thing touches the soul, but in that, that they are men and women,
they are begotten and borne in sin, and shall be damned for ever, except they
be through baptism borne again the sons of God.

Saint Cyprian was of the same belefe, saying: Ad remissionem Lib. 3. epist.
8. ad ^^dum.
peccatorum accipiendam ho^ipso facilius ad baptisma accedit, quod illi
remittantur, non propria, sed aliena peccata. The young ^hylde comes to
baptism so much the more easly to receive remission of his sins, because
Original sin came from Adam.
an other man's sin and not his own is there forgeuen him. Peter Martyr
defends that the child has remission of his sin, be fore he be baptized.
Oh blindness of the man, and of his scholars.

Saint Ambrose is of the same judgment saying. Neque Lib 2. cap. 8. de
vocatione gentium.
credi fas est, eo^, qui reg^nerationis non adepti sunt sacramentum, ad ullu^
beatorum peruenire consortium, ueruntamen quare tanta infan tium multitud^, non
regeneratorum, a perpetua alienatur salute, no^ conturbabitur cor nostrum, si
fir Read ye Swing^^ and Ma^tyrians.
ma and stabili fide omne iudicium dei iustum esse credamus, nec appetamus
habere cognitum, quod uoluit esse secretum, ut ubi in uesti gari non potest,
qu^re ita i^di^et sufficiat scire quis iudicet and ce. Yt is not lawefull to be
believed, that they which are not baptized, do go to heaven. But yet, we neade
not to trouble our selves to think, why so great a number of babes
unchristened should not be saved, if we do surely and stedfastlye believe, that
all Gods judgments he righteous, and desire not to know that thing, which
God would have secret, that where it can not be searched out, why he does so
judge, it should be sufficient, to know who judges.

Saint Gregory Nazianzene, (...). (...). La^^cru^.
saint Hieroms master, says. Melius est infantes, si pe^^culum aliquod
imminet, non dum rationis co^potes sanctificare, quam non signatos, and
initiatos uita excid^r^.

It is better that young children, which have not yet the usage of reason, be
made holy (through baptism) if there be any danger at hand, rather than
they should loose everlasting life, being not christened, before they do
depart out of this life.

Saint Austen would, that ^o. xvi, ser. (...) de temp^re.
baptism of children should not be differred, but be ministered to them, as soon as they are borne. Also he says that saint Cypr^an, not making a new
decree Lib. iii. epi. (...) Lib. i. ca. xx, de origin ai^ae (...) Hieron^.
of it, but kepinge the most steadfast faieth of the church, to correct them,
which judged that the child should not be baptized, before theight day of
his birthe: said, that the soul, not the body, should perish, if he were
not baptized, and he with other bishops thought, that the child streighte
after his birthe might be well baptized. Saint Hierome confirms this
belefe, saying. Infantuli baptiza^tur, Lib. (...). dialogoru^ contra Pelag. Ad
latu^ idem
ut eis peccata in baptismate dimittantur. Young children are baptized, that
their sins may be forgeuen by it. What can Peter Martyr and his disciples
say to this? Will they have us believe them before the scriptures, and the old
godly doctors of Christ's church? What blyndnes is this? Our lord of his
tender and great mercy open their eyes, that they may see the truth of his
word, and seeing it, recule and retourn again to ye catholyke church, out of ye
which no man can be saved.

Origin believed even as these other fathers did, part of whose sentences are
now recited, for Hom. xiiii. in Lucam,
he says thus, upon these words of Job. No man is clean from the filthynesse
of sin, no although his life were but of one day upon the earth. Et quia
Ca. 25. (...). 70
per baptismi sacramentum natiuitatis sordes deponuntur, propterea baptizantur
and paruuli. Nisi enim quis renatus fuerit etc. Because the filthynes of man's
natural birthe is put away through the sacrament of baptism, children are for
that cause also baptized. For except a man be borne again of water, and the
holy Joan. iii.
ghost, he can not enter in to the kingdom of heaven. Innocentius the first,
which was in S. Austens time, and to whom he wrote, holds the same bele^^^,
saying, as saint Austen re^^teth Lib. ij. cap. iiij. contra duas epist, ^^ripta
^ (...) and (...) uita^^^^m.
pelagiorum* Illudu^ro. quod e^^ vestra fraternitas asserit predicare, paruulos
a^ternae uitae praemijs, etiam sine baptismatis gratia posse donari, perfatuum
est. It is a very foolish thing, that they do preach (as your brotherhoode
affirms) that children should be saved without baptism. It appears then
now most playne^ye how this opinion, which Peter Martyr, folowinge the
Swinglia^s, has taught, to defend that only faith justifies man, is
against the holy word of God, and the holy doctors both of the Greek
church* and also of the Latyue, and thereby it is evident that Peter Martyr,
and his scolers are not members of the catholic church, but schismatiques. I
beseech God of his gracious goodness turn their hearts, that they may
embrace the truth again, and continue therein to his honor and glory, and
their own salvation. But hear once again Origin, which was about. M. three
hundred years passed, Orig. lib. vi. Coment. in ca. vi. ad Romans
and writes after this manner: Pro hoc, scilicet corpore pec^ cati abolendo,
and ecclesia ab apostolis traditionem suscepit etiam paruulis baptisma dare.
Sciebant enim illi, quibus mysteriorum secreta commissa sunt diuinorum, quod
es^ent in omnibus sordes pecc^ti ^enuinae, quae peraqua^ e^ spiritum ablui
deberent. That is to say. For this body of sin to be defaced or put away,
the An unwritten veritee of our belief
church has received also a tradition of the Apostles, to give baptism,
yea, to children. For they, to whom the secrets of Gods mysteries were
committed, did know that there should be in all men natural fylthines of
sin, which ought to be washed away through water and the holy ghost This
authority is against Peter Martyr, the authors of the articles annexed unto
the Catechism set furthe in king Edward the vi. time, and all them, that
say either that children not baptized should be saved, or that baptism is no
cause of our justification, but faith only, or that baptism is but a sign
or mark of our justification, or finally that the baptism of children is set
furthe in the Scripture, where it is left to the church by the holy Apostles
without writing only by tradition, as Orige^ here De eccles. Hierar, c^, xii.
says manefestlye, and S. Dion^se S. Paul's scoler, of the which S. Austen
writes thus. Lib. x. cae. xxii^ in cene ad (...) ram. Lib. iii. c^. xiii. de
lib arb. Lib. iiii. cap. 4. de bapti^^ contra dona^^
Consuetudo matris ecclesiae in baptizandis paruulis nequa^ sper nenda est ne^
ullo modo superflua deputanda, nec omnino credenda, nisi apostolica esset
traditio. The accustomaunce of our mother the Church in baptisinge of
children is in no wise to be despised, nor to be reckened superfluous by any
means, nor utterly to be believed, if it had not ben a tradition of ye
Apostles. What ca^ our new teachers, and the makers of the articles before
mentioned, say to these authorities for the defense of their doctrine, that
men are bound to credit and believe nothing, but that only, which the
scripture sets furthe? Would they, that men should believe them before these
ancient, godly, and great learned fathers? But of this mattier I have written
moore at large in my book of traditions, and therefore I now make an end of
this chapter, wisshinge grace and the knowledge of the truth unto all that
err in Christ's religion, that they may come at the length unto ye joys of
heaven thorough Christ our saviors glorious passion, to whom with the
father and the holy ghost be honor and praise for ever Amen.

The fourth chapter.
That the souls of men departed do^ not slea^e, but either they go to heaven
for their good* works or else to Hell for their ^uell before domes day.

TOuthinge this matter I will be very short, because I think that few of
our country men are infected with this opinion. Christ said to the theife
hanginge with him upon the cross. Hod^e mecum eris in paradiso. This day thou
Luke xxiii.
shalt be with me in paradise, that is to say (as saint Austen expounds it
very truly.) this day of my death thy soul being departed out of thy body,
shall see the de^te, and god head clearly. Also saint Paul said Phil. i.
Cupio disolui and esse cum Christo. I desire to die and to be with Christ,
which is as much as if he had said, when I shall depart out of this world,
I shall be streighte way with Christ, as he himself declares to the
Corinthians, saying thus. (...). Cor. v.
Scimus quod si terrestris do mu^ nostra etc. We know that if our earthlye
house of this dwelling be brooken, we have a house of God in heaven not made
with man's hand. Again he says. Audemus and bonam uoluntatem ii. Cor. v.
habemus, magis peregrinari a corpore, and praesentes esse ad domin^. We are
bold, and we have a good will, rather to be strangers from the body, and to be
present with our lord. Which is as much as if he had said, when I shall goo
out of this world, than I have a house in heaven, and shall be present with our
lord God. Which saint Hierom Hier^^, To. i. epist. ad Marcellam de obitu Leae.
affirms saying thus. Nunc illa pro breui labor, aeterna fruitur
beatitudine, excipitur a^geloru^ choris. Now she has the pleasure of ye
everlasting bliss, she is received with the compaignie of Angels. Saint
Austen writtinge Aug. in psalm, 10. Phil. i.
upon this Paul's sentence. Cupio d^ssolui etc. says. Viuit Paulus nunc cu^
christo* sicut illi prophetae omnes viuunt cu^ christo. Saint Paul lives
now with Christ, as all those Prophets does. Again Saint Austen speakinge
of the gate or port of paradise, which Christ opened the day of his death,
writes thus. Per have ingressus est Petrus, per hanc ingressus est Paulus, per
hanc omnes sancti Martyrs intraueru^t. Through this port S. Peter entered into
heaven, through this gate s. Paul went into heaven, through this gate all the
holy Martyrs entered into heaven. Saint Basil believed the same, Basil. epist.
67.
when he said thus. Mortuus est uir, qui columna erat, and stabilime^ tum
ecclesiae, imo magis ad beata^ uitam sublarus a nobis, abscessit. The man is
dead, which was the pillar, and the establisheme^t of the church: Nay
rather he taken from us, is goone into heaven. Abdias, which was of the Abdi.
lib. i. ^ist. ^^postilic^.
lxxii. disciples which Christ sent in to the world before him to preach,
says that Saint Peter said, when he should be crucified: Quare scito^e me
ad hoc ipsum fest^are, ut carne exutus; domino assistam. Wherefore know ye that
I make haste unto this same thing, that I being unclothed of the fleashe,
may be present with our lord.

Again he witnes^eth that S. Lib. v. ^ist. ap^^
John evangelist said unto one Andronicus, weping much for the death of
Drus^ana. Ita ne fleueris quasi ignores, quo illa concesserit? Nescis illam
conu^rsationem esse meliorem, quae in coelo est ad quam sa^cta and fidelis,
Drusiana tra^ siuit, expectans spem resurrectionis ex mortuis? Do thou so
weape for her as though thou knew not, whether she is goone? Do thou
not know that that conversation is better, which is in heaven, unto the
which the holy and faiethful Drusia^ is passed out of this life, looking for
the risinge up again from death unto life? Oecumenius a Greake writter,
expou^ding these words of s. Steven: Acts. vii.
receive O lord Jesus, my spirit, says. Hinc ostenditur iustorum animas a
corporibus liberatas nequaqua^ in infernum desce^dere, sed tra^s mitti in manus
Dei viuentis*

The fifte chapter.
That it is lawful and good to put fiaunce, esperaunce, or trust in our good
works, next after God, as in his gifts, which thing Luther, Bu^^^ Peter
Martyr, and semblable others deui^. Also that we may live godly for the
heavenly reward.

THe Prophet did put trust in his good works, when he said. Memento Psalm
cxxxi.
do mine* David, and omnis mansue tudinis eius. Remember David, O lord, and
all his mekenes. Even so did the good king Eze iiii. Reg. xx.
chias saying. Memento, domine, quo modo ambulauerim, coram ^e in veritate and
in cord perfecto etc. Remember, o Lord, how I have walked, that is to say,
how I have lived before thee with a perfect faieth, and have d^ne those
things, which pleases Phil. iii.
thee. Saint Paul confirms this doctrine, when he says: Nostra conuersatio
est in coelis, vnde and expectamus dominum nostrum Iesum Christum and ce. Our
living is heavenly, and therefore we look for our lord Jesus Christ, which
will refourme our vile bodies, and make them like unto his glorious body.
Christ said. Sunt Matthew. xix.
eunuchi etc. There be some men, which have chosen a continent life for the
kingdom of heaven, as their stipende, and reward. Mooreouer, said not the
holy Prophet David. Inclinaui cor Psalm. L. xix
meum etc. I have bowed mye heart to keep thy righteous co^inaundementes for a
reward. Commends not saint Paul the Colossians, because they exercised
Loloss. i. Hebr. i^. xii*
char^^ee, and gave alines, propter spem repositam eis in coelis, for a reward
laid up in heaven, which they so doing hooped to have? Says he not that
Moses preferringe the He. xi. and xii.
reproaches, which he suffered for Christ's sake before the riches of Aegypte,
looked upon the reward to come* Says he not also, that Christ, when he
suffered, looked upon the joys, which he should have by his passion Now
hear what some The doctors s^n^ences.
of the old doctors say in this matter, and first saint Austens min^e,
which says. S^ pro remissione Tom. s^r. lx, de tempore.
peccatorum, and amore vite ae^e^nae, eleemosy na dederis, ^otum dextera facit.
If thou do give an alms for to obtain remission of thy sins, and for the
love of everlasting life, thy right hand does altogether, that is to say, it
is well done.

Saint Basyl says. Iustus est is, qui nos ad tolerandos agones, Basil. epist.
lx. Lege Bas. de ve ra virginitate et ad interrogationem, 135.
praemijs inuitat. God is righteous, which sterreth us with rewards to suffer
fightes. How often times did Christ move the people to live godly by
promysing to them everlasting life? Says he not amongst the rest, Hoc fac,
and viues? Do you this, that Luke. x.
is to say, help thy neadie neighbor with alms geuinge, and thou shall live
ever? Why then may not I leafullie live well, upon hope of that everlasting
life which he promises to us that do well, and continue in doing well unto
our lives end, as Paul did? Saint Paul, says. Non sunt condign passiones
etc. The afflictions, or tribulations Romans ix.
of this life, are not worthy the glory to come. Which he wrote to provoke
us, to suffer aduersitees patiently, hopyng to obtain thereby that reward.
This is manifestlye taught by the scripture, saying: Fiducia Tob. iiii*
magna erit omnibus, coram Deo summo, ele^mosyna, facientibus eam.

S. Chrysostom expresses the same playnelye writynge Chrisost. him. v^u Math.
thus. Vnusquis^ nostrum in nulla re alia, spem suam, nisi post dei
misecordiam, in morum honestate constituat. Let every one of us put his
affiaunce and trust in no other thing, next after Gods mercy, but in the
honesty of manners. Again he says Homi. lxvi. in. Ioannem. Math. xx.
expoundinge these Christ's words Non est meum dare vobis and ce. Dominus illo
compellebat, in gratia Dei primum, deinde in Iaboribus proprijs, omnem salutem
and spem gloriae reponere. Our Lord moved us thither, to put first all our
salvation, and all our hope and esperaunce of the glory to come, in Gods
grace, and then afterward in our own labors. Thirdelye To ^ii. co^tione* 4.
delazaro.
he writes after this sort. Ingens bonum in tuis ipsius benefactis collocare
spe^. It is a very good thing to put trust in thine own good deeds. Vt
scires quod eleemosina est beneficium, opusque tuu^ non simpliciter i^ ^^norum
amicitijs sed in amieitijs per ma^mona p^rtis, Christus iust^^ te co^fidere,
dicens. Facite v^bis amicos et^ Christ commanded thee to trust in amities
gotten throw Luc. xvi.
alms, saying. Make you friends by the mam man of iniquity. etc. To make
an^^de of this Chapter, did not S. Paul ii. Tim. iiii.
both trust in his good works, and also look to have a reward in heaven for
them, and not only for has faith, when he said? (...) certamen. etc. I have
foughten a good batte^^, I have kept my faith, and have ended my course of
pr^achynge and of good living, there now rests a crown of ryghteousnes,
which God a ryghteous judge shall render to me at that day, and not only
unto me, but unto them also, which do love his coming unto that judgment.
Wherefore I molte humbly and heartelye beseech God of his great mercy give
them grace, that are against this Catholic doctrine, to return unto the
verity again, and lead their lives godly in obseruyng of Gods holy
commandments, that they may iustlye put their ^^aunce and trust in their
own good works, as Gods (...).
gifts, and look stedfastlye to have and inioye the glory of heaven thereby,
through the merits of Christ our saviors blessed Passion, to whom with the
father and the holy ghost be all ^rayse, and honor for ever. Ame^.

The sixte chapter.
That Baptism is not only a sig^e and a mark of our justification and pro^^
^^on, (...) only a seal and confirmation of the same, as Peter Martyr T.
Lr^^^^ Ryd^^ye. Latechisme ^o. 35. 36. (...) ar^. xxvi. (...). xxi^.
and the authors of the (...), and articles (...) king Edward^^ the (...)
(...) and (...) say^, and teach^.

This error, good christian reader, is so manifestlye against Gods word,
^s nothing can be more. Therefore if me^ have any grace, and regard to Gods
^rueth, his honor, and their own soul^s health, or salvation, they will,
that yet are not inferte^ with these new opinions, beware of them, and abhor
the teachers of them, and they that are poisoned with any such doctr^ne, will
for sake it, and embrace again the very true doct^^ne of the cathelyke
church, when they shall see that there guides teachers, and preachers do so
(...) err against the word of GOD, as they do in this pre^^^^^ matter of
Baptism: but to entrepruise and begin this treatise, sa^d not S. Johan
Baptist* that Christ should baptize the people (...) the holy ghost? What is
that, if it ^e Math. ii^.
not Christ, as ^^^aye God, to give his: holy espi^^^ through grace* and
forgeuenes of ^^^nes, to the personage that is bapt^sed in baptism? Again was
Peter Martyr, and the makers of the articles annexed to the above re^e^^sed
cathechis^^, ^ither so ignorant, that they knew not, or so malicious against
the truth yt they would not believe this christ's, saying? Quisquis crediderit,
and baptizatus fuerit salu^^^^ Who soever, shall Mar. vl^^.
believe and ^e baptized, shall be saved? Is not this plain enough against this
heresy, and also against Peter Martyr, with all others the Lutherans, and
Swinglians, which say that Faith only justifies not man.
we are justified, and saved by faieth only? For does not Christ ^oyne here
faieth, and baptism together for the pourchasemente Read ye that are infected
with Peter Ma^^^rs doctrine and repent in time.
of our salvation? See thou not then, reader, that our new brethren were
very blind to say, that baptism is but a mark of our salvation and a
sealyng of it only. Will any man be yet so madd^ to follow their doctrine,
or to believe their teachinge, and corrupted books? But hear Christ again to
their further reproach, and coni^utation, saying. Nisi quis etc. Except a man
be borne again Ioa^. (...).
of water, and the holy ghost, he shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.
What is it, I beseech the, Christien reader, here to be borne again, of the
water and the spirit, if it be not a man to be borne spiritually through
grace, and forgeuenes of his sins the child of God, which was borne
naturallye of his mother the son Psalm. (...).
of Gods ire, or wrath, as saint Paul witnesses plainly? Affirms not also
Christ hear Ephesians. ii. Note this.
that a man enters into the realm or kingdom of heaven thorow^ his new
birth in baptism, and that without it, he shall not, ^e can enter into it? Is
this baptism to be but a Faieth only ^^ueth us not, as our new brech^en sa^
it do^th.
sign and a confirmation of our salvation, or faieth only to justify man? Is
it any other thing a man to be justified, than to be borne again through the
workinge of the holy ghoost, which is given to us in baptism? Ti iii.
See thou not the^ ones again, reader these Gospellers blindness, and
ignorance in the scriptures? Moreover, says not S. Paul, that we are grafted
into Romans vi.
Christ's mystical body, the church, through baptism* Says he not in an
other place that the Corrinthians were washed, made holy, and justified This is
against Peter Martyr which says that a child is a member of the church before
he ^e (...) baptized.
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in the spirit of god, meaning by
that washinge of them, their baptism? See we not then, that saint Paul
believed a man to be made righteous, or justified through baptism, and not by
fayeth only? Is this baptism then to be but Faith only i^stifieth us not.
a mark of our salvation, and justification? O notable and strange blyndnes
of these proceders, yea of these goers backward from the truth, and new
preachers. Why wynked they at this saying of saint Paul, Gala. iii.
Ye all are the sons of GOD, through faieth, which is in Christ Jesus? Quot
quot nam^ in Christo baptizati estis, Christum induistis. For as many of you
as be baptized in Christ, have put on Christ. What else meant sayn^t Paul
here, by putting on of Christ in Baptism, but the receauinge of him by grace,
that we made the children of God his father, not only by faith, (as this
letter declares) but also by baptism, should be clothed with him, and our
sins so remitted through his deserts and special grace, that they should
be thereby as it were covered and hid from the sight of God, that he will not
look upon them to punish us for them? Did these men never read, and
understand say^et Paul, affirmynge, that Christ cleanses us through the
fountain Ephe. v.
of water, and the word of life, to make us glorious without spotte, and
wrincle of sin? Will then any learned wise man yet believe this doctrine,
Faith only ^usti^eth us not.
which is, that only faith justifies man, and that baptism is but a sign,
or a mark only of it? Add to these sayings this testimony of S. Paul.
Cum apparuerit benignitas etc. After the bounteousnes and love of our savior
God, which he bare toward man appeared, he of his mercy saved us, and not of
our ryghteous works, through the fountain Baptism is not only a mark of
our iustifi^ation but a cause of it.
of renewynge and regeneration, or bearyng us again of the holy ghost, which
he powered into us plenteouslye, through Jesus Christ our savior, that we
being justified by his grace, should be heirs of eternal life, through
esperaunce or hoope. Who may not see here most plainly, that S. Paul
affirms a man to be saved, renewed, borne again, and justified by baptism,
and the holy Ghost also to be given to us in it? Where was then these men's
learning in the scriptures, when they so ignorauntlye taught the contrary,
saying: that baptism is but a token, mark, seal, and confirmation of our
justification Faith only justifies not man.
and salvation, and that only faith does justify us? Our Lord turn their
hearts to his troth again, out of this strange blyndnes, in which they
are. Finallye touching the rehearsal of the Scriptures, says not s. Peter
that as N^es i. Peter. iii.
a^ke or ship saved him, and seven other from drownynge in the floude* even
semblablye baptism saves us* Wherefore return ye Swinglians and Lutherans
to the Catholyke church, and forsakynge your errors and* naughtye opinions,
embrace the truth again, which the holy and notable doctors has taught us
in their books, as it appears manifestlye by some of their sentences, which
I have annexed to these scriptures, that thereby men may playnelye see, that
our new brethren are not members of Christ's catholic church, nor believe as
those fathers did, which are now Saints in heaven. (...) of some of the
ancient writers mi^des, and judgments, touchy^ge the ^^^ce and strength of
baptis^^, against Peter Martyr and all the (...) of ^^^e. Swinglians and (...)
w^^^h do affirm that it is but only a sign and a confirmation of our
justification, and no cause thereof.

Saint Austen writes after this manie^. Vnusquis^ ^am in Serm^. xvi. (...)
verbis apost.
iustificatione constitutus, accepta sc^licet. remissione peccatorum per
^auacrum regenerationis, accepto ^piritu sancto, proficiens de die in diem,
uideat, ubi sit. Let ever man, We do r^ceaue forgeuenes of our sins and
the holy ghost in and by baptism
^han he is justified, and remission of his synues being recea^^^^ through the
fountain of baptism, in which man is born again, and also when he has the
holy Ghoost through the same baptism, take heed, look or considre in what
estate he is profitinge or goinge forward daily in grace, and virtuous
lyuinge. This is veraye plainlye written, but hear him again writing more
plainly in To^. lib. contra (...) Pelag^anum.
this matter. Iustificato^ in ha^ uita secundum ^sta tria confertur, prius
lauacro regenerationis, quo remittuntur cuncta p^^^ata. Deinde congressione cum
uitijs, a quo^^ reatu soluti sumus. Tertio dum no stra exauditur oration, qua
dicimus. Dimitte nobis debita nostra and ce. That is to say, justification is
Mat. vi.
given to us in this life by these We are instified by in things and not by
faith only as our new ghoos^el^rs do sai falslye.
three things* First through baptism, in the which we are borne again and
a^ ou^ (...) are forgeuen us. Secondlye we are made righteous by fightinge with
our vices, from the gylte, or fault of which, we be loosed. Thirdlye
justification is given to us, when this our petition is gratiouslye hard:
Forgive us, O father, which art in heaven, our trespasses committed against
the, as we do forgive them, that trespass against us. Aqua exhibet
forin^ecus Grace is given by baptism.
sacramentum gratiae, and spiritus operatur intrinsecus benefici^m gratiae,
soluens uinculum culpae, reconcilians bonum naturae, regenerat hominem in vno
christo, ex uno Adam generatum. The water exhibiteth outwardly the sacrament of
grace, and the holy ghost works inwardelye the benefit of grace, loosynge
the bond of sin, and reconciling the goodness of nature: it does regenerat a
man in, or through one Christ, begotten of one Adam. What can our brethren
Faith only tustifieth not man.
thren say to this, which defend that faieth only iustifeth man, and that
baptism is but only a mark of our justification, and a seal of it? Hear
him again saying. Illo sacrosancto lauacro in choatur renouatio noui hominis.
Lib. i. demo^i^us Ma^^^ae. orum, ca^* xxxv.


The renewinge of the new man is begone through the holy lauatorie, or
fountaygne of baptism. Dicimus baptisma dare Then our new brethren are not
catholyke me^, but plain scismatikes.
in dulgentiam omnium peccatorum, et auferre crimina, no^ radere. We catholyke
men do affime, that baptism gives to us remission of all our sins, and
takes clean away our sins, and not as it were to shave them, that the
roots of them remayn still. Baptisma abluit peccata omnia, prorsus omnia,
dictorum facto Lib. i. ca. xiii. contra duas epist ^alogi^^^^rum.
rum ac cogitatoru^, sieve originalia, sieve addita etc. Baptism wassheth away
all sins, utterly al, of words, deeds, and thoughts, whether they be
originales, or added, that is to say, or actual Baptism puts away our
sins, and not faieth only.
sins, committed by man's own act and free will. How shamfully then are
Peter Martyr and all the new brethren deceived, which say that baptism is
no cause of our justification, but faieth only, and that baptism is but a
mark of it, and a confirmation, and yet say that they do setfurth the faieth,
and religion of the fathers and of the old catholyke church? He that lusts
to read more of this matter in saint Austens works, let him go^ to the pla
Lib. de (...) ad catech. lib. (...) cap. x.
ces alleged here, and noted in the margent of this treatise, and ^o. ix.
tract. v. in primam. Io. epist. To. x. ser. 128. de tempore tract. 80. in Io.
he shall be fullye satisfied of his belief herin, notwithstanding, that these
sentences already recited, may satisfy every good man. Hear how what was
saint Hieroins belief in this matter, which says. Eua^ gelij mihiplacet
religio, vt baptize mini in fanguine meo, per lauacru^ Hieroni. in ca. i. Esai^.
regeneration is, quod solum potest dimittere peccata, iuxta illud. Nisi quis
renatus fuerit etc. The religion of the Euangelie (says Hiero^ in Christ's
person) pleases me, that ye be baptized in my blood, through the lauatotie
of regeneration, which only can remitte sins, according to this saying of
Christ. Except a man be borne again of water and the holy ghost, he Joan.
iii. Note this reader.
shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. What can Peter Martyr and his
followers say to this plain sentence?

Will they arrogantlye deny these doctors sayings and those that follow
here, desiring that men should rather credit and believe them, than those holy
aunciente great clerks, as Latymer did of late in the disputations kept at
Oxforde, Latimer.
when he could not answer to them? Saint Hierom says, only: baptism is
the mean to obtain forgeues of our sins, and Peter Martyr says, faith
only is, and that baptism is only a sign of it, and no cause. He says
again. Christus baptisma Hieroni. in c^ ii^. ad Gala^^
in Iordanis fluento, ^dcir^^ quasi poeni^ens, quu^ esset a peccatis liber,
accepit, ut coeteros edoceret mundandos esse per baptisma, and in filios noua
spiritus adoptione regenerari: Christ received baptism in the river of
Iordane therefore, as a penitent person, although he was free from sin,
that he might thereby, Note this good reader well.
teach other men, that they must be made clean from the filthynes of sin
through baptism, and be borne again the sons of God by the adoption of the
holy ghost. Origin was of the self same belief in this Origenes hom. v. in
losu^.
mattier, which wrote this. P^r baptisma regenerationis expurgatae sunt animae
nostrae. Our souls are cleansed through baptism of a new birth. Again ^e
Homi. ii. in Le^^^cum. Cy^^illus.
and saint ^yrill followynge him, do say thus. A^di nunc, quantae sunt in
euangelijs peccatorum remissiones. Est prima, qua baptizamur in remissionem
peccatorum. Hear now how many ways there are in the euangeles to obtayn
remission of sins. The first is, by which we are baptized to pourchace
forgeuenes of sin. Deus abolet sine dubio uitium primae natiuitat is per
regenerationem. God without doubtaunce puts away the syn of our first
birth through our new birth in baptism. Chrysostom establishes this
doctrine saying. Futurum erat Chry^^ost. hom. xxxv. in eua^, Ioann^s.
baptisma plenum maximae potestatis, and gratiae purgaturum peccata pro mortuo
viuum effecturum. Baptism was to come, full of greatest puissaunce, or power,
and of grace, which should pourge or cleanse men's souls from their sins,
and make a man alive spirituallye, which was dead before through sin. Again
he says Aufert quidem Sermon. iiii. in ca. i^. ad Ephesios
deu^ in praesenti uita iniquitates, et per lauacrum regenerationis, et per
poenitentiam. God takes away men's sins in this Note this against the
solif^dians.
present life, both through baptism, and also through penance.
Iustificauit deus per lauacri Sermon. xv. in ca. ix. ad Romans
regenerationem. God has justified man through the lauatorie of
regeneration. He says also that our circumcision (baptism) brings to us
goods without number, and that it fills Hom xxxix. in Genes^os ca. 17.
us full of the holy ghostes grace, and that it has no time appointed for
the administration of it: Tertullia^ believed ye same, saying. Caro abluitur,
ut anima emaculetur. The body of man is Tertul. de re^ sur. car^^.
is washed, that his soul may be made clean from the spots of sin. Saint
Cyprian, consents to these fathers, when he says thus: Gratia de baptismi
Lib. i. ^pist. iii
sanctification^ percipitur. Grace is received through the halowinge of man's
soul in baptism. per baptisma spiritus sanctus percipitur. The holy ghost is
received by or through baptism. Oportet mundari, and sanctificari Lib. ii.
epist. iii. and lib. i. ^pi. xi*
aquam prius a sacerdote, vt possit baptismo suo peccata hominis, qui
baptizatur, abluere. The water must be first made clean and holy of the
prieite, that it ^alowinge of the fo^te Lib. in^. cp^. vii.
may through the washinge of it, wash away the man's sins which is
baptized. To be short he says that all the Deuels might and power is taken
from him in baptism, and the grace of the holy Ghooste is equallye given to
us in it.

Sciat diaboli nequitiam pertinacem Lib. 4. epist. 7.
us^ ad aquam salutarem valere, in baptismo autem omnes vires nequitiae
amittere. Lette^ man know that the dyuels stubborn euelnes or malice is
strong continually unto the water of salvation, but in baptism he loses all
his power to do evil. Quos parentalis labes infecerat, sic lauat baptismus, vt
Mark this saying.
nec actualis, nec originalis macula aliqua post ablutionem il^am vestigia
derelinquat. Baptism does so clean wash them, which Adams sin had
infected or defiled, that no spotte another of original sin nor of The^ the
co^cupisence remaininge in the child baptized is no sin.
actual after that washing away of fylth, leaves any print, token, or sign.
Is this baptism to be but only a mark of our justification, or a sealynge
of it? Is this faith only to justify us, and baptism to be no cause of
our ryghtuousnes, and justification? O how blind are these brethren, which
do teach that, and semblable other wicked doctrine. Our lord give them grace
to recule and retier to the troth from their heresies. Hear S. Basyll, which
Bas. de exhortati^ue ad baptismum.
was almost twelve hundred years sense. Baptisma captiuoru^ est redemptio,
debitoru^ remissio, mors peccatorum, animae regeneratio, amictus splendens,
character indeprehensibilis, coeli ite^, regni coelestis conciliatio,
adoptionis gratia. Baptism is a raunsom Many benefits obtained by baptism.
Mark. Ioa^. iii.
of prisoners, a forgeuenes of debtes, the death of sins, a regeneration of
the soul, a bright apparel, a figure that can not be perfitlye perceived, the
iourneye of or to heaven, the purchasyng of the heavenly kingdom, the grace
of adoption, or choosing of a man to be the child of God, and his heir. He
has also these sentences amongst many more. Tempus aliud alij opportunum
negocio quaerunt, ad baptismi ve* to salutem, tempus quodlibet acco^modum Ho^.
(...). (...). (...) baptism^.
sit, sieve dies, sieve nox, sieve hora, sieve quodcun^ temporis momentum. Men do
seek diverse times convenient for diverse busynesses, but every season may or
should be meet Our new brethren appointed a time to re^eyue baptism.
to receive salvation through baptism, whether it be day, or night, hour,
or any other short time. Again he says, Peccatum gratiam nobis per
baptismi regenerationem datam abo Hom. (...) in psalm. xxviii.
let. Sin puts away grace, given to us through baptism, in which we
are borne again. Seruamur, autem, quo modo? Nimiru^ regenerati per De exhorta,
ad baptisma.
gratiam, quae confertur in baptismo. We are saved, but how? Undoubtedly
through Gods grace, which is given to us in baptism. Was not then Peter
Faith! only saves not, how be it our new brethren say that it does.
Martyr very ignorant, when he affirmed and defended that our salvation
consisted only in God, and that baptism is but a ^igne, and an establishme^t
of our salvation? S. Martial Epist. i. cap. 5.
S. Peter's disciple ^areth. Reuiuiscit anima per baptisma. Iam sanctificat^,
and mundati estis aqua regenerationis. The soul of man waxes alive through
baptism: You are now made holy and clean from the fylthynes of sin, by or
with the water of baptism, in which ye are borne again. S. Gregore, Hieroms
master, affirms the same thing saying Lauacrum eorum qui peccauerunt, non
^ratione in s. ^auacrum.
qui peccant, remiss^onem continet. His scoler Eucherius was of the same
belief, which wrote thus. Salutis vnda nos a primi parentis culpa absoluit. The
water (...) libres regu^.
of salvation louseth us from the sin of our first father Adam, which is
original sin. Erred not then Peter Martyr when he taught at Oxforde, that a
Christian man's child obtayneth remission of original sin before he be
baptized, and that he shall be saved if he be not baptized at all? Which
doctrine ryseth of that other, that faith only does justify us. Arator an
old writer holds Lib i. cap. ii^^ in act, apost^.
with this catholyke doctrine saying:

(...) Sisol^ere cur a est
Faecundi crementa mali, faelicibus vndi^
Extinctu^ reparate genus, spes un a remitti,
Debita supplicii, post ^rimina Velle renas^i*
S. Alch^mus Archebyshop of An. domi^^^ Lib. 5. cap. 2^^^^ Genes.
Vienna an ancient writer has thus. Quu^ purgata sacris debitur culpa fluentis
(...) noua parientis lympha lauacri, Pro^^ post veteres, quos aedidit Eua,
reatus. C^audius Varius Victor, which was about xi. hundred years passed,
has set furthe Lib^ i^ Genesis
this godly doctrine, when he wrote thus. Posse perire homines docuit,
mergentibus vndis,
Oftendit flammis, ac vndis posse renasci.


S. Pauline, that was in Austens time and wrote to him, Natali. x. f. ^l. cis
is in this matter against Peter Martyr, and such others, writynge thus. Sic
pariter templum nouat hostis, gratiae fontem,
Fonsque nouus renouans homines. etc.


Eusebius confirms this catholic L. b. 9. capita. Euangelica demonstra.
doctrine, when he says. Non amplius per legitima sacrificia Mosaicae legis,
remissio illis peccatorum conciliatur, sed pe^ lauacri purgatione^, quod in
collecta ex gentibus ecclesia tradebatur. Remission of sin is no longer
purchased of them through the lawful sacrifices of Moses law, but through
the cleansynge of the fountain of baptism, which was given in the church
assembled of the Gentiles.

This is playnelye said, and as plain is this sentence, pronounced and
published in the first counsel holden at the city of Nicea, almost twelve
hundred years sense. Confiteo^ v^^^m baptisma in remissionem peccatorum. That
is to say. Note thi^ reader.


I do confess, or acknowledge, that there is one baptism, or that a man must
be ones baptized to obtain remission of sins. This is the Creed and belief
Ephesians. iiii. Peter martyr and the new brethren believe not a^ the holy
catholyke church does.
of al christian nations, and therefore. I may well conclude against Peter
Martyr, and the makers of the before recited catechism, and the articles
adjoined to the same, that they are not members of Christ's holy church,
because they say that baptism is but a sign, token, mark, and confirmation
of our justification, and of the remission of our sins, but that they are
forgeuen us by fayeth only before we be baptized, yea we being children
latelye borne and having no faith of our own. Saint Ambrose agrees herein
with the other fathers speaking Ambros^ in i. Cor.
of our wasshing in baptism, of our being hallowed in baptism, Faieth only
does not justify man, but baptism also.
and of our justification obtained therein, as Paul witnesses in that place.
Haec omnia beneficia puritatis, in baptismate consecuti noscuntur, quod est
fundamentu^ ^uangelicae ueritatis. Illic enim omnibus pec^ati^ depositis,
abluitur credens, and iustificatur in nomine domini, and spiritu dei nostri,
filius deo adoptatur. The people are known to have gotten all these benefits
of pureness in baptism Note this, reader, diligently.
which baptism is the foundation of the truth of the euangell. For in
baptism he that believes is washed clean from his sins, and is justified
in the name of our lord, and through the spirit of God is chosen the son of
God, al his s^nnes being put away from him. See thou not here playnelye,
reader, The virtue and strength, of baptism.
that saint Ambrose expo^nding saint Paul's words, declares that he mente,
that we are justified in baptism, and do receive thereby the holy ghost,
obtain remission of al our sins, and are made the sons or children of God
by adoption, which altogether Peter Martyr denies ungodly? Ought he then to
be credited and believed in his other opinions, which does so ignorauntlye
err in this mattier against the holy scriptures, the general cou^selles, the
doctors, the ancient custom, and the belief of the catholic church? Hear
the holy man Leo the first Pope of that name, which ^eo sermon primo de
^a^^^^^ate Christi.
was above M. C. years since, and says. Per baptismatis sacramentum, spiritus
sancti factus es templum. Thou art made the temple of the holy Ghooste
through the sacrament of baptism. Maximus an ancient great learned man was
of the Homi. de symbolo apost.
^ame belief, when he wrote thus. Sancta est ecclesia, quae baptismi
sacramento, peccatorum contagione detersa, terrarum incolas transmittit ad
coelum. The church is holy, which sends the dwellers of the earthes unto
heaven, through the sacrament of baptism, the infectio^ of sins being
thereby wyppen or taken away. This is manifestlye spoken of these holy
doctors. I pass over all the rest of the old doctors sentences, boeth
because these are sufficient to persuade every man, that is not obstinatlye
given to abide in his error, and also for that, that I would not be over
tedious to the reader. Our lord of his infinite goodness, and most tender
mercy grant them grace to amend, and to forsake this wicked error, and all
others their abominable opinions, and to return again unto Christ's
catholyke church leauinge their schism, to the honor of God and the
salvation of their own souls. which Christ bought most dear^^e with the shed
dynge of his precious blood*

The preface to the vii. chapter.
That vows ought to be kept both of men, and also of women, which is against
Peter Martyr, and the whole ^ab^^ment of the new brethren, and especially
against the married monks ^hanons, Fre^rs, and N^nnes.

THen I perceived, reader, that many, which had made vows to God of
perpetual chastitee, we^ married through the enticement and alluringe of the
deuell, the fleashe, and the world, and that their doings was against the
word of God, to their own uttermost damnation, I thought it good, and
needful breifelie to treat of this mattier, that they, which are offenders
therein, might plainly see, in what perell they stand, and avoid it in time.
And for as much as many men, especially such as are detained, and e^peched
with many great a^^ayres, delight in things brefelye setfurthe, I will use in
this treatise a breuitee of words, and allege but a certain of the old
doctors sentences writ in this controversy. But I will commence and begin
with the scriptures, and then address to the^ the holy fathers minds thereof,
that every man may see thereby, both that this doctrine is not new (as our
new men say) and also how ab^minablye M. Luther the friar, Marte^ Bucer the
friar, Peter Martyr the chanon of saint Austens rule, Johan Hoper the white
monk, Couerdale the friar, Ferrer the chanon, and semblable others ^otaries,
^^^ed, and brought many mo^ into their errors, and heresies, God permittynge
them so euidentlye and shamefullye to fall for the punishment of their sins,
as he suffered the Gentyles to run headlynge, as it were, into vices most
detestable, and into a reproved mind (as saint Paul Romans (...)
witnesses) so to be avenged on them for their former offe^ses. But I will set
upon this entreprise, and dispatche it breifelye, because ye right worthy
doctor Thomas Marten, has written Doctor Martens book agai^^ priests
marriages.
thereof both learnedly and largely. Thou shall good reader, understand that
all such places of the scripture, which do require of us generallye the
perfourmance and accomplisheme^t of our vows godly made unto God, does show
that men must neades upon pain of everlasting damnation, keep, not only the
vow of chastitee, but also of poverty, of obeisaunce, and of al others.
Wherefore let no man be offended with me, that I am so plain in this mattier
against their breakinge of their vows, for the truth ought to be pleasant
to every good man, which regards Gods glory, and his own salvation. Saint
Paul reproved the Galathian^ Gala. iiii.
very sharplye, because they were offended with him for teachinge them the
truth.

If any man be displeased with this my setting furthe of Gods holy verity,
he shall give to me a just occasion to say unto him, as S. Paul said unto
the Galathians. Who has bewitched and empesched Gal. iii. iiii.
thee, that thou obeyest not ye truth? Our Lord Jesus Christ, which is (as he
said) ye John. xiiii.
verity, give the^, against whose faults this traicte is written, grace to
remember that Christ said. Si veritatem dico. etc.

If I tell you the truth, why John. ix.
do you not believe me? He that Note this,
is of God, does here the words of God, ye therefore do not hear Gods
words, because ye are not of God. What man is so stonye hearted, that these
words can not move him?

Does not these Christ's words declare, that they are not Gods children, nor
the children of salvation, which will not believe and follow the truth opened
to them? I speak against them here, that vowed poverty, and renounced utterly
ye propriety of goods, when the^ were professed, and do not accomplish that
their vow, but are beneficed, yea have diu^^s benefices, dignities, and
promotions, and do gather together thereby much riches. But this should not
offend any man, for I teach them Gods word, and truth. Which embrased of
them, and followed, shall (as Christ said to the Jews) deliver them from the
peril of John. ix.
damnation. Will not such votaries call to their minds this Christ's saying?
What does it profi^e a man, if he John, xvi
gain all the world, and thereby lose his soul? What exchange shall a man
make for his soul? Were we not al borne naked, and shall bear nothing out of
this world with us, as S. Paul says

Wherefore let every man continue i. Tim. vi.
(as Paul commands us) in his own vocation, and i. Cor. vii.
serve God therein godly, let no man look backewarde with Lothes wife lest he
perish. Let every man remember, that Christ said. No man putting Luc. ix.
his hand to the plowe, and lokynge behind him, is meet for the kingdom of
heaven.

S. Paul says again, that ii. Tim. ii,
no man shall be crowned, except ^e fight lawfullye, that is t^ say: no man
shall obtain the crown of bliss, except he fight against the Deuell, the
ficshe, and the world, manlye and couragiouslye, in his own calling, degree*
and estate, according to the laws, and ordinances of his vocation, and
profession. ^herfore to end this preface, I advise, yea God does advise, every
man and woman, Psalm. lxxv.
which has vowed chastity, and poverty to pe^fourme that their godly
vows to the advancement, and increase of Gods honor, and to their own
salvation, that at the end of their mortal lives, Christ may say unto
them, amongst the rest: our good and faithful seruanntes, enter ye Math. xxv.
into the joys of your Lord. Unto whom be laud, and honor for ever, and
ever. Amen.

The seventh chapter.
That al godly vows, as the vow of (...) o^ continual chastic^e, promyse^ ^y
amydowe, the vow of wylful or volu^ ta^^^ po^^rt^e, and semb^ables, ough^^ by
Gods law to be observed under, ^he ^ayne of everlasting damnation.

WHen I saw, good reader, that very many of our cou^treymen and women now of
late in the misera^^e alteration of Christ's holy religion, which was of late
in this Realm) were run headlynge into a dampnable estate through breach
of their vows, I thought it needful, and my bounden du^^^e to advertise them
thereof, that they seeing in what peril and danger they stand in, might by
Gods succor and ^yde avoid it in time.

Wherefore let them waygh diligently these places of the holy scripture, which
are manifestlye against their doings. Si quis viroium votum domino vouerit,
aut se constrinxerit iuramento, Nu^. xxx.
n^n faciet irritu^ verbum suum, sed omne quod premisit, implebit. If any man
shall ^ake a vow to our lord God, or shall bind him self with an oath, let
him not break his word, but he shall fulfill all that he has promised. Can
there be any thing more plainlye, Note this ye votaries and beware of danuger.
spoken against them, that do break their vows and promysses made to God of
chastity, and voluntary poverty? See thou not here reader, that religious
persons, which have vowed poverty, and have willynglye forsaken the
propriety of worldly goods, do break that their vow, The vow of poverty.
and^ promise, when they take benefices, prebendes, and such other promotions,
enrichynge them selves thereby, as much as other do, that never made any
such vow? Why read they not this verse of David? Vouete, et reddite domino
deo Psalm. lxx^.
vestro omnes qui in circuitu eius ^ffertis munera. Vow and render your vows
to your lord God, ye all men that do offer gifts unto God in his circuit.
Does not GOD require here the accomplishement and perfourmaunce of all godly
vows made to him? Solomon sets forth the same doctrine, Eccle. v.
saying. Si quid vouisti Deo, ne moreris reddere, displicet enim (...) stulta
et in^idelis promi^sio, sed quod^unque voueris read, and ce. I^ thou haste
vowed any thing A vow of ^onectie ought to be kept, and all others lawfullye
made.
to God, tarry not to render it. For a folyshe and an unfaithful promysse
displeases him, but what thing so ever thou haste, or shall vow, perform
it. Who sees not here euidentlye (except he be blinded with carnal
affection) that the holy ghost forbids here ye breaking of all leafull vows,
and godly promises, both of chastity, and volu^tarie pouerte? What mean
then our vow breakers, when they can not abide him that teaches them their
duties to god for their salvation? Ought they to be angry with him, that
tells them the truth? Why remember not they these Christ's words? Ma^th.
xvi. Man. viii.
What shall it profitte a man, though he should win all the whole world,
if he loose his own soul? But let them hear the scripture again, for a
further, and a more sufficient proffe of this mattier. Quum D^ut. xxiii.
uotum uoueris domino deo ^uo, non tardabis reddere, quia require^ illud
dominus deustuus, and si moratus fueris, reputabitur tib^in pe^ catum. Si
nolueris polliceri, absq peccato eris. Quod autem egressu^ est de labijs tuis,
obseruabis, and facies, Mathe this ye vo^^ries and repent the breach of your
vows in time
sicut promisisti domino deo tuo, and propria voluntate, and ore tuo locutus
es. When thou haste vowed a vow unto thy Lord God thou shall not be slack to
pay it, because thy lord God will require it of thee, and if thou shall be
slow or slack, to perform thy vow, thou shall sin. If thou will not make
a vow, thou shalt be without sin, concerning this point. But thou shalt
keep, and do that thing, which is ones gone out of thy lyppes, as tho^ haste
promised to thy lord God, and haste spoken with thine own free will, and
mouth. Oh how manifest is this text against the breakers of their vows of
chastitee, voluntary pouerte, obedience, and all other that are Read this.
good and godly, as these three are? Why remember they not that Christ would
not suffer a man, which he had called to be a preachour of his word, to bury
his Matthew. viii Theoph. Luc. ix.
own father, declarynge thereby that every man should serve God in his own
vocation, and not leave it, or do any thing repungnaunt to the same Does not
Christ exhort us to remember Luc. xvii. Genesis xix.
Lothes wife, that we look not backewarde from our vocation, and calling?
Said not Christ also to one that said, I will Luc ix.
follow the o Lord, but let me first take my leave of them that are at home
in my house? No man puts his hand to the plowe, and looks back, or
behind him, is apt to the realm, or kingdom of God? And does not they look
behind the^, which forsake their profession, and kind of life wyllingly
chosen to serve God in? Saint Paul commands, yea Christ speakinge in i.
Cor. vii. ii. Cor. xiii.
him, that every man should abide in his own vocation. Does they so, that
break their vows of chastitee, and poverty? Did not saint Peter by the
puissaunce, and power given to him of God, stryke Ananias, and Saphyra to death
for breaking Act. v. Fulgentius epistola i. Cyprianus lib. i. ca. xxv. aduersus
Iudaos.
their promise, and vow made to the holy ghoost, which was in reseruiuge to
themselfes a piece of the money gotten by sale of their field, where they
had promised to give the whole unto thapostles, for their sustina^ce and the
pooers, as then had done many good men, willynglye Act. iiii.
without any commandment of God, followinge therein only Christ's counsel?
Saint Basyl Matthew. xix. Lib. de institutione ad vitam perfectam.
proves by this place, that men ought to keep all their vows of virginity,
contine^ce, chastity, pouerte, of abstine^ce, of fasting, and semblable others.

Saint Bid, which was Lib. i. ca. xxiii. hist. anglorum
our countreeman, and lived above. DCCC. threscorre years passed, witnesses
that saint Gregory the first Pope of that Anno. do. (...).
name, sent one saint Austen with almost forty other learned good men into
this our country England to convert it unto the faith of Christ again, and
that when the king Edilberthus, and many others had received the faieth of
Christ, the said Austen was made bishop of Cantorburie, and that then he
wrote to the Pope Gregory, to be instructed of him, how the Bishops and the
clergy should live amongst the people, or how many portions should be
made of the things, which through the Lib. 8. ca. xxvii histaecclese
Anglorium.
faithful peoples oblatio^s came to the altar, and how the bishop should use
himself in the church. Unto which demaundes the Pope saint Gregory made
this answer. The accustomau^ce of the apostles seat How bishops should
despende their goods
at Rome is to teach bishops created, or made, that of every stipende, which
comes to them, four parts or portions ought to be made, one for the bishop,
and his family, and to receive strangers, and to keep hospitality with. The
second for the nourriture and sustentation of the clergy. The third part
should be given to the poor people. The fourth ought to be reserved and
dispended upon the repayringe of his churches: But for as much as, says he,
thye brotherhoode has been instructed in the rules of solitary lyuinge,
Religious men, albeit they were bishops ought to have nothing proper.
and of religion, you may not live seuerallye from your clerks, ye must
ordeyne this conversation, and thus lead your life in England, as the fathers
did even at the beginnynge of Christ's church, amongst the which every
thing that they Act. (...). iiii.
had, was commen, and they had nothing propre. This leasson gave that holy
father saint Gregory the Pope unto that bishop, which was before a religious
person, and to his companions, that were Monks. Which counsel being
grounded Note this.
upon the scriptures, and their vow, all religious men and women ought to
follow upon pain of damnation. But I The old. doctors upon vows.
will recite some of the old godly fathers sayings, written of them against
priests pretensed marriages that they may see euidentlye, how they err in the
defense of them, and that they stand in danger of everlasting damnation
continuynge in that opinion.

S. Fulgentius writteth these Fulgentius epi. prima de debi to coniugali.
words. Saints Paul pronounces that wydowes are in danger of damnation,
because they have a mind to i. Tim v.
marrye after they have professed chastitye. Quam sit autem malum, quamque
solicit effugiendum, si quis de hoc, quod domino vouerit, aut retinere, aut
repetere aliquid, mortificatione, pertentet, exemplo sunt Ananias and (...). v.
Saphyra, quos de precio agri quandam partem infoeliciter subtrahentes, non
solum vox apostolica, tanque diuini iuris peruasores incre puit, sed etiam
seueritas iustitiae coelestis occidit. Si quis igitur rem iam deuotam, carnali
victus illecebra, crediderit denuo reposcenda^, non est legitimus rei
possessor, sed diuini iuris pronunciatur inuasor. Nec immerito continenciae iam
deuotae violator immu^dus audit, quod pecuniae auarus audiuit. haec ille. Is
not this manifestly written against breakers of Mark this ye votaries and
vow breakers.
their vows of chastity, and volu^tarye poverty? Se we not here most
manifestly what great indignation of god, yea what great damnation in hell the
votaries do incur, which voluntarily have broken their vows, and now do
obstinatly still persevere in their fleshly and fylthy wickedness, most blyndly,
most boldly, and most desperately drowned in carnal lust without recovery or hope
of ame^dement? Do not all men se here also how they have fallen from sine to
sin, so yt ever one sin has been punisshed by an other more grievous: And
this is one of the greatest punishme^tes yt may be, But of this matter I will
by Gods help, speak more at large in another treatise.

Some of the ancient doctors sentences, written against the marririages of
them, which had made a vow of continual chastity, and continency.
O^cumenius an old Greake writer thus has, declaringe (...) i. Cor (...).
these Sayncte Paul's words: If a Vyrgen do marry she synneth not. Varginem
hoc loco appellat, non eam, quae Deo consecrata est, sed innuptam puel lam. Nam
quae Deo consecrata est. (...).
si nupserit, Christo reddit cum adulterum, cui nubit. When S. Paul says, yt
if a virgin marrye, she offends not God, he calls not her in this place a
virgin, which is whollye given to God by a vow of chastity, but a damsel or
a wenche unmarried. For if she marry, Read ye married no^nes and beware of
danger.
which has vowed chastity, or virginity, she makes him, to whom she
marries, an aduoutrer against Christ her husband. The godly and good
Christian Emperor, Iouinian Tripar. histo. lib. 7. cap. 4.
made a law, that who so ever married a nonne, or a virgin, that had vowed
chastity, should suffer death therefore.

S. Hierom is plainly against Hierom. lib. i. contra Iouinia (...).
the marriages of them, that have vowed chastity, writing after this sort
upon these words of Paul. If a virgin do marry, she does not sin. (...)
Lim. v.


Non illa virgo, quae semet cultui Dei dedicauit. Harum enim si quae nupserit,
habebit damnatinem, quia primam fidem irritam fecit. Paul saying, if a virgin
marrye, she synneth not, did not mean that virgin, which had once for ever
given her self by a vow of chastity, or virginity, to serve, or worship
God. For if any one of them shall marrye, she shall be damned, because she
has broken her first faith, given to God, when she vowed to him virginity.
Peter Martyr following therein the friar Decolampadius, Bucer, and other the
Lutherians, and Swinglians, which married against their professions and vows,
affirms and defends with a shameless face, that it is not lawefull to vow
continual chastity, and that men and women may without fault marrye,
although they had vowed the (...). Is this to refourme Christ's religion
defaced (as they at the least do pretend) and (...) it again to her (...)
estate and pureness, (...) was at the beginning of the church? But hear S.
Hierem again saying: Virgins quae post consecrationem nup (...) i. contra
Iouimanum.
serint, non tam adulterae sunt, qua^ in cesiae. The virgins which do marry
after their profession, are not so much aduoutresses, as sinners against their
promise made to their spiritual espouse Christ. Read him ad Sabinianum,
where he says, that he which marries a no^ne, commits aduoutrie against
Christ her spouse, and husband. Hear now Epiphanius, which was almost xii.
hundredth Epiphanius co^tra apostolicor^ haeres^. anno do mini. 369.
(...) passed, and says. Tradlde unt sancti Dei apostoli, pec (...) esse post
decretam (...) ad nuptias conuerti: Et scrip^^ apostolus. Si nupserit virgo non
peccauit. Quo modo (...) hoc cum (...) concordar? Imo (...) virginem dicit,
quae non est dicata Deo. and ce. The holy Apostles of GOD have The ap^stles
law that vows should be kept.
^aughte, that it is sin, to (...) unto marriage after vir ginifie is decreed
to be kept.

And the Apostle Paul has written. If a virgin do marrye she has not
sinned. How th^^ does this saying of S. Paul agree with that the Apostles
teaching? Yea the Apostle rather speaks of that virgin, which is not
offered, or given to the service of God by a vow of chastity. Ambrose
accords with this godly doctrine when he says. Melius est nubere, quam
Ambrosius ad virgine^ lapsa^. cap. 5. (...). i. de iustificatione virginis.
cap. (...). et lib. 3. virginitate.
uri Hoc apostolicum dictum non ad pollicitam pertinet, ad non du^ velatam.
Coeferum, quae se spopondit Christo, and sanctum velamen accepit, iam nupsit,
iam immortal iuncta est viro. Et iam si voluerit nubere communi lege connubij,
adulterium perpetrat, ancilla mortis efficitur. It is better to marrye then to
burn. This saying of the apostle appertains not to her, which is promised to
god by a vow, to her that is not yet covered with a vele. But she, which
has promised herself to Christ to be his espouse, or wife, and has taken
the holy veil, is now married, is now joined unto an imortal husband. And if
she will now marie by the commen law of marriage, she commits aduoutrie, she
is made the bond servant of death. Is it not then a great madness to follow
Peter Marryr, August. lib. (...) ca. vii. de peccatorum etc. Lib. de hares. ca.
lxxxii.
doctor Thomas Cranmer, and such others defending the heresy of Iouinian,
condemned by saint Austen, saint Hieroin and many other notable clerks, and
to forsake these holy fathers lessons, the determinations of diverse
counselles, Con. Elibertinu^ ca. xiii. sub Siluestri. Con. Chalce. cap. xvi.
established with the word of God? Our lord God of his render goodness, and
great mercy take this blyndnes out of men's hearts, that they may return unto
the catholyke church, out of the which they are gone, and are clean divided
from it by a scisme most dainuable, when they forsook the mother church (as
saint Ireneus and saint Cyprian calls it) which is Rome. The great
learned man saint Basil wrote much Basillius lib. (...) virginitate.
against this heresy, for he says. Virginitatem domino professae, deinde a
carnis voluptatibus conciratae, scortationis peccatum, nuptiarum nomine uolunt
uelare. and ce. They have professed virginity to our Lord, and afterward
Read ye Nuns, that have married.
being sterred by the lusts or pleasures of the flesh, would cover their
horedome with the name of marriage. What can Peter Martyr the chanon, and other
votaries, that have married women, say to these ancient doctors sayings
Would they that men should rather believe their ignoraunte judgments, tha^
these fathers excellent learned sentences? Does they not plainlye de^clare
themselfes to be schismarikes, and no me^bres of the catholyke church, when
they dissent from these, and the other holy writers belief and teachinge?
Again sau^^ Basil speaking of religious persons, ^ ^ and xv.
which had de vowed chastitee such as are Monks, Nuns, and Chano^s says.
Horum vnusquisque si posteaque inter (...) rum fratrum focietatem (...) fuerit,
factam (...) resciderit, is perinde aspici debet, ut qui in deum peccauerr,
(...) uidelicet professionis testem adhibuerit, cuique se uoto solemni
obligarit. Etenim qui seipsum deo semel deuouit, hicsi ad aliud deinde uitae
genus transierit, sacrilegij se scelere obstrinxit, quip pe qui seipsum deo,
cuise consecrauerat, ueluti superfuratus sit. If any one of these, after he is
ones chosen into the co^paignie of the other brethren, shall break his
profession, Read this ye votaries and repence the breaking of your vows.
he must or ought so to be looked upon, as he, which offended God, whom he took
a wirnesse of his profession, and to whom he bound himself with a solemn
vow. For he, which has made to God a solem^e promise, or vow, if he go
afterward to an other kind of life, has bounden himseire with the heinous
sin of sacrileage because he as it were, steals himself from God, unto
whom Lege Basilium epi. lxiii. libro constitutionum monasticarum (...). and ad
(...) nachu^ lapsum.
he had wholly given himself. Is not this plainly spoken against the chanon
Peter Martyr, and seinblable others, that have broken their vows of chastitee,
and voiuntarie pouerte? In an other place saint Basil lays Epist. ad
virginem lapsam.
a great reproach to a virgyn, that had brooken the solemn vow of her
profession made with the vesture, or habit of a professed Nun. I let pass
many other sentences of this holy doc tour. To be breife saint Auste^ is
against this heresy, which writes thus. Quod cuique anteque uouisser, August.
lib^. cap xxiiii. ad p^llentium.
licebat, quum id se nu^quam facturum vouerit, non lice^it. Si id uouerit, quod
uouendum fuit, sicut est perpetua virginitas vel co^ tinentia, post experta
connubia solutis a uinculo coniugali, uel ex consensu uonentibus etc. He that
The vow of vouertie. ought to be kept.
has, says he, made a vow of perpetual virginitee, or of continence ever
to endure al his life (...) else of pouerte, he may in no case breeke that his
vow, because our Lord has commanded that vows should be kept, saying
thus. Vouete, and Scal. lxxiii.
reddite domino deo^^uestro.

Make ye a vow, and render it to your lord God. Also he proves by this
sentence of David now alleged here, that it is against Gods commandment to
breeke a vow of chastitee, and other vows, when he says after ^ Armentar^^
riparium and (...) nam epi. (...).
this manier. Non re vouisle paeniteat, imo gaudeiam tibi sic no^ licere, quod
cum detrimento tuo licuisset. Do thou not repent, that thou haste vowed, nay
rather rejoice, and be glade that that thing is not now leeful for the to do,
which thou myghtest have done leefullye with thye dommage. To be breife, and
to let pass many of his sayings in this matter, he says. Quid ait
apostolus de quibusdam quae To. viii. in psalm, lxxv. i. Limo. v.
uouerunt and non reddiderunt? Habentes inquit, damnationem, quia primam fidem
irritam fecerunt. Quid est primam fidem irritam fecerunt? Vouerunt, and non
reddiderunt. What says the apostle Lege cum in psalm. lxxxiii. de bono
viduitatis ca. ix. x. xi.
S. Paul of certain wydowe, which have vowed chastitee, and have not kept
their vows? They have, says Paul, damnation, because they have broken their
first fayeth, what thing Note this reader dili^entlye.
is that, they have broken their first faieth? They have vowed, and kept not
their promise, or vow. Who wyil then give any further credence to our new
gospellers in any one point of their damnable opinions, saying they do herin
err so manifestly both against the holy scriptures, and the ancient doctors
expoundinge the same to us? Also he affirms that no Lib de bono viductatis
ca. 8
woman, which, has vowed cha stitee may leefullye afterward marrye, but she
runs thereby into everlasting damnation: and groundeth his saying upon the
text of saint Paul last above rehearsed. But hear now saint 1. Limo. v.
Chrysostom, homi. de fide, spe, and charitate.
Chrysostom in this mattier saying thus Si aliud gesseris, quod voueris, and
fidei nomen perfida uoluntate dissolueris, non modo praemiorum compos esse non
poteris sed and destinato supplicio, necesse est, subiugeris. If thou shalt
do Read this ye votaru^^
any thing against thy vow, and shall breeke the name of faith. or
faithfulness, with an unfaith full will, thou shall not only lose thy reward,
but thou must needs be punished accordynglye as God has determined. Again
he writes thus expoundynge these S. Paul's words. If a vyrgin do marrye
(...). 4. homi. xix. in. i. Co. vii
she synneth not. Neque de ea, quae sibi virginitatem elegerit, loquitur,
quippe quae iam peccauit. Nam si viduae, quae secundis se nuptijs alligarunt,
iudicium subeunt, sise mel uiduitatem elegerint. multo magis virgins. Saint
Paul saying, if a virgyn do marrye, i. Lim. (...)
she synneth not, speaks not of her, that has ones chosen to herself
virginitee, because she has now sinned. For if wydowes, which has bound
themselfes to the second marriages, are under the perell of dampnation, if they
ones have chosen by a vow to continue widows, and after that do marye, much
more virgyns. What can be moore playneiye spoken against the votaries, Nuns,
Monks, Chanons, and Freers, that have married against their vows made to God?
Chrysostom says also that the marriages of Monks are worse tha^ Tom. 2.
(...). 21. ad Theodorum monachu^, vbi ait monachum contrahentem (...) incurrere
adulio (...) eo peiu^ cri designare.
aduoutrye. See thou not the^, good reader, evidently that Peter Martyr,
doctor Thomas Cra^mer late archebishoppe of Ca^torburye, Ridlye, Latymer, John
Hoper, Rogers, doctor Crome, and all the rest of that sort are nor of the
catholyke church, out of the which there i. (...) iii.
is no salvation, but schismatykes, and divided clearelye from the company of
them that shall be saved, seeing they believe not as these holy fathers did,
which are now saints in heaven? Is then any man so folishe to believe their
doctrine, touching the blessed sacrament of the altar, the holy Mass, and
such other mattiers of our faieth, lately called into question, and doubt, by
them, after they had forsaken the unity of the catholyke church? But hear
saint Cypria^, which was almost ^ ^.
m. c c c. years sense and a holy Martyr. Quu^ christus virgine^ sua (...)
dedicata^, et sa^ctitati suae (...) iacere cum altero cernit, quam indignatur,
et irascitur, et quas paenas incestis eiusmodi coniunctionibus co^minatur? When
Christ sees his virgin, given to him by a vow of virginitee, and appointed
to his holiness, lie with an other, how much is he moved and angry? And what
peynes threteneth he to such an vuleful marriage, which is worse then
aduoutrie? Again he says. Cypria. de du plici martyrio. Lege eu^ de habitis
virginum.
Nonne uide mus totu^ ecclesiae coetum vultus dimittere, atque erubescere,
quoties aliqua virgo, quae christo nupserat, dilapsa ex angelico contubernio,
defecit ad stuprum, aut coniugium? Do we not see all the whole compaigine of the
church look down with their countenaunces, and to be ashamed, as often as
any virgyn, which had married to Christ by a vow of virginity, fallen down
from the company of angels, forsook her profession by committiuge of
horedome, or by marryage?

The ho^ye Pope Leo first of that name, which was above. xi. hundred years
passed commended wonderfully of the general counsel holden at Calcedo being
therein assembled D C. x^r. learned fathers, says this of Monks. Propositum
Leo primus Epist. 9 (...).
monachi proprio arbitrio, aut voluntate sulceptum, deseri non potesta^sque
peccato. The purpose of a monk taken with his own arbitriment or will, can
That had vow^d chasti^^e and p^^ ^ertie.
not be left vndoue without syane. But let this be said in this
controversy, as sufficient to establishe the troth thereof, and to overthrow
the contrary. Now hear a little moore of the vow of poverty, and of the
keeping of it, albeit, that which is already spoken thereof, might be
sufficient, for the ignorant to learn the truth of this matter, and to see
in what danger they be, which do break that vow.

That the vow of poverty ought to be observed of monks; nonnes, chanons,
frere^s, and all other religious persons upon the pain of damnation.
For as much as, good reader, many good men think that it is lawefull for a
man that has made a vow of voluntary poverty, to enjoy rychesses in
propre, or to have the propriety of goods, I thought it very necessary to
traicte briefly of that matter, that men might the better know the truth
therein, for the dilchargynge of their own consciences toward God.

The authorities ufore written, out of the scriptures touching vows, do
prove sufficientlye that y^ a man, or woman has vowed willingly poverty, to
have nothig proper, he or she is bound to keep this same vow under pain of
everlasting damnation: and the same does ye holy doctors of the church teach,
amongst the which these are some of their sayings that here follow. S. Auscen
intreatinge of monks, ^ ^ ^
says. Nemo quicquam possidet propriu^, nemo cuiquam onerosus est. None of
them possesses any thing as his own proper goods, no man is onerous to an
other. Also he says Aug^ib^^. cade ciuitace dei
that the Apostles (the life of whom monks should follow in that point)
professed and vowed poverty, which S. Peter declared, when he said to Math.
xix.
Christ. Behold, we have left all things. Alius vult relinquere Ang^n psal^
omnia sua, distribuendo ea pau peribus, et ire in communem vitam, in
societatem sanctorum, magnum votu^ vouit. Vnusquisque reddat deo, quod vouit.
An other man does vow to forsake al his goods, distributinge and deuidynge
them to the poor, and to go into a common life, wherein all things are common,
and nothing propre, and to go into the fellowship of the holy, he has made a
great vow to God. Let every man pay, or re^^dre to God, that thing, which
he has vowed to him. Saint Chrysostom was of that same Tractatis aduersus
vituperatores monasticae vitae.
mind, saying. In Monasteries all things are commen, meum, and tuum, mine,
and thine, which de trouble all the whole world are taken away there. Item
he says: In monasterijs no^ Ta^. homi^viis ad pop. Antiochenum.
est meum, and tuum, sed hoc uerbu^ eliminatum est, infinitorum causa bellorum.
In monasteries is not mine and thine, but this word, which is the cause of
infinite battaylles, is put out of those houses.

The holy Pope Vrbane, an Vrbanus papa lib. de bonis ec clesiarum and re ru^
co^munione.
ancient great clearke writes after this sort. Quicunque vestru^ communem
suscepit uitam, et nihil se habere vouit, videat ne pollicitationem suam
irritam faciat, sed hoc, quod domino est pollicitus, fideliter custodiat; ne
damnationem, sed praemium sibi acquirat etc. Which so ever of you, says he,
has taken upon him a common Note ye beneficed votaries.
life, and has made a vow to have nothing propre, let him see, or take heed
and beware, that he break not his promise, but keep faithfullye that thing,
which he has promised to our Lord, that he get not to himself damnation,
but a reward of God. Our lord give that grace to all votaries, which have
made a vow of poverty, to beware of breakinge of it, least they for lucre and
gains of a little worldly goods, loose the eternal, and heavenly riches.
Amen.

But hear saint Hierom saying. Non est ubi eadem causa, quae To. i. epis. i
ad helioderum.
coeteris. Dominum ausculta dicentem. Si uis perfectus esse, vade, and vende
omnia, and da pauperibus, and sequere me. Tu autem perfectum re fore pollicitus
es. Nam cum derelicta militia, te cast rasti propter regna coelorum, quid aliud
quod perfectam secutus es vitam. Perfectus autem seruus Christi, nihil praeter
christum habet. Aut si quid praeter christum habet, perfectus non est. Et si
perfectus non est, cum se perfectum fore deo pollicitus sit, ante mentitus est.
Os autem, quod me^titur, occidit animam, Igitur ut concludam, Sapienc. (...).
si perfectus es, cur bona paterna desideras? Dominum fefel listi, si perfectus
non es. Alia est monachorum causa, alia clericoru^. Clerici pascunt oues, ego
pascor. Again he says unto a monk. To. i. ad vusticum.
Tu vero, si monachus esse vis, non uideri, habeto curam, non rei familiaris,
cui renunciando, hoc esse caepisti, sed animae tuae. But if thou will be a
monk in deed, and not to appear only, care not for the goods belonginge to
thy family, or household, which thou haste forsaken, to be a Monk, but take
care of thye soul. He says also. Vidi ego quosdam, qui postquam renunciauere
^eade ye monks and chanous.
saeculo, uestimentis dumta^at et uocis professione, non rebus, nihil de
pristina conuersatione mutarunt. Res familiaris magis aucta, qua^m imminuta.
Eade^ ministeria ser^ulorum, idem apparatus conuiuij. Idem ad paulinum de
institutione (...)
mona^^iait. S^officium uis exercere presbyteri, si episcopat^ te vel opus, vel
honor force deiectat, viue vrbibus, vel castellis, and alioru^ salutem, fac
lucrum animae tuae. Sim aute^ capis esse, quo^^iceris, monachus, ^^est, solus,
quid facis in vrbibus, quae utique non su^t solorum habitacala, sed multorum
^^am non sunt tua; quae possides, sed (...) pens^tio tibicredita est. Memento
Act. v.
Ananiae at Sapphyr^^, Illi sua timide serr^^erunt, tu considera, ne christi
(...) imprudenter effundas, id est, ne immoderato iudicio rem (...) trib^as,
no^ pauperibus. Is not this manifest lie said against religious men, that have
benefices, prebendes, and other promotions, where they have vowed poverty, and
made a promise in the time of their profession, to have nothing as their own,
and propre to themselfes, but to live in commone God give to the^ grace, and to
all others, to serve him devoutly, that therbye they may pourchasse unto
themselfs the glory of heaven, through Gods mercy, and the deserts of our
Lord Jesus Christ

Amen.
Imprinted at London by Robert Caly, within the precinct of the late dissolved
house of the graye Freers, now converted to an hospital, called Christ's
hospital.

M. D. LV.


