THE TRUE TRAVELS, ADVENTVRES, AND OBSERVATIONS OF Captain JOHN SMITH, In
Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, from Anno Domini 1593. to 1629. His
Accidents and Sea Fights in the Straights; his Service and Stratagems of war
in Hungaria, Transylvania, Wallachia, and Moldavia, against the Turks, and
Tartars; his three single combats betwixt the Christian Army and the Turks.
After how he was taken prisoner by the Turks, sold for a Slave, sent into
Tartaria; his description of the Tartars, their strange manners and customs of
Religions, Diets, Buildings, Wars, Feasts, Ceremonies, and Living; how he
slew the Bashaw of Nalbrits in Cambia, and escaped from the Turks and Tartars.
Together with a continuation of his general History of Virginia, Summer-Iles,
New England, and their proceedings, since 1624. to this present 1629; as also
of the new Plantations of the great River of the Amazons, the Isles of St.
Christopher, Mevis, and Barbados in the West Indies.

All written by actual Authors, whose names you shall find along the History.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for Thomas Slater, and are to be sold at the Blew
Bible in Green Arbor. 1630.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, William EARL OF PEMBROKE, Lord Steward of his
Majesty's most Honorable Household. Robert EARL OF LINDSEY, Great Chamberlain
of ENGLAND. Henry Lord Hunsdon, Vicount Rochford, Earl of Dover. And all your
Honorable Friends and Well-willers.
My Lords:
SIR Robert Cotton, that most learned Treasurer of Antiquity, having by
perusal of my General History, and others, found that I had likewise
undergone diverse other as hard hazards in the other parts of the world,
requested me to fix the whole course of my passages in a book by it self,
whose noble desire I could not but in part satisfy; the rather, because they
have acted my fatal Tragedies upon the Stage, and racked my Relations at their
pleasure. To prevent therefore all future misprisions, I have compiled this
true discourse. Envy has taxed me to have writ too much, and done too little;
but that such should know, how little I esteem them, I have writ this, more
for the satisfaction of my friends, and all generous and well disposed Readers:
To speak only of my self were intolerable ingratitude; because, having had so
many copartners with me; I cannot make a Monument for my self, and leave them
unburied in the fields, whose lives begot me the title of a Soldier; for as
they were companions with me in my dangers, so shall they be partakers with me
in this Tomb.

For my Sea Grammar (caused to be printed by my worthy friend, Sir Samuel
Saltonstall) has found such good entertainment abroad, that I have been
importuned by many noble persons, to let this also pass the Press. Many of
the most eminent Warriers, and others, what their swords did, their penns writ:
Though I be never so much their inferior, yet I hold it no great error, to
follow good examples; nor repine at them, will do the like.

And now my most Honorable good Lords, I know not to whom I may better present
it, than to your Lordships, whose friendships, as I conceive, are as much to
each others, as my duty is to you all; and because you are acquainted both with
my endeavors, and writings, I doubt not, but your honors will as well accept
of this, as of the rest, and Patronize it under the shadow of your most noble
virtues, which I am ever bound in all duty to reverence, and under which I hope
to have shelter, against all storms that dare threaten.

Your Honors to be commanded, JOHN SMITH.

The Contents of the several Chapters.
CHAP. I. HIs birth; apprentiship; going into France; his beginning with ten
shillings and three pence, his service in Netherlands; his bad passage into
Scotland; his return to Willoughby; and how he lived in the woods. page 1.
Chap. 2. The notable villainy of four French Gallants, and his revenge; Smith
thrown over-boord, Captain La Roche of Saint Malo releeves him. 3. Chap. 3. A
desperate Sea-sight in the Straights; his passage to Rome, Naples, and the view
of Italy. 5. Chap. 4. The Siege of Olumpagh; an excellent stratagem by Smith;
another not much worse. 6. Chap. 5. The siege of Stowlle-Wesenburg; the effects
of Smiths Fire-workers; a worthy exploit of the Earl Rosworme; Earl Meldritch
takes the Bashaw prisoner. 8. Chap. 6. A brave encounter of the Turks army
with the Christians; Duke Mercury overthrows Assan Bashaw; He divides the
Christian army; his nobleness and death. 9. Chap. 7. The unhappy siege of
Caniza; Earl Meldritch serves Prince Sigismundus; Prince Moses besieges
Regal; Smiths three single combats. 11. Chap. 8. Georgio Busca an Albane his
ingratitude to Prince Sigismundus; Prince Moses his Lieutenant, is overthrown
by Busca, General for the Emperor Rodulphus; Smiths Patent from Sigismundus,
and reward. 14. Chap. 9. Sigismundus sends Ambassadors unto the Emperor; the
conditions re-assured; he yields up all to Busca, and returns to Prague.
18. Chap. 10. The Battle of Rottenton; a pretty stratagem of fire-workes by
Smith. 20. Chap. 11. The names of the English that were slain in the battle of
Rottenton; and how Captain Smith was taken prisoner; and sold for a slave. 21.
Chap. 12. How Captain Smith was sent prisoner through the Black and Dissabacca
Sea in Tartaria; the description of those Seas, and his usage. 23. Chap. 13.
The Turks diet; the Slaves diet; the attire of the Tartars; and manner of
Wars and Religions, etc. 24. Chap. 14. The description of the Crym-Tartars;
their houses and carts; their idolatry in their lodgings. 26. Chap. 15. Their
feasts; common diet; Princes estate; buildings; laws; slaves; entertainment of
Ambassadors. 27. Chap. 16. How be levieth an Army; their Arms and Provision;
how he divides the spoil; and his service to the Great Turk. 29. Chap. 17.
How Captain Smith escaped his captivity; slew the Bashaw of Nalbrits in
Cambia; his passage to Russia, Transylvania, and the midst of Europe to
Africa. 31. Chap. 18. The observations of Captain Smith; Mr. Henry Archer,
and others in Barbary. 34. Chap. 19. The strange discoveries and observations
of the Portugals in Africa. 37. Chap. 20. A brave Sea Fight betwixt two
Spanish men of war, and Captain Merham, with Smith. 39. Chap. 21. The
continuation of the general History of Virginia; the Summer Isles; and New
England; with their present estate from 1624. to this present 1629. 41. Chap.
22. The proceedings and present estate of the Summer Isles, from An. Dom. 1624.
to this present 1629. 45. Chap. 23. The proceedings and present estate of New
England, since 1624. to this present 1629. 46. Chap. 24. A brief discourse of
diverse voyages made unto the goodly Country of Guiana, and the great River of
the Amazons; relating also the present Plantation there. 48. Chap. 25. The
beginning and proceedings of the new plantation of St. Christopher by Captain
Warner. 51. Chap. 26. The first planting of the Barbados. 55. Chap. 27. The
first plantation of the I Will of Mevis. 56. Chap. 28. The bad life, qualities and
conditions of Pirates; and how they taught the Turks and Moors to become men of
war. 58.
To my worthy friend, Captain JOHN SMITH.
TWo greatest Shires of England did thee bear,
Renowned Yorkshire, Gaunt-stild Lancashire;
But what is all this? even Earth, Sea, Heaven above,
Tragabigzanda, Callamata's love,
Dear Pocahontas, Madam Shano^'s too,
Who did what love with modesty could do:
Record thy worth, thy birth, which as I live,
Even in thy reading such choice solace give,
As I could wish (such wishes would do well)
Many such Smiths in this our Israel.
R. BRATHWAIT.

To my noble brother and friend, Captain JOHN SMITH.
THou have a course so full of honor run,
Envy may snarle, as dogs against the Sun
May bark, not bite: for what deservedly
With thy life's danger, valor, policy,
Quaint warlike stratagems, abillity
And judgment, thou have got, fame sets so high
Detraction cannot reach: thy worth shall stand
A pattern to succeeding ages, and
Clothed in thy own lines, ever shall add grace,
Unto thy native Country and thy race;
And when dissolved, laid in thy mothers womb;
These, Caesar-like, Smiths Epitaph and tomb.
ANTHONY FIREBY.

To his valiant and deserving friend, Captain JOHN SMITH.
Among Frenchmen, Spaniards, Hungars, Tartars, Turks,
And wild Virginians too, this tells thy works:
Now some will ask, what benefit? what gain?
Is added to thy store for all this pain?
The art then content to say, content is all,
Thou Have got content for perils, pain and thrall;
It Is lost to look for more: for few men now
Regard Wit, Learning, Valor; but allow
The quintessence of praise to him that can
Number his own got gold, and riches, than
The art Valiant, Learned, Wise; Paul's counsel will,
Admire thy merits, magnify thy skill.
The last of thine to which I set my hand
Was a Sea Grammar; this by Sea and Land,
Serves us for imitation: I know none,
That like thy self have come, and run, and gone,
To such praiseworthy actions: be it approved,
Thou Have well deserved of best men to be loved:
If France, or Spain, or any foreign soil
Could claim thee theirs, for these thy pains and toil,
Thou Had got reward and honor: now adays,
What our own natives do, we seldom praise.
Good men will yield thee praise; then slight the rest;
It Is best praiseworthy to have pleased the best.
Tuissimus ED. JORDEN.

To my worthy friend, Captain JOHN SMITH.
Dear noble Captain, who by Sea and Land,
To act the earnest of thy name have hand
And heart; who can with skill design the Fort,
The Leaguer, Harbor, City, Shore, and Port:
Whose sword and pen in bold, ruff, Martial wise,
Put forth to try and bear away the prize,
From Caelar and Blaize Monluc: Can it be,
That Men alone in Gonnels fortune see
Thy worth advanced? no wonder since our age,
Is now at large a Bedlem or a Stage.
RICH. JAMES.

To his worthy friend, Captain JOHN SMITH.
THou that have had a spirit to fly like thunder,
Without thy Countries charge through those strange dangers*
Does make my muse amazed, and more to wonder,
That thy deserts should shared be by strangers,
And thou neglected; (ah miracle!) most lamented,
At thy great patience thus to rest contented.
For none can truly say thou did deceive,
Thy Soldiers, Sailers, Merchants, nor thy friends,
But all from thee a true account receive,
Yet naught to thee all these thy virtues brings;
Is none so noble to advance thy merit,
If any be, let him thy praise inherit.
MA. HAWKINS.

To my worthy friend, Captain JOHN SMITH.
TO combat with three Turks in single du'le,
Before two Armies, who the like has done?
Slain thy great Iailor; found a common weal
In fair America where; thou have won
No less renown amongst their Savage Kings,
Than Turkish wars, that thus thy honor sings.
Could not those tyrants daunt thy matchless spirit,
Nor all the cruelty of envies spite:
Will not thy Country yet reward thy merit,
Nor in thy acts and writings take delight?
Which here in so few sheets does more express
Than volumes great, this is thy happiness.
RICHARD MEADE.

To my well deserving friend, Captain JOHN SMITH.
THou have no need to covet new applause,
Nor do I think vainglory moves thee to it;
But since it is thy will (though without cause)
To move a needless thing, yet will I do it:
Do it in brief I will, or else I do the wrong,
And say, read over Captain Smiths former song;
His first then will invite thee to his latter:
Reader it is true; I am not bribed to flatter.
EDW. INGHAM.

To his approved friend, the Author; Captain JOHN SMITH.
THe old Greek Beard, counts him the only man,
Who knows strange Countries, like his Ithacan,
And wise, as valiant, by his observation,
Can tell the several customs of each Nation:
All these are met in thee, who will not then
Repute thee in the rank of worthiest men?
To the Western world to former times unknown,
Thy active spirit has thy valor shown:
The Turks and Tartars both can testify,
Thee to have deserved a Captains dignity;
But verse, thou need'st not to express thy worth,
Thy acts, this book do plainly set it forth.
M. CARTNER.

To the Valourous and truly- virtuous soldier, Captain JOHN SMITH.
NO Nulla fides pietasque viris, qui castra sequuntur.
Faith in Camp? it is false: see pious Smith
Has brought straggling Astraea back, and with
An all-outdaring spirit made Valor stand
Vpheld by Virtue in bold Mars his land:
If Valourous, be praise; how great's his Name?
Whose Valor joynd with Virtue laud's his Fame.
It Was Homers boast of wise Laertes son,
(...) Hom. Odyst. ^c.
Well-read in men and Cities: than thou none
(Great Smith) of these can more true tales rehearse;
What want thy praises then, but Homers verse?
Jn Smithum Distichon.
Quisque suae sortis Appius.
Faber: an Faber exstitit unquam
T^ (Smithe) fortunae verior usque suae?
I. C. C. P.

To his noble friend, Captain JOHN SMITH.
TO see bright honor sparkled all in gore,
Would steel a spirit that never fought before:
And that is the height of Fame, when our best blood,
Is nobly spilt in actions great and good:
So thou have taught the world to purchase Fame,
Rearing thy story on a glorious frame,
And such foundation does thy merits make it,
As all detractions rage shall never shake it;
Thy actions crown themselves, and thy own pen,
Gives them the best and truest Epiphonem.
BRIAN O ROVRKE.

To his truly deserving friend, Captain JOHN SMITH.
CAn one please all? there is none from Censure free,
To look for it then it were absurd in thee;
It Is easy work to censure sweetest Lays,
Where Ignorance is Judge thou would have no praise:
Wisdom I know will mildly judge of all,
Envious hearts, tongues, pens, are dippt in Gall.
Proud malignant times will you now bring forth
Monsters at least to snarle at others worth;
O do not so, but wisely look on him
That wrought such Honors for his Countries King*
Of Turks and Tartars thou have won the field,
The great Bashaw his Courage thou have quel'd;
In the Hungarian war thou'st showed thy Arts,
Proved thy Self a Soldier true in all parts:
Thy Arms are decked with that thy Sword has won,
Which malice cannot out-weare till day be done:
For three proud Turks in single fight thou'st slew,
Their Heads adorn thy Arms, for witness true;
Let Mars and Neptune both with Pregnant wit,
Extol thy due deserts, He pray for it.
SALO. TANNER.

THE TRVE TRAVELS, ADVENTVRES, AND OBSERVATIONS OF CAPTAIN JOHN SMITH, in
Europe, Asia, Afric, and America: beginning about the year 1593. and
continued to this present 1629.
CHAP. I.
His Birth; Apprentiship; Going into France; His beginning with ten shillings
and three pence; His Service in Netherlands; His bad passage into Scotland; His
return to Willoughby; And how he lived in the Woods.

HE was borne in Willoughby in Lincolne-shire, and a Scholar in the two
Free-schooles of Alford and Louth. His father anciently descended from the
ancient Smiths of Crudley in Lancashire; his mother from the Rickands at great
Heck in Yorkshire. His parents dying when he was about thirteen years of
age, left him a competent means, which he not being capable to manage, little
regarded; his mind being even then set upon brave adventures, sold his
Satchell, books, and all he had, intending secretly to get to Sea, but that
his fathers death stayed him. But now the ^uardians of his estate more
regarding it than him, he had liberty enough, though no means, to get beyond
the Sea. About the age of fifteen years he was bound an Apprentice to Mr.
Thomas Sendall of Linne, the greatest Merchant of all those parts; but because
he would not presently send him to Sea, he never saw his master in eight
years after. At last he ^ound means to attend Mr. Perigrine Barty into
France, second son to the Right Honorable Perigrine, that generous Lord
Willoughby, and famous Soldier; where coming to his brother Robert, then at
Orleans, now Earl of Linsey, and Lord great Chamberlain of England; being
then but little youths under Tuto^age: his service being needless, within a
month or six weeks they sent him back again to his friends; who when he
came from London they liberally gave him (but out of his own estate) ten
shillings to be rid of him; such often is the share of fatherless children: but
those two Honorable Brethren gave him sufficient to return for England. But
it was the least thought of his determination, for now being freely at liberty
in Paris, growing acquainted with one Master David Hume, who making some use of
his purse, gave him Letters to his friends in Scotland to prefer him to King
James. Arriving at Roane, he better bethinkes himself, seeing his money near
spent, down the River he went to Haver de grace, where he first began to
learn the life of a soldier: Peace being concluded in France, he went with
Captain Joseph Duxbury into the Low Countries, under whose Colors having
served three or four years, he took his journey for Scotland, to deliver his
Letters. At Ancusan he embarked himself for Lethe, but as much danger, as
shipwreck and sickness could endure, he had at the holy I Will in
Northumberland near Barwicke: (being recovered) into Scotland he went to
deliver his Letters. After much kind usage amongst those honest Scots at
Ripweth and Broxmoth, but neither money nor means to make him a Courtier, he
returned to Willoughby in Lincolne-shire; where within a short time being
glutted with too much company, wherein he took small delight, he retired
himself into a little wooddie pasture, a good way from any town, environed
with many hundred Acres of other woods: Here by a fair brook he built a
Pavillion of boughs, where only in his clothes he lay. His study was
Machiavills Art of war, and Marcus Aurelius; his exercise a good horse, with
his lance and Ring; his food was thought to be more of venison than any thing
else; what he wanted his man brought him. The country wondering at such an
Hermit; His friends persuaded one Seignior Theadora Polaloga, Rider to Henry
Earl of Lincoln, an excellent Horseman, and a noble Italian Gentleman, to
insinuate into his wooddish acquaintances, whose Languages and good discourse,
and exercise of riding drew him to stay with him at Tattersall. Long these
pleasures could not content him, but he returned again to the Low-Countreyes.

Chap II.
The notable villainy of four French Gallants, and his revenge; Smith thrown
overboard; Captain La Roche of Saint Malo releeves him.

THus when France and Netherlands had taught him to ride a Horse and use his
Arms, with such rudiments of war, as his tender years in those martial
Schools could attain unto; he was desirous to see more of the world, and try
his fortune against the Turks, both lamenting and repenting to have seen so
many Christians slaughter one another. Opportunity casting him into the
company of four French Gallants well attended, A notable villan^ of four
^rench Gallants.
faining to him the one to be a great Lord, the rest his Gentlemen, and that
they were all devoted that way; over-perswaded him to go with them into
France, to the Duchess of Mercury, from whom they should not only have
means, but also Letters of favor to her noble Duke, then General for the
Emperor Rodolphus in Hungary; which he did, with such ill weather as winter
affords, in the dark night they arrived in the broad shallow Inlet of Saint
Va^leries sur Some in Picardie; his French Lord knowing he had good apparel,
and better furnished with money than themselves, so plotted with the Master of
the ship to set his and their own trunckes a shore leaving Smith aboard till
the boat could return, which was the next day after toward evening; the
reason he alleged was the sea went so high he could come no sooner, and that
his Lord was gone to Amiens where they would stay his coming; which
treacherous villainy, when diverse other soldiers, and passengers understood,
they had like to have slain the Master, and had they known how, would have
run away with the ship.

Coming on shore he had but one Carralue, A Carralue is in value a penny.
was forced to sell his cloak to pay for his passage. One of the soldiers,
called Curzianvere, compassionating his injury, assured him this great Lord
Depreau was only the son of a Lawyer of Mortaigne in base Britany, and his
Attendants Cursell, La Nelie, and Monferrat, three young citizens, as arrant
cheats as himself; but if he would accompany him, he would bring him to their
friends, but in the interim supplied his wants: thus traveling by Deep,
Codebeck, Humphla, Pount-demer in Normandy, they came to Cane in base
Normandy; where both this noble Curzianvere, and the great Prior of the great
Abbey of S. Steven (where is the ruinous Tomb of William the Conqueror,) and
many other of his friends kindly welcomed him, and brought him to Mortaigne,
where he found Depreau and the rest, but to small purpose; for Mr. Curzianvere
was a banished man, and durst not be seen, but to his friends: yet the bruit
of their cosenage occasioned the Lady Collumber, the Baron Larshan, the Lord
Shasghe, and diverse other honorable persons, to supply his wants, and with
them to recreate himself so long as he would: but such pleasant pleasures
suited little with his poor estate, and his restless spirit, that could never
find content, to receive such noble favors, as he could neither deserve nor
requite: but wandering from Port to Port to find some man of war, spent that he
had, and in a Forest, near dead with grief and cold, a rich Farmer found him
by a fair Fountain under a tree: This kind Pesant releeved him again to his
content, to follow his intent. Not long after, as he passed through a great
grove of trees, ^ere he incounned one of the thieves.
between Pounterson and Dina in Britain, it was has chance to meet Cursell,
more miserable than himself: His piercing injuries had so small patience, as
without any word they both drew, and in a short time Cursell fell to the
ground, where from an old ruinated Tower the inhabitants seeing them, were
satisfied, when they heard Cursell confess what had formerly passed; and that
how in the dividing that they had stolen from him, they fell by the ears
amongst themselves, that were actors in it; but for his part, he excused
himself to be innocent as well of the one, as of the other. In regard of his
hurt, Smith was glad to be so rid of him, directing his course to an honorable
Lord, The noblenesle of the Earl of Ployer.
the Earl of Ployer, who during the war in France, with his two brethren,
Viscount Poomory, and Baron d' Mercy, who had been brought up in England; by
him he was better refurnished than ever. When they had showed him Saint Malo
Mount, Saint Michael, Lambal, Simbreack, Lanion, and their own fair Castle of
Tuncadeck, Gingan, and diverse other places in Britanny, (and their British
Cornwaile) taking his leave, he took his way to Raynes, the Britains chief
City, and so to Nantes, Poyters, Rochell, and Bordeaux. The ^umour of the
strength of Bayon in Biskay, caused him to see it; and from thence took his
way from Leskar in Biearne, and Paw in the kingdom of Navar to Tolouz (...)
Gascoigne, Bezers and Carcassone, Narbone, Montpellier, Nimes in Languedock,
and through the Country of Avignion, by Arles to Marcellos in Province, there
imbarking himself for Italy, the ship was enforced to Tolonne, and putting
again to sea, ill weather so grew upon them, they anchored close aboard the
shore, under the little Isle of S. Mary, against Neice in Savoy. Here the
inhumane Provincialls, An inhumane act of the Provin^ialls in casting (...)
overboard.
with a rabble of Pilgrims of diverse Nations going to Rome, hourly cursing
him, not only for a Hugonoit, but his Nation they swore were all Pirates, and so
vildly railed on his dread Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, and that they never
should have fair weather so long as he was aboard them; their disputations
grew to that passion, that they threw him overboard, yet God brought him to
that little Isle, where was no inhabitants, but a few kine and goats. The next
morning he espied two ships more riding by them, put in by the storm, that
fetched him aboard, well refreshed him, and so kindly used him, that he was
well contented to try the rest of his fortune with them. After he had related
unto them his former discourse, what for pity, and the love of the Honorable
Earl of Ployer, this noble Britain his neighbor, Captain la Roche of Saint
Malo, Capt. La Roche releeves him.
regarded and entertained him for his well respected friend. With the next
fair wind they failed along by the Coast of Corsica and Sardinia, and crossing
the gulf of Tunis, passed by Cape Bona to the Isle of Lampadosa, leaving the
coast of Barbary till they came at Cape Rosata, and so along the African shore,
for Alexandria in Egypt. There delivering their fraught, they went to
Scandaroone; rather to view what ships was in the Road, than any thing else:
keeping their course by Cypres and the coast of Asia, sailing by Rhodes, the
Archipellagans, Candia, and the coast of Grecia, and the Isle of Zaffalonia.
They lay to and again a few days betwixt the Isle of Corfue and the Cape of
Otranto in the Kingdom of Naples, in the Entrance of the Adriatike sea.

CHAP. III.
A desperate Sea Fight in the Straights; His passage to Rome, Naples, and the
view of Italy.

BEtwixt the two Capes they meet with an Argosie of Venice, it seemed the
Captain desired to speak with them, A desperate sea fight.
whose untoward answer was such, as slew them a man; whereupon the Britain
presently gave them the broadside, then his Stern, and his other broadside
also, and continued the chase, with his chase pieces, till he gave them so many
broad-sides one after another, that the Argosies sails and tackling was so
torn, she stood to her defense, and made shot for shot; twice in one hour and
a half the Britain boarded her, yet they cleared themselves, but clapping her
aboard again, the Argosie fired him, which with much danger to them both was
presently quenched. This rather augmented the Britains rage, than abated his
courage; for having reaccommodated himself again, shot her so often between
wind and water, she was ready to sink, then they yielded; the Britain lost
fifteen men, she twenty, besides diverse were hurt, the rest went to work on
all hands; some to stop the leakes, others to guard the prisoners that were
chained, the rest to rifle her. The Silks, Velvets, Cloth of gold, and Tissue,
Pyasters, Chicqueenes and Sultanies, which is gold and silver, they unloaded in
four and twenty hours, was wonderful, where of having sufficient, and tired
with toil, they cast her off with her company, with as much good merchandise
as would have fraughted such another Britain, that was but two hundred Tons,
she four or five hundred.

To repair his defects, he stood for the coast of Calabria, but hearing there
was six or seven Galleyes at Mesina he departed thence for Malta, but the wind
coming fair, he kept his course along the coast of the Kingdom of Sicilia by
Sardinia and Corsica, till he came to the Road of Antibo in Peamon, where he
set Smith on shore with five hundred chicqueenes, and a little box God sent him
worth near as much more. Here he left this noble Britain, and embarked
himself for Lygorne, being glad to have such opportunity and means to better
his experience by the view of Italy; and having passed Tuskany, and the
Country of Sieana, where he found his dear friends, the two Honorable
Brethren, the Lord Willoughby and his Brother cruelly wounded, in a desperate
fray, yet to their exceeding great honor. The Popes holy Stairs brought from
Jerusalem, whereon (they say) Christ went up to Pontious Pilate.
Then to Viterbo and many other Cities he came to Rome, where it was his chance
to see Pope Clement the eight, with many Cardinals, creep up the holy
Stayres, which they say are those our Savior Christ went up to Pontius Pilate,
where blood falling from his head, being pricked with his crown of thorns,
the drops are marked with nails of steel, upon them none dare go but in that
manner, saying so many Ave-Maries and Pater-nosters, as is their devoton, and
to kiss the nails of steel: But on each side is a pair of such like
stairs, up which you may go, stand, or kneel, but divided from the holy
Stairs by two walls: right against them is a Chapel, where hangs a great
silver Lamp, which burns continually, yet they say the oil neither
increases nor diminishes. A little distant is the ancient Church of Saint
John de Laterane, where he saw him say Mass, which commonly he does upon some
Friday once a month. Having saluted Father Parsons, that famous English
Jesuit, and satisfied himself with the rarities of Rome, he went down the
River of Tiber to Civita Vechia, where he embarked himself to satisfy his eye
with the fair City of Naples, and her Kingdoms nobility; returning by
Capua, Rome and Seana, he passed by that admired C^tie of Florence, the Cities
and Countries of Bolonia, Ferrara, Mantua, Padu, and Venice, whose Gulf he
passed from Malamoco and the Adriatike Sea for Ragouza, spending some time to
see that barren broken coast of Albania and Dalmatia, to Capo de Islria,
traveling the maine of poor Slavonia by Lubbiano, till he came to Grates in
Steria, the Seat of Ferdinando Archduke of Austria, now Emperor of Almania:
where he met an English man, and an Irish Jesuit, who acquainted him with many
brave Gentlemen of good quality, especially with the Lord Ebersbaught, with
whom trying such conclusions, as he projected to undertake, preferred him to
Baron Kisell, General of the Ar^llery, and he to a worthy Collonell, the Earl
of Meldritch, with whom going to Vienne in Austria, under whose Regiment, in
what service, and how he spent his time, this ensuing Discourse will declare.

CHAP. IV.
The Siege of Olumpagh; An excellent Stratagem by Smith; Another not much worse.

The siege of Olumpagh.
AFter the loss of Caniza, the Turks with twenty thousand besieged the strong
Town of Olumpagh so straightly, as they were cut off from all intelligence and
hope of succor; till John Smith, this English Gentleman, acquainted Baron
Kisell, General of the Archdukes Artillery, he had taught the Governor, his
worthy friend, such a Rule, that he would undertake to make him know any thing
he intended, and have his answer, would they bring him but to some place where
he might make the flame of a Torch seen to the Town; Kisell inflamed with
this strange invention; Smith made it so plain, that forthwith he gave him
guides, who in the dark night brought him to a mountain, where he showed
three Torches equidistant from other, which plainly appearing to the Town, the
Governor presently apprehended, and answered again with three other fires in
like manner; each knowing the others being and intent; Smith, though distant
seven miles, signified to him these words: On Thursday at night I will charge
on the East, at the Alarm, salley you; Ebersbaught answered he would, and thus
it was done: First he writ his message as brief, you see, as could be, then
divided the Alphabet in two parts thus;

A. b. c. d. e. f. g. h. i. k. l.

1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1.

m. n. o. p. q. r. s. t. v. w. x.

2. 2. 2. 2. 2. 2. 2. 2. 2. 2. 2.

y. z.

2. 2.

The first part from A. to L. An excellent Stratagem.
is signified by showing and hiding one link^, so often as there is letters from
A. to that letter you mean; the other part from M. to Z. is mentioned by two
lights in like manner. The end of a word is signified by showing of three
lights, ever staying your light at that letter you mean, till the other may
write it in a paper, and answer by his signal, which is one light, it is done,
beginning to count the letters by the lights, every time from A. to M. by this
means also the other returned his answer, whereby each did understand other.
The Guides all this time having well viewed the Camp, returned to Kisell, who,
doubting of his power being but ten thousand, was animated by the Guides, how
the Turks were so divided by the River in two parts, they could not easily
second each other. Another Stratagem.
To which Smith added this conclusion; that two or three thousand pieces of
match fastened to diverse small lines of an hundred fathom in length being
armed with powder, might all be fired and stretched at an instant before the
Alarm, upon the Plain of Hysnaburg, supported by two staves, at each lines
end, in that manner would seem like so many Musketteers; which was put in
practice; and being discovered by the Turks, they prepared to encounter these
false fires, thinking there had been some great Army: whilst Kisell with his
ten thousand being entered the Turks quarter, who ran up and down as men
amazed. It was not long ere Ebersbaught was pell-mell with them in their
Trenches; in which distracted confusion, a third part of the Turks, that
besieged that side toward Knousbruck, were slain; many of the rest drowned,
but all fled. The other part of the Army was so busied to resist the false
fires, that Kisell before the morning put two thousand good soldiers in the
Town, and with small loss was retired; the Garrison was well releeved with
that they found in the Turks quarter, which caused the Turks to raise their
siege and return to Caniza: and Kisell with much honor was received at
Kerment, and occasioned the Author a good reward and preferment, to be Captain
of two hundred and fifty Horsemen, under the Conduct of Colonel Voldo, Earl
of Meldritch.

CHAP. V.
The siege of Stowlle-wesenburg; The effects of Smiths Fireworkes; A worthy
exploit of Earl Rosworme; Earl Meldritch takes the Bashaw prisoner.

A General rumor of a general peace, now spread it self over all the face of
those tormented Countries: but the Turk intended no such matter, but levied
soldiers from all parts he could. The Emperor also, by the assistance of the
Christian Princes, provided three Armies, the one led by the Archduke Mathias,
the Emperors brother, and his Lieutenant Duke Mercury to defend Low Hungary,
the second, by Ferdinando the Archduke of Steria, and the Duke of Mantua his
Lieutenant to regaine Caniza; the third by Gonzago, Governor of High Hungary,
to join with Georgio Busca, to make an absolute conquest of Transylvania.

The siege of Alba Regalis.
Duke Mercury with an Army of thirty thousand, whereof near ten thousand were
French, besieged Stowlle-wesenburg, otherwise called Alba Regalis, a place so
strong by Art and Nature, that it was thought impregnable. At his first
coming, the Turks sallied upon the Germane quarter, slew near five hundred,
and returned before they were thought on. The next night in like manner they
did near as much to the Bemers, and Hungarians; of which fortune still
presuming, thinking to have found the French quarter as careless, eight or
nine hundred of them were cut in pieces and taken prisoners. In this encounter
Mousieur Grandvile, a brave French Colonel, received seven or eight cruel
wounds, yet followed the Enemy to the Ports; he came off alive, but within
three or four days died.

Earl Meldritch, by the information of three or four Christians, (escaped out
of the Town) upon every Alarm, where there was greatest assemblies and throng
of people, The effect of good (...)-work^.
caused Captain Smith to put in practice his fiery Dragons, he had
demonstrated unto him, and the Earl Von Sulch at Comora, which he thus
performed: Having prepared forty or fifty round-bellied earthen pots, and
filled them with hand Gunpowder, then covered them with Pitch, mingled with
Brimstone and Turpentine; and quartering as many Musket-bullets, that hung
together but only at the Center of the division, stuck them round in the
mixture about the pots, and covered them again with the same mixture, over
that a strong Searcloth, then over all a good thickness of Towze-match well
tempered with oil of Lin-seed, Campheer, and powder of Brimstone, these he
fitly placed in Slings, graduated so near as they could to the places of these
Assemblies. At midnight upon the Alarm, it was a fearful sight to see the
short flaming course of their flight in the air, but presently after their
fall, the lamentable noise of the miserable slaughtered Turks was most
wonderful to hear: Besides, they had fired that Suburb at the Port of Buda
in two or three places, which so troubled the Turks to quench, that had there
been any means to have assaulted them, they could hardly have resisted the
fire, and their enemies. The Earl Rosworme, contrary to the opinion of all
men, would needs undertake to find means to surprise the Segeth and Suburb
of the City, strongly defended by a muddie Lake, which was thought unpassable.

The Duke having planted his Ordnance, battered the other side, A worthy
exploit of Earl Rosworme.
whilst Rosworme, in the dark night, with every man a bundle of sedge and
bavins still thrown before them, so laded up the Lake, as they surprised that
unregarded Suburb before they were discovered: upon which unexpected Alarm,
the Turks fled into the City, and the other Suburb not knowing the matter,
got into the City also, leaving their Suburb for the Duke, who, with no great
resistance, took it, with many pieces of Ordnance; the City, being of no such
strength as the Suburbs, with their own Ordnance was so battered, that it was
taken perforce, with such a merciless execution, as was most pitiful to
behold. Earl Meldritch takes the Bashaw prisoner.
The Bashaw notwithstanding drew together a party of five hundred before his
own Palace, where he intended to die; but seeing most of his men slain
before him, by the valiant Captain Earl Meldritch, who took him prisoner
with his own hands; and with the hazard of himself saved him from the fury of
other troops, that did pull down his Palace, and would have rent him in
pieces; had he not been thus preserved. The Duke thought his victory much
honored with such a Prisoner; took order he should be used like a Prince,
and with all expedition gave charge presently to repair the breaches, and the
ruins of this famous City, that had been in the possession of the Turks
near threescore years.

CHAP. VI.
A brave encounter of the Turks Army with the Christians; Duke Mercury
overthrows Assan Bashaw; He divides the Christian Army; His nobleness and
death.

MAHOMET, the great Turk, during the siege, had raised an Army of sixty
thousand men to have releeved it; but hearing it was lost, he sent Assan Bashaw
General of his Army, the Bashaw of Buda, Bashaw Amaro^, to see if it were
possible to regaine it; The Duke understanding there could be no great
experience in such a new levied Army as Assan had; having put a strong
Garrison into it: and with the brave Colonel Rosworme, Culnits, Meldritch, the
Rhine-Grave, Vahan and many others; with twenty thousand good soldiers, set
forward to meet the Turk in the Plains of Girke. A brave encounter of the
Turks Army with the Christians.
Those two Armies encountered as they marehed, where began a hot and bloody
Skirmish betwixt them, Regiment against Regiment, as they came in order, till
the night parted them: Here Earl Meldritch was so environed amongst those
half circuler Regiments of Turks, they supposed him their Prisoner, and his
Regiment lost; but his two most courageous friends, Vihan and Culnits, made
such a passage amongst them, that it was a terror to see how horse and man lay
sprawling and tumbling, some one way, some another on the ground. The Earl
there at that time made his valo^ shine more bright than his armor, which
seemed then painted with Turkish blood, he slew the brave Zanzack Bugola, and
made his passage to his friends, but near half his Regiment was slain.
Captain Smith had his horse sl^^e under him, and himself sore wounded; but he
was not long unmounted, for there was choice enough of horses, that wanted
masters. The Turk thinking the victory sure against the Duke, whose Army, by
the Siege and the Garrison, he had left behind him, was much weakened, would not
be content with one, but he would have all; and left the Duke should return to
Alba Regalis, he sent that night twenty thousand to besiege the City, assuring
them he would keep the Duke or any other from releeving them. Two or three
days they lay each by other, entrenching themselves; the Turks daring the
Duke daily to a set battle, who at length drew out his Army, led by the
Rhine-Grave, Culnits and Meldritch, who upon their first encounter, charged
with that resolute and valiant courage, as disordered not only the foremost
squadrons of the Turks, but enforced all the whole Army to retire to the
Camp, Duke Mercury overthrows Assan Rassa
with the loss of five or six thousand, with the Bashaw of Buda, and four or
five Zanzacks, with diverse other great Commanders, two hundred Prisoners, and
nine pecces of Ordnance. At that instant appeared, as it were, another Army
coming out of a valley over a plain hill, that caused the Duke at that time
to be contented, and to retire to his Trenches; which gave time to Assan to
reorder his disordered squadrons: Here they lay nine or ten days, and more
supplies repaired to them, expecting to try the event in a set battle; but
the soldiers on both parties, by reason of their great wants and approach of
winter, grew so discontented, that they were ready of themselves to break up
the Leager; the Bashaw, retiring himself to Buda, had some of the Rear
Troops cut off. Amaroz Bashaw hearing of this, found such bad welcome at Alba
Regalis, and the Town so strongly repaired, with so brave a Garrison, raised
his siege, and retired to Zigetum.

The Duke understanding that the Archduke Ferdinando had so resolutely
besieged Caniza, as what by the loss of Alba Regalis, and the Turks retreat to
Buda, being void of hope of any relief, doubted not but it would become again
the Christians. Duke Mercury divides his Army.
To the furtherance whereof, the Duke divided his Army into three parts. The
Earl of Rosworme went with seven thousand to Caniza; the Earl of Meldritch
with six thousand he sent to assist Georgio Busca against the Transilvanians,
the rest went with himself to the Garrisons of Strigonium and Komara; having
thus worthily behaved himself, he arrived at Vienne, where the Archdukes and
the Nobility with as much honor received him, as if he had conquered all
Hungaria; his very Picture they esteemed would make them fortunate, which
thousands kept as curiously as a precious relic. To requite this honor,
preparing himself to return into France, to raise new Forces against the next
year, with the two Archdukes, Mathias and Maximilian, and diverse others of
the Nobility, was with great magnificence conducted to Nurenburg, there by
them royally feasted, Duke (...) and his brother in law ere suddenly.
(how it chanced is not known;) but the next morning he was found dead, and
his brother in law died two days after; whose hearts, after this great
triumph, with much sorrow were carried into France.

CHAP. VII.
The unhappie Siege of Caniza; Earl Meldritch serves Prince Sigismundus;
Prince Moses besieges Regal; Smiths three single combats; His Patent from
Sigismundus, and reward.

THe worthy Lord Rosworme had not a worse journey to the miserable Seige of
Caniza, The unhappie siege of Caniza.
(where by the extremity of an extraordinary continuing tempest of hail,
wind, frost and snow, in so much that the Christians were forced to leave their
Tents and Artillery, and what they had; it being so cold that three or four
hundred of them were frozen to death in a night, and two or three thousand lost
in that miserable flight in the snowie tempest, though they did know no enemy
at all to follow them:) than the noble Earl of Meldritch had to Transylvania,
where hearing of the death of Michael and the brave Duke Mercury, and knowing
the policy of Busca, and the Prince his Roialtie, being now beyond all belief
of men, in possession of the best part of Transylvania, persuaded his troops,
in so honest a cause, to assist the Prince against the Turk, rather than Busca
against the Prince.

The soldiers being worn out with those hard pays and travells, Earl
Meldritch serves Prince Sigismundus.
upon hope to have free liberty to make booty upon what they could get
possession of from the Turks, was easily persuaded to follow him
whithersoever. Now this noble Earl was a Transilvanian borne, and his fathers
Country yet inhabited by the Turks; for Transylvania was yet in three
divisions, though the Prince had the hearts both of Country and people; yet the
Frontiers had a Garrison amongst the unpassable mountains, some for the
Emperor, some for the Prince, and some for the Turk: to regaine which small
estate, he desired leave of the Prince to try his fortunes, and to make use
of that experience, the time of twenty years had taught him in the Emperors
service, promising to spend the rest of his days for his countries defense in
his Excellencies service. The Prince glad of so brave a Commander, and so many
expert and ancient soldiers, made him Campe-master of his Army, gave him all
necessary relief for his troops and what freedom they desired to plunder the
Turks.

The Earl having made many incursions into the Land of Zarkam among those
rockie mountains, where were some Turks, some Tartars, Earl Meldritch makes
incursions to discover Regal.
but most Bandittoes, Rennegadoes, and such like, which sometimes he forced
into the Plains of Regal, where is a City not only of men and
fortifications, strong of it self, but so environed with mountains, that made
the passages so difficult, that in all these wars no attempt had been made
upon it to any purpose: Having satisfied himself with the Situation and the
most convenient passages to bring his Army unto it: The earth no sooner put on
her green habit, than the Earl overspread her with his armed troops. To
possess himself first of the most convenient passage, which was a narrow
valley betwixt two high mountains; he sent Colonel Veltus with his Regiment,
dispersed in companies to lie in Ambuscado, as he had directed them, and in the
morning to drive all the cattle they could find before a Fort in that
passage, whom he supposed would sally, seeing but some small party, to recover
their prey; which took such good success, that the Garrison was cut off by
the Ambuscado, and Veltus seized on the Skonces, which was abandoned. Meldritch
glad of so fortunate a beginning, it was six days ere he could with six
thousand Pioners make passage for his Ordnance: The Turks having such warning,
strengthened the Town so with men and provision, that they made a scorn of so
small a number as Meldritch brought with him before the City, which was but
eight thousand. Before they had pitched their Tents, the Turks sallied in such
abundance, as for an hour they had rather a bloody battle than a skirmish,
but with the loss of near fifteen hundred on both sides. Moses besieges
Regal.
The Turks were chased till the Cities Ordnance caused the Earl to retire.
The next day Zachel Moses, General of the Army, pitched also his tents with
nine thousand foot and horse, and six and twenty pieces of Ordnance; but in
regard of the situation of this strong Fortress, they did neither fear them
nor hurt them, being upon the point of a fair promontory, environed on the one
side within half a mile with an un-usefull mountain, and on the other side
with a fair Plain, where the Christians encamped, but so commanded by their
Ordnance, they spent near a month in entrenching themselves, and raising their
mounts to plant their batteries; which slow proceedings the Turks often derided,
that their Ordnance were at pawn, and how they grew fat for want of exercise,
and fearing lest they should depart ere they could assault their City, sent
this Challenge to any Captain in the Army.

That to delight the Ladies, who did long to see some court-like pastime, the
Lord Turbashaw did defy any Captain, that had the command of a Company, who
durst combat with him for his head: The matter being discussed, it was
accepted, but so many questions grew for the undertaking, it was decided by
lots, which fell upon Captain Smith, before spoken of.

Three single Combats.
Christians in Battalio; Turbashaw with a noise of Howboyes entered the fields
well mounted and armed; on his shoulders were fixed a pair of great wings,
compacted of Eagles feathers within a ridge of silver, richly garnished with
gold and precious stones, a Ianizary before him, bearing his Lance, on each
side another leading his horse; where long he stayed nor, ere Smith with a
noise of Trumpets, only a Page bearing his Lance, passing by him with a
courteous salute, took his ground with such good success, that at the sound
of the charge, he passed the Turk through the sight of his Beaver, face, head
and all, that he fell dead to the ground, where alighting and unbracing his
Helmet, cut off his head, and the Turks took his body; and so returned
without any hurt at all. The head he presented to the Lord Moses, the
General, who kindly accepted it, and with joy to the whole army he was
generally welcomed.

Grualgo, his vowed friend, as rather enraged with madness than choler, he
directed a particular challenge to the Conqueror, to regaine his friends head,
or lose his own, with his horse and Armor for advantage, which according to
his desire, was the next day undertaken: as before upon the sound of the
Trumpets, their Lances flew in pieces upon a clear passage, but the Turk was
near unhorsed. Their Pistolls was the next, which marked Smith upon the
placard; but the next shot the Turk was so wounded in the left arm, that
being not able to rule his horse, and defend himself, he was thrown to the
ground, and so bruised with the fall, that he lost his head, as his friend
before him; with his horse and Armor; but his body and his rich apparel was
sent back to the Town.

Every day the Turks made some sallies, but few skirmishes would they endure
to any purpose. Our works and approaches being not yet advanced to that height
and effect which was of necessity to be performed; to delude time, Smith with
so many incontradictible persuading reasons, obtained leave that the Ladies
might know he was not so much enamoured of their servants heads, but if any
Turk of their rank would come to the place of combat to redeem them, should
have his also upon the like conditions, if he could win it.

Bonny Mulgro. The next day both the Champions entering the field as before,
each discharging their Pistol, having no Lances, but such martial weapons as
the defendant appointed, no hurt was done; their Battle-axes was the next,
whose piercing bills made sometime the one, sometime the other to have scarce
sense to keep their saddles, specially the Christian received such a blow that
he lost his Battle-axe, and failed not much to have fallen after it, whereat the
supposing conquering Turk, had a great shout from the Rampires. The Turk
prosecuted his advantage to the uttermost of his power; yet the other, what by
the readiness of his horse, and his judgment and dexterity in such a
business, beyond all men's expectation, by Gods assistance, not only avoided
the Turks violence, but having drawn his Faulchion, pierced the Turk so
under the Culets through back and body, that although he alighted from his
horse, he stood not long ere he lost his head, as the rest had done.

CHAP. VIII.
Georgio Busca an Albane his ingratitude to Prince Sigismundus; Prince Moses
his Lieutenant, is overthrown by Busca, General for the Emperor Rodolphus;
Sigismundus yields his Country to Rodolphus; Busca assisteth Prince Rodoll
in Wallachia.

THis good success gave such great encouragement to the whole Army, that with
a guard of six thousand, three spare horses, before each a Turks head upon a
Lance, he was conducted to the Generals Pavillion with his Presents. Moses
received both him and them with as much respect as the occasion deserved,
embracing him in his arms, gave him a fair Horse richly furnished, a S^mitere
and belt worth three hundred ducats; and Meldritch made him Sergeant major of
his Regiment. But now to the siege, having mounted six and twenty pieces of
Ordnance fifty or sixty foot above the Plain, made them so plainly tell his
meaning, that within fifteen days two breaches were made, which the Turks as
valiantly defended as men could; that day was made a darksome night, but by the
light that proceeded from the murdering Muskets, and peacemaking Canon,
whilst their slothful Governor lay in a Castle on the top of a high
mountain, and like a valiant Prince asks what is the matter, when horror and
death stood amazed each at other, to see who should prevail to make him
victorious: Moses commanding a general assault upon the sloping front of the
high Promontory, Regal assaulted and taken.
where the Barons of Budendorfe and Oberwin lost near half their Regiments,
by logs, bags of powder, and such like, tumbling down the hill, they were to
mount ere they could come to the breach; notwithstanding with an incredible
courage they advanced to the push of the Pike with the defenda^ts, that with
the like courage repulsed, till the Earl Meldritch, Becklefield and Zarvana,
with their fresh Regiments seconded them with that fury, that the Turks retired
and fled into the Castle, from whence by a flag of truce they desired
composition. The Earl remembering his fathers death, battered it with all the
Ordnance in the Town, and the next day took it; all he found could bear
Arms he put to the sword, and set their heads upon stakes round about the
walls, in the same manner they had used the Christians, when they took it.
Moses having repaired the Rampires, and thrown down the work in his Camp,
he put in it a strong Garrison, though the pillage he had gotten in the Town
was much, having been for a long time an impregnable den of thieves; yet the
loss of the Army so intermingled the sour with the sweet, as forced Moses
to seek a further revenge, that he sacked Veratio, Solmos, and Kupronka, and
with two thousand prisoners, most women and children, came to Esenberg, not
far from the Princes Palace, where he there Encamped.

Sigismundus coming to view his Army, was presented with the Prisoners, and
six and thirty Ensigns; where celebrating thanks to Almighty God in triumph
of those victories, he was made acquainted with the service Smith had done at
Olumpagh, Stowle-Wesenburg and Regal, for which with great honor he gave him
three Turks heads in a Shield for his Arms, by Patent, under his hand and
Seal, with an Oath ever to wear them in his Colors, his Picture in Gould,
and three hundred Ducats, yearly for a Pension.



The Patent.
SIGISMVNDVS BATHORI, Dei gratia Dux Transilvaniae, Wallachiae, and Vandalorum;
Comes Anchard, Salford, Growenda; Cunctis his literis significansus qui eas
lecturi aut audituri sunt, concessam licentiam aut facultatem Iohanni Smith,
natione Anglo Generoso, 250. militum Capitan^o sub Illustrissimi and Gravissimi
Henrici Volda, Comitis de Meldri, Salmariae, and Peldoiae primario, ex 1000.
equitibus and 1500. peditibus bello Vngarico conductione in Provincias
suprascriptas sub Authoritate nostra: cui servituti omni laud, perpetuaque
memoria dignum praebuit sese erga nos, ut virum strenuum pugnantem pro aris and
focis decet. Quare e favore nostro militario ipsumordine condonavimus, and in
Sigillum illius tria Turcica Capita designare and deprimere concessimus, quae
ipse gladio suo ad Vrbem Regalem in singulari praelio vicit, mactavit, atque
decollavit in Transilvaniae Provincia: Sed fortuna cum variabilis ancepsque sit
idem forte fortuito in Wallachia Provincia Anno Domini 1602. die Mensis
Novembris 18. cum multis aliis etian Nobilibus and aliis quibusdam militibus
captus est a Domino Bascha electo ex Cambia regionis Tartariae, cujus
severitate adductus salutem quantam potuit quaesivit, tantumque effecit, Deo
omnipotente adjuvante, ut deliberavit se, and ad suos Commilitones revertit; ex
quibus ipsum liberavimus, and haec nobis testimonia habuit ut majori licentia
frueretur qua dignus esset, jam tendet in patriam suam dulcissimam: Rogamus
ergo omnes nostros charissimos, confinitimos, Duces, Principes, Comites,
Barons, Gubernatores Vrbium and Navium in eadem Regione and caeterarum
Provinciarum in quibus ille residere conatiu fuerit ut idem permittatur
Capitancus libere sine obstaculo omni versari. Haec ^cientes pergra^um nobis
feceritis. Signatum Lesprizia in Misnia die Mensis Decembris 9. Anno Domini
1603.



Cum Privilegio propriae Majestatis. SIGISMVNDVS BATHORI.

UNIVERSIS, and singulis, cujuscunque loci, status, gradus ordinis, ac
conditionis ad quos hoc praesens scriptum pervenerit, Guilielmus Segar Eques
auratus alias dictus Garterus Principalis Rex Armorum Anglicorum, Salutem.
Sciatis, quod Ego praedictus Garterus, notum, testatumque facio, quod Patentem
suprascripium, cum manu propriapraedicti Ducis Transilvaniae subsignatum, and
Sigillo suo affixum, Vidi: and Copiam veram ejusdem (in perpetuam rei memoriam)
transcripsi, and recordavi in Archivis, and Registris Officii Armorum. Datum
Londini 19. die Augusti, Anno Domini 1625. Annoque Regni Domini nostri CAROLI
Dei gratia Magnae Britanniae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris,
etc. Primo.

GVILIELMVS SEGAR, Garterus.

The same in English.
SIGISMVNDVS BATHOR, by the Grace of God, Duke of Transylvania, Wallachia, and
Moldavia, Earl of Anchard, Salford and Growenda; to whom this Writing may come
or appear. Know that We have given leave and license to John Smith an English
Gentleman, Captain of 250. Soldiers, under the most Generous and Honorable
Henry Volda, Earl of Meldritch, Salmaria, and Peldoia, Colonel of a thousand
horse, and fifteen hundred foot, in the wars of Hungary, and in the
Provinces aforesaid under our authority; whose service does deserve all praise
and perpetual memory toward us, as a man that did for God and his Country
overcome his enemies: Wherefore out of Our love and favor, according to the
law of Arms, We have ordained and given him in his shield of Arms, the figure
and description of three Turks heads, which with his sword before the town of
Regal, in single combat he did overcome, kill, and cut off, in the Province of
Transylvania. But fortune, as she is very variable, so it chanced and happened
to him in the Province of Wallachia, in the year our Lord, 1602. the 18. day
of November, with many others, as well Noble men, as also diverse other
Soldiers, were taken prisoners by the Lord Bashaw of Cambia, a Country of
Tartaria; whose cruelty brought him such good fortune, by the help and power
of Almighty God, that he delivered himself, and returned again to his
company and fellow soldiers, of whom We do discharge him, and this he has
in witness thereof, being much more worthy of a better reward; and now intends
to return to his own sweet Country. We desire therefore all our loving and
kind kinsmen, Dukes, Princes, Earls, Barons, Governors of Towns, Cities, or
Ships, in this Kingdom, or any other Provinces he shall come in, that you
freely let pass this the aforesaid Captain, without any hinderance or
molestation, and this doing, with all kindness we are always ready to do the
like for you. Sealed at Lipswick in Misenland, the ninth of December, in the
year of our Lord, 1603.

With the proper privilege of his Majesty. SIGISMVNDVS BATHOR.

TO all and singular, in what place, state, degree, order, or condition
whatsoever, to whom this present writing shall come: [ William Segar Knight,
otherwise Garter, and principal King of Arms of England, wish health. Know
that I the aforesaid Garter, do witness and approve, that this aforesaid
Patent, I have seen, signed, and sealed, under the proper hand and Seal
Manual of the said Duke of Transylvania, and a true copy of the same, as a
thing for perpetual memory, I have subscribed and recorded in the Register and
office of the Heralds of Arms. Dated at London the nineteenth day of August,
in the year of our Lord, 1625. and in the first year of our Sovereign Lord
Charles by the grace of God, King of great Britain, France, and Ireland;
Defender of the faith, etc.

WILLIAM SEGAR.

CHAP. IX.
Sigismundus sends Ambassadors unto the Emperor; the conditions re-assured;
He yields up all to Busca, and returns to Prague.

BVsca having all this time been raising new forces, was commanded from the
Emperor again to invade Transylvania, which being one of the fruitfullest and
strongest Countries in those parts, was now rather a desert, or the very
spectacle of desolation; their fruits and fields overgrowne with weeds, their
Churches and battered Palaces and best buildings, as for fear, hid with Moss
and Ivy; being the very Bulwark and Rampire of a great part of Europe, most
fit by all Christians to have been supplied and maintained, was thus brought
to ruin by them it most concerned to support it. But alas, what is it, when
the power of Majesty pampered in all delights of pleasant vanity, neither
knowing nor considering the labor of the Ploughman, the hazard of the
Merchant, the oppression of Statesmen; nor feeling the piercing torments of
broken limbs, and inveterated wounds, the toilsome marches, the bad lodging,
the hungry diet, and the extreme misery that Soldiers endure to secure all
those estates, and yet by the spite of malicious detraction, starves for want
of their reward and recompenses; whilst the politic Courtier, that commonly
aims more at his own honors and ends, than his Countries good, or his Princes
glory, honor, or security, as this worthy Prince too well could testify. But
the Emperor being certified how weak and desperate his estate was, sent Busca
again with a great Army, to try his fortune once more in Transylvania. The
Prince considering how his Country and subjects were consumed, the small means
he had any longer to defend his estate, both against the cruelty of the Turk,
and the power of the Emperor, and the small care the Polanders had in supplying
him, as they had promised, sent to Busca to have truce, till messengers might
be sent to the Emperor for some better agreement, wherewith Busca was
contented. The Ambassadors so prevailed, that the Emperor re-assured unto
them the conditions he had promised the Prince at their confederacy for the
lands in Silesia, with 60000. ducats presently in hand, and 50000. ducats
yearly as a pension. When this conclusion was known to Moses his Liestenant
then in the field with the Army, that would do any thing rather than come in
subjection to the Germans, Busca in Transylvania overthrows Moses.
he encouraged his Soldiers, and without any more ado marched to encounter
Busca, whom he found much better provided than he expected; so that betwixt
them in six or seven hours, more than five or six thousand on both sides lay
dead in the field. Moses thus overthrown, (...) to the Turks at Temesware,
and his scattered troops some one way, some another.

The Prince understanding of this so sudden and unexpected accident, only
accompanied with an hundred of his Gentry and Nobility, went into the camp to
Busca, to let him know, how ignorant he was of his Liestenants error, that had
done it without his direction or knowledge, freely offering to perform what
was concluded by his Ambassadors with the Emperor; Sigismundus yields his
country to E^s^a.
and so causing all his Garrisons to come out of their strong holds, he
delivered all to Busca for the Emperor, and so went to Prague, where he was
honorably received, and established in his possessions, as his Imperial
Majesty had promised. Busca assembling all the Nobility, took their oaths of
allegiance and fidelity, and thus their Prince being gone, Trasilvania became
again subject to the Emperor.

Now after the death of Michael, Busca assisteth Rodoll in Wallachia.
Vavoyd of Wallachia, the Turk sent one Jeremy to be their Vavoyd or Prince;
whose insulting tyranny caused the people to take Arms against him, so that he
was forced to fly into the confines of Moldavia; and Busca in the behalf of
the Emperor, proclaimed the Lord Rodoll in his stead. But Jeremy having
assembled an Army of forty thousand Turks, Tartars, and Moldavians, returned
into Wallachia. Rodoll not yet able to raise such a power, fled into
Transylvania to Busca, his ancient friend; who considering well of the matter,
and how good it would be for his own security to have Wallachia subject to the
Emperor, or at least such an employment for the remainders of the old
Regiments of Sigismundus, (of whose greatness and true affection he was very
suspicious,) sent them with Rodoll to recover Wallachia, conducted by the
valiant Captains, the Earl Meldritch, Earl Veltus, Earl Nederspolt, Earl
Zarvana, the Lord Bechlefield, the Lord Budendorfe, with their Regiments, and
diverse others of great rank and quality, the greatest friends and alliances
the Prince had; who with thirty thousand, marched along by the river Altus, to
the streights of Rebrinke, where they entered Wallachia, encamping at Raza;
Jeremy lying at Argish, drew his Army into his old camp, in the plains of
Peteske, and with his best diligence fortified it, intending to defend himself
till more power came to him from the Crym-Tartar. Many small parties that came
to his camp, Rodoll cut off, and in the nights would cause their heads to be
thrown up and down before the trenches. Seven of their Porters were taken,
whom Jeremy commanded to be stayed quick, and after hung their skins upon
poles, and their carcasses and heads on stakes by them.

CHAP. X.
The battle of Rotenton; a pretty stratagem of fire-workes by Smith.

ROdoll not knowing how to draw the enemy to battle, raised his Army,
burning and spoiling all where he came, and returned again toward Rebrinke in
the night, as if he had fled upon the general rumor of the Crym-Tartars
coming, which so inflamed the Turks of a happy victory, they urged Jeremy
against his will to follow them. Rodoll seeing his plot fell out as he desired,
so ordered the matter, that having regained the streights, he put his Army in
order, that had been near two days pursued, with continual skirmishes in
his Rear, A battle betwixt Rodoll and Jeremy.
which now making head against the enemy, that followed with their whole Army
in the best manner they could, was furiously charged with six thousand Hydukes,
Wallachians, and Moldavians, led by three Colonells, Oversall, Dubras, and
Calab, to entertain the time till the rest came up; Veltus and Nederspolt with
their Regiments, entertained them with the like courage, till the Zanzacke
Hamesbeg, with six thousand more, came with a fresh charge, which Meldritch and
Budendorfe, rather like enraged lions, than men, so bravely encountered, as if
in them only had consisted the victory; Meldritchs horse being slain under
him, the Turks pressed what they could to have taken him prisoner, but being
remounted, it was thought with his own hand he slew the valiant Zanzacke,
whereupon his troops retyring, the two proud Bashawes, Aladin, and Zizimmus,
brought up the front of the body of their battle. Veltus and Nederspolt having
breathed, and joining their troops with Becklefield and Zarvana, with such an
incredible courage charged the left flancke of Zizimmus, as put them all in
disorder, where Zizimmus the Bashaw was taken prisoner, but died presently upon
his wounds. Jeremy seeing now the maine battle of Rodoll advance, being thus
constrained, like a valiant Prince in his front of the Vantgard, by his example
so bravely encouraged his soldiers, that Rodoll found no great assurance of
the victory. Thus being joined in this bloody massacre, that there was scarce
ground to stand upon, but upon the dead carcasses, which in less than an hour
were so mingled, as if each Regiment had singled out other. The admired Aladin
that day did leave behind him a glorious name for his valor, whose death many
of his enemies did lament after the victory, which at that instant sell to
Rodoll. It was reported Jeremy was also slain, but it was not so, but fled
with the remainder of his Army to Moldavia, leaving five and twenty thousand
dead in the field, of both Armies. Wallachia subjected to the Emperor.
And thus Rodoll was seated again in his Sovereignty, and Wallachia became
subject to the Emperor.

But long he rested not to settle his new estate, but there came news, that
certain Regiments of straggling Tartars, were forraging those parts toward
Moldavia. Meldritch with thirteen thousand men was sent against them, but when
they heard it was the Crym-Tartar and his two sons, with an Army of thirty
thousand; and Jeremy, that had escaped with fourteen or fifteen thousand,
lay in ambush for them about Langanaw, he retired toward Rottenton, a strong
garrison for Rodoll; but they were so environed with these hellish numbers,
they could make no great haste for skirmishing with their scouts, forragers,
and small parties that still encountered them. But one night amongst the rest,
having made a passage through a wood, with an incredible expedition, cutting
trees thwart each other to hinder their passage, in a thick fogge early in the
morning, unexpectedly they met two thousand loaded with pillage, and two or
three hundred horse and cattle; the most of them were slain and taken
prisoners, who told them where Jeremy lay in the passage, expecting the
Crym-Tartar that was not far from him. Meldritch intending to make his
passage perforce, was advised of a pretty stratagem by the English Smith, which
presently he thus accomplished; for having accommodated two or three hundred
truncks with wild fire, upon the heads of lances, and charging the enemy in
the night, gave fire to the truncks, which blazed forth such flames and
sparkles, that it so amazed not only their horses, but their foot also; that
by the means of this fl^ming encounter, their own horses turned tails with
such fury, as by their violence overthrew Jeremy and his Army, without any
loss at all to speak of to Meldritch. But of this victory long they triumphed
not; for being within three leagues of Rottenton, the Tartar with near forty
thousand so beset them, that they must either fight, or be cut in pieces
flying. Here Busca and the Emperor had their desire; for the Sun no sooner
displayed his beams, than the Tartar his colors; where at midday he stayed a
while, to see the passage of a tyrannical and treacherous imposture, till the
earth did blush with the blood of honesty, that the Sun for shame did hide
himself, from so monstrous sight of a cowardly calamity. It was a most brave
sight to see the banners and ensigns streaming in the air, the glittering of
Armor, the variety of colors, the motion of plumes, the forests of lances,
and the thickness of shorter weapons, till the silent expedition of the bloody
blast from the murdering Ordnance, whose roaring voice is not so soon heard,
as felt by the aimed at object, which made among them a most lamentable
slaughter.

CHAP. XI.
The names of the English that were slain in the battle of Rottenton; and how
Captain Smith is taken prisoner; and sold for a slave.

IN the valley of Veristhorne, betwixt the river of Altus, and the mountain of
Rottenton, was this bloody encounter, where the most of the dearest friends of
the noble Prince Sigismundus perished. Meldritch having ordered his eleven
thousand in the best manner he could, at the ^oot of the mountain upon his
flancks, and before his front, he had pitched sharp stakes, their heads
hardened in the fire, and bent against the enemy, as three battalion of Pikes,
amongst the which also there was dug many small holes. The battle of
Rottenton.
Amongst those stakes was ranged his footmen, that upon the charge was to
retire, as there was occasion. The Tartar having ordered his 40000. for his
best advantage, appointed Mustapha Bashaw to begin the battle, with a
general shout, all their Ensigns displaying, Drums beating, Trumpets and
Howboyes sounding. Nederspolt and Mavazo with their Regiments of horse most
valiantly encountered, and forced them to retire; the Tartar Begolgi with his
Squadrons, darkening the skies with their flights of numberles arrows, who was
as bravely encountered by Veltus and Oberwin, which bloody slaughter continued
more than an hour, till the matchless multitude of the Tartars so increased,
that they retired within their Squadrons of stakes, as was directed. The bloody
Tartar, as scorning he should st^y so long for the victory, with his massy
troops prosecuted the charge: but it was a wonder to see how horse and man
came to the ground among the stakes, whose disordered troops were there so
mangled, that the Christians with a loud shout cried Victoria; and with five or
six field pieces, planted upon the rising of the mountain, did much hurt to
the enemy that still continued the battle with that fury, that Meldritch
seeing there was no possibility long to prevail, joined his small troops in
one body, resolved directly to make his passage or die in the conclusion; and
thus in gross gave a general charge, and for more than half an hour made
his way plain before him, till the maine battle of the Crym-Tartar with two
Regiments of Turks and Ianizaries so overmatched them, that they were
overthrowen. The night approaching, the Earl with some thirteen or fourteen
hundred horse, swamme the River, some were drowned, all the rest slain or
taken prisoners: And thus in this bloody field, near 30000. lay, some
headless, armelesse and leglesse, all cut and mangled; where breathing their
last, they gave this knowledge to the world, that for the lives of so few, the
Crym-Tartar never paid dearer. But now the Countries of Transylvania and
Wallachia, (subjected to the Emperor) and Sigismundus that brave Prince his
Subject and Pensioner, the most of his Nobility, brave Captains and
Soldiers, became a prey to the cruel devouring Turk: where had the Emperor
been as ready to have assisted him, and those three Armies led by three such
worthy Captains, as Michael, Busca, and Himself, and had those three Armies
joined together against the Turk, Ex^racted out of a Book entitled, The
w^r^es of Hungaria, Wall^^hia, and Moldavia, written by Francisco F^rneza, a
lea^ned Italian, the Princes Secretary, and translated by Mr. ^urchas.
let all men judge, how happy it might have been for all Christendom: and
have either regained Bulgaria, or at least have beat him out of Hungaria, where
he has taken much more from the Emperor, than has the Emperor from
Transylvania.

In this dismal battle, where Nederspolt, Veltus, Zarvana, Mavazo, Bavell,
and many other Earls, Barons, Colonels, Captains, brave Gentlemen, and
Soldiers were slain. Give me leave to remember the names of our own
Countrymen with him in those exploits, The English men in this Battle.
that as resolutely as the best in the defense of Christ and his Gospel, ended
their days, as Bask^rfield, Hardwicke, Thomas Milemer, Robert Mullineux,
Thomas Bishop, Francis Compton, George Davison, Nicholas Williams, and one John
a Scot, did what men could do, and when they could do no more, left there
their bodies in testimony of their minds; only Ensign Carleton and Sergeant
Robinson escaped: but Smith among the slaughtered dead bodies, and many a
gasping soul, with toil and wounds lay groaning among the rest, till being
found by the Pillagers he was able to live, and perceiving by his armor and
habit, his ransom might be better to them, than his death, they led him
prisoner with many others; well they used him till his wounds were cured, and
at Axopolis they were all sold for slaves, like beasts in a marketplace, where
every Merchant, viewing their limbs and wounds, caused other slaves to
struggle with them, to try their strength, he fell to the share of Bashaw
Bogall, who sent him forthwith to Adrinopolis, so for Constantinople to his
fair Mistress for a slave. By twenty and twenty chained by the necks, they
marched in file to this great City, where they were delivered to their
several Masters, and he to the young Charatza Tragabig zanda.

CHAP. XII.
How Captain Smith was sent prisoner through the Black and Dissabacca Sea in
Tartaria; the description of those Seas, and his usage.

This Noble Gentlewoman took sometime occasion to show him to some friends, or
rather to speak with him, because she could speak Italian, would feign her
self sick when she should go to the Banians, or weep over the graves, to
know how Bogall took him prisoner; and if he were as the Bashaw writ to her, a
Bohemian Lord conquered by his hand, as he had many others, which ere long he
would present her, whose ransomes should adorn her with the glory of his
conquests.

But when she heard him protest he knew no such matter, nor ever saw Bogall
till he bought him at Axopolis, and that he was an Englishman, only by his
adventures made a Captain in those Countries. To try the truth, she found
means to find out many could speak English, French, Dutch, and Italian, to
whom relating most part of these former passages he thought necessary, which
they so honestly reported to her, she took (as it seemed) much compassion on
him; but having no use for him, left her mother should sell him, she sent him
to her brother, the Tymor Bashaw of Nalbrits, in the Country of Cambia, a
Province in Tartaria.

Here now let us remember his passing in this speculative course from
Constantinople by Sander, Screwe, Panassa, Musa, Lastilla, to Varna, How he was
sent into Tartaria.
an ancient City upon the Black Sea. In all which journey, having little more
liberty, than his eyes judgment since his captivity, he might see the Towns
with their short Towers, and a most plain, fertile, and delicate Country,
especially that most admired place of Greece, now called Romania, but from
Varna, nothing but the Black Sea water, (...) he came to the two Capes of Taur
and Pergilos, where he passed the Straight of Niger, which (as he conjectured)
is some ten leagues long, and three broad, betwixt two low lands, the Channel
is deep, but at the entrance of the Sea Dissabacca, The description of the
Dissabacca Sea.
their are many great Osie-shou^ds, and many great black ro^kes, which the
Turks said were trees, weeds, and mud, thrown from the inland Countries, by
the inundations and violence of the Current, and cast there by the Eddy. They
sailed by many low Isles, and saw many more of those muddy ro^kes, and nothing
else, but salt water, till they came betwixt Susax and Curuske, only two white
towns at the entrance of the river Bruapo appeared: In six or seven days
sail, he saw four or five seeming strong castles of stone, with flat tops and
battlements about them, but arriving at Cambia, he was (according to their
custom) well used. The river was there more than half a mile broad. The
Castle was of a large circumference, foure^^ene or fifteen foot thick, in the
foundation some six foot from the wall, is a Paliizado, and then a Ditch of
about forty foot broad full of water. On the west side of it, is a Town all
of low flat houses, which as be conceived could be of no great strength, yet
it keeps all them barbarous Countries about it in admiration and subjection.
After he had stayed there three days; it was two days more before his guides
brought him to Nalbrits, where the Tymor then was resident, in a great vast
stony Castle with many great Courts about it, environed with high stone walls,
where was quartered their Arms, when they first subjected those Countries,
which only live to labor for those tyrannical Turks.

Smith his usage in Tar^^ria.
To her unkind brother, this kind Lady writ so much for his good usage, that
he half suspected, as much as she intended; for she told him, he should
there but sojourne to learn the language, and what it was to be a Turk, till
time made her Master of her self. But the Tymor her brother, diverted all this
to the worst of cruelty, for within an hour^ after his arrival, he caused his
Drub-man to strip him naked, and shave his head and beard so bare as his hand,
a great ring of iron, with a long stalk bowed like a sickle, rivetted about
his neck, and a coat made of Vlgries hair, guarded about with a piece of an
undrest skin. There were many more Christian slaves, and near an hundred
Forsados of Turks and Moors, and he being the last, was slave of slaves to
them all. Among these slavish fortunes there was no great choice; for the best
was so bad, a dog could hardly have lived to endure, and yet for all their
pains and labors no more regarded than a beast.

CHAP. XIII.
The Turks diet; the Slaves diet; the attire of the Tartars; and manner of
Wars and Religions, etc.

The Tymors diet of Cambia is as the Turks.
THe Tymor and his friends fed upon Pillaw, which is boiled Rice and Garnances,
with little bits of mutton or Buckones, which is roasted pieces of Horse, Bull,
Vlgrie, or any beasts. Samboyses and Muselbit* are great dainties, and yet but
round pies, full of all sorts of flesh they can get chopped with variety of
herbs. Their best drink is Coffa, of a grain they call Coava, boiled with
water; and Sherbecke, which is only honey and water; M^res milk, or the milk
of any beast, they hold restorative: but all the Comminaltie drink pure water.
The Slaves diet.
Their bread is made of this Coava, which is a kind of black whea^, and
Cuskus a small white seed like Millya in Biskay: but our common victual, the
entrails of Horse and Vlgries; of this cut in small pieces, they will fill a
great Cauldron, and being boiled with Cuskus, and put in great bowls in the
form of chaffing-dishes, they sit round about it on the ground, after they
have raked it through so often as they please with their soul fists, the
remainder was for the Christian slaves. Some of this broth they would temper
with Cuskus pounded, and putting the fire off from the hearth, power there a
bowl full, then cover it with co^les till it be baked, which stewed with the
remainder of the broth, and some small pieces of flesh, was an extraordinary
dainty.

The better sort are attired like Turks, The Attire o^ those Tartars.
but the plain Tartar has a black sheep skin over his back, and two of
the legs tied about his neck; the other two about his middle, with another
over his belly, and the legs tied in the like manner behind him: then two more
made like a pair of b^ses, serves him for breeches; with a little close cap
to his skull of black felt, and they use exceeding much of this felt, for
carpets, for bedding, for Coats, and Idols. Their houses are much worse than
your Irish, but the Inland Countries have none but Carts and Tents, which
they ever remove from Country to Country, as they see occasion, driving with
them infinite troops of black sheep, Cattle and Vlgries, eating all up
before them, as they go.

For the Tartars of Nagi, they have neither Town, nor house, corn, The
Tartars of Nagi and their manners.
nor drink; but flesh and milk. The milk they keep in great skins like
Burracho's, which though it be never so sower, it agrees well with their
strong stomachs. They live all in Hordias, as does the Crim-Tartars, three or
four hundred in a company, in great Carts fifteen or sixteen foot broad,
which is covered with small rods, wattled together in the form of a birds nest
turned upwards, and with the ashes of bones tempered with oil, Camels hair,
and a clay they have: they lome them so well, that no weather will pierce them,
and yet very light. Each Hordia has a Murse, which they obey as their King.
Their Gods are infinite. One or two thousand of those glittering white Carts
drawn with Camels, Dear, Bulls, and Vlgries, they bring round in a ring, where
they pitch their Camp; and the Murse, with his chief alliances, are placed in
the midst. They do much hurt when they can get any Stroggs, which are great
boats used upon the river Volga, (which they call Edle) to them that dwell in
the Country of Perolog, and would do much more, were it not for the
Muscovites Garrisons that there inhabit.

CHAP. XIIII.
The description of the Crym-Tartars; their houses and carts; their Idolatry in
their lodgings.

NOw you are to understand, The description of the Crym-Tartars Court.
Tartary and Scythia are all one, but so large and spacious, few or none could
ever perfectly describe it, nor all the several kinds of those most barbarous
people that inhabit it. Those we call the Crym-Tartars, border upon Moldavia,
Podolia, Lituania, and Russia, are much more regular than the interior parts of
Scythia. This great Tartarian Prince, that has so troubled all his neighbors,
they always call Chan, which signifies Emperor; but we, the Crym-Tartar. He
lives for most part in the best champion plains of many Provinces; and his
removing Court is like a great City of houses and tents, drawn on Carts, all
so orderly placed East and West, on the right and left hand of the Prince his
house, which is always in the midst toward the South, before which none may
pitch their houses, every one knowing their order and quarter, His houses and
carts.
as in an Army. The Princes houses are very artificially wrought, both the
foundation, sides, and roof of wickers, ascending round to the top like a
Dove-coat; this they cover with white felt, or white earth tempered with the
powder of bones, that it may shine the whiter; sometimes with black felt,
curiously painted with vines, trees, birds, and beasts; the breadth of the
Carts are eighteen or twenty foot, but the house stretches four or five foot
over each side, and is drawn with ten or twelve, or for more state, twenty
Camels and Oxen. Baskets.
They have also great baskets, made of smaller wickers like great chests, with
a covering or the same, all covered over with black felt, rubbed over with
tallow and sheeps milk, to keep out the rain; prettily bedecked with
painting or feathers; in those they put their household stuff and treasure,
drawn upon other carts for that purpose. When they take down their houses,
they set the door always toward the South, and their carts thirty or forty
foot distant on each side, East and West, as if they were two walls: the women
also have most curious carts; every one of his wives has a great one for
herself, and so many other for her attendants, that they seem as many Courts,
as he has wives. One great Tartar or Nobleman, will have for his particular,
more than an hundred of those houses and carts, for his several offices and
uses, but set so far from each other, they will seem like a great village.
Their idolatry in their lodgings.
Having taken their houses from the carts, they place the Master always
toward the North; over whose head is always an Image like a Puppet, made of
felt, which they call his brother; the women on his left hand, and over the
chief Mistress her head, such another brother, and between them a little one,
which is the keeper of the house; at the good wives beds-feet is a kids skin,
stuffed with wool, and near it a Puppet looking toward the Maids; next the
door another, with a dried cowes udder, for the women that milk the kine,
because only the men milk mares; every morning those Images in their orders
they besprinkle with that they drink, be it Cossmos, Cossmos is M^^e^ m^^ke.
or whatsoever, but all the white mares milk is reserved for the Prince. Then
without the door, thrice to the South, every one bowing his knee in honor of
the fire; then the like to the East, in honor of the air; then to the West,
in honor of the water; and lastly to the North, in behalf of the dead. After
the servant has done this duty to the four quarters of the world, he returns
into the house, where his fellows stand waiting, ready with two cups and two
basins to give their master, and his wife that lay with him (...) night, to
wash and drink, who must keep him company all the day following; and all his
other wives come thither to drink, where he keeps his house that day; and
all the gifts presented him till night, are laid up in her chests; and at the
door a bench full of cups, and drink for any of them to make merry.

Chap. XV.
Their feasts; common diet; Princes estate; buildings; tributes; laws; slaves;
entertainment of Ambassadors.

FOr their feasts they have all sorts of beasts, birds, fish, fruits, Their
feasts.
and herbs they can get, but the more variety of wild ones is the best; to
which they have excellent drink made of rice, millit, and honey, like wine;
they have also wine, but in Summer they drink most Cossmos, that stands
ready always at the entrance of the door, and by it a fiddler; when the master
of the house begins to drink, they all cry, ha, ha, and the fiddler plays,
then they all clap their hands and dance, the men before their Masters, the
women before their Mistresses; and ever when he drinks, they cry as before;
then the fiddler stays till they drink all round; sometimes they will drink
for the victory; and to provoke one to drink, they will pull him by the ears,
and lugge and draw him, to stretch and heat him, clapping their hands, stamping
with their feet, and dancing before the champions, offering them cups, then
draw them back again to increase their appetite; and thus continue till they
be drunk, or their drink done, which they hold an honor, and no infirmity.

Though the ground be fertile, they sow little corn, Their common diet.
yet the Gentlemen have bread and hony-wine; grapes they have plenty, and wine
privately, and good flesh and fish; but the common sort stamped millit, mingled
with milk and water. They call Cassa for meat, and drink any thing; also any
beast unprofitable for service they kill, when they are like to die, or however
they die; they will eat them, guts liver and all; but the most fleshy parts
they cut in thin slices, and hang it up in the Sun and wind wihout salting,
where it will dry so hard, it will not putrify in a long time. A Ram they
esteem a great feast among forty or fifty, which they cut in pieces boiled or
roast, puts it in a great bowl with salt and water, for other sauce they have
none; the master of the feast gives every one a piece, which he eats by
himself, or carries away with him. How they become populous.
Thus their hard fare makes them so infinite in Cattle, and their great number
of captived women to breed upon, makes them so populous. But near the
Christian frontiers, the baser sort make little cottages of wood, called Vlusi,
daubed over with dirt, and beasts dung covered with sedge; yet in Summer they
leave them, beginning their progress in April, with their wives, children,
and slaves, in their carted houses, scarce convenient for four or five
persons; driving their flocks toward Perecopya, and sometimes into Taurica, or
Osow, a town upon the river Tanais, which is great and swift, where the Turk
has a garrison; and in October return again to their Cottages. Their Clothes
are the skins of dogs, goats, and sheep, lined with cotton cloth, made of
their finest wool, for of their worst they make their felt, which they use in
abundance, as well for shoes and caps, as houses, beds, and Idols; also of
the coarse wool mingled with horse hair, they make all their cordage. Their
Princes state.
Notwithstanding this wandering life, their Princes sit in great state upon
beds, or carpits, and with great reverence are attended both by men and women,
and richly served in plate, and great silver cups, delivered upon the knee,
attired in rich furs, lined with plush, or taffity, or robes of tissue. These
Tartars possess many large and goodly plains, wherein feed innumerable herds
of horse and cattle, as well wild as tame; which are Elkes, Bisones, Horses,
Dear, Sheep, Goats, Swine, Bears, and diverse others.

Ancient buildings.
In those countries are the ruins of many fair Monasteries, Castles, and
Cities, as Bacasaray, Salutium, Almassary, Perecopya, Cremum, Sedacom, Capha,
and diverse others by the Sea, but all kept with strong garrisons for the great
Turk, who yearly by trade or traffic, receives the chief commodities
those fertile countries afford, as Bezer, Rice, Furs, Hides, Commodities for
tribute to the Turk.
Butter, Salt, Cattle, and Slaves, yet by the spoils they get from the secure
and idle Christians, they maintain themselves in this Pomp. Also their wives,
of whom they have as many as they will, very costly, yet in a constant custom
with decency.

Go^d laws, yet no lawyers.
They are Mahometans, as are the Turks, from whom also they have their Laws,
but no Lawyers, nor Attournies, only Judges, and Justices in every Village, or
Hordia; but capital criminalls, or matters of moment, before the Chan
himself, or Privy Counsels, of whom they are always heard, and speedily
discharged; for any may have access at any time to them, before whom they
appear with great reverence, adoring their Princes as Gods, and their
spiritual Judges as Saints; for Justice is with such integrity and expedition
executed, without covetousness, bribery, partiality, and brawling, that in six
months they have sometimes scarce six causes to hear. About the Princes court
none but his guard wears any weapon, but abroad they go very strong, because
there are many bandytos, and Thieves.

Their slaves.
They use the Hungarians, Russians, Wallachians, and Moldavian slaves (whereof
they have plenty) as beasts to every work; and those Tartars that serve the
Chan, or noblemen, have only victual and apparel, the rest are generally
nasty, and idle, naturally miserable, and in their wars better thieves than
soldiers,

Th^s Chan has yearly a Donative from the King of Poland, (...).
the Dukes of Lituania, Moldavia, and Nagagon Tartars; their Messengers
commonly he uses bountifully, and very nobly, but sometimes most cruelly;
when any of them does bring their Presents, by his household Officers they are
entertained in a plain field, with a moderate proportion of flesh, bread and
wine, for once; but when they come before him, the Sultaines, Tuians, Vlans,
Marhies, his chief Officers and Counselors attend, one man only brings the
Ambassador to the Court gate, but to the Chan he is led between two
Counselors; where s^luting him upon their bended knees, declaring their
message, are admitted to eat with him, and presented with a great silver cup
full of Mead from his own hand, but they drink it upon their knees: when they
aredispatched, he invites them again, the feast ended, they go back a little
from the Palace door, and rewarded with silk Vestures wrought with gold down
to their anckles, with an horse or two, and sometimes a slave of their own
Nation; in them robes presently they come to him again, to give him thanks,
take their leave, and so depart.

CHAP. XVI.
How he levieth an Army; their Arms and Provision; how he divides the
spoil; and his service to the Great Turk.

WHen he intends any wars, How he levieth an Army.
he must first have leave of the Great Turk, whom he is bound to assist when
he commands, receiving daily for himself and chief of his Nobility,
pensions from the Turk, that holds all Kings but slaves, that pay tribute or
are subject to any: signifying his intent to all his subjects, within a month
commonly he raises his Army, and every man is to furnish himself for three
months victuals, which is parched Millit, or grownd to meal, which they
ordinarily mingle with water (as is said) hard cheese or cruds dried, and
beaten to powder, a little will make much water like milk, and dried flesh,
this they put also up in sackes: The Chan and his Nobles have some bread and
Aquavitae, and quick cattle to kill when they please, wherewith very
sparingly they are contented. Being provided with expert Guides, and got into
the Country he intends to invade, he sends forth his Scouts to bring in what
prisoners they can, from whom he will wrest the utmost of their knowledge fit
for his purpose: having advised with his Council, what is most fit to be done,
the Nobility, according to their antiquity, does march; then moves he with
his whole Army: if he find there is no enemy to oppose him, he advises how
far they shall invade, commanding every man (upon pain of his life) to kill
all the obvious Rusticks; but not to hurt any women, or children.

Ten, or fifteen thousand, he commonly places, The manner of his wars.
where he finds most convenient for his standing Camp; the rest of his
Army he divides in several troops, bearing ten or twelve miles s^uare before
them, and ever within three or four days return to their Camp, putting all
to fire and sword, but that they carry with them back to their Camp; and in
this scattering manner he will invade a Country, and be gone with his prey,
with an incredible expedition. But if he understand of an enemy, he will
either fight in Ambuscado, or fly; for he will never fight any battle if he
can choose, but upon treble advantage; yet by his innumerable flights of
arrows, I have seen fly from his flying troops, we could not well judge,
whether his fighting or flying was most dangerous, so good is h^s horse, and so
expert his bowmen; but if they be so entangled they must fight, there is none
can be more hardy, or resolute in their defenses.

Regaining his own borders, How he divides the spoil.
he takes the tenth of the principal captives, man, woman, child, or beast
(but his captains that t^ke them, will accept of some particular person they
best like for themselves) the rest are divided amongst the whole Army,
according to every man's desert, and quality; that they keep them, or sell them
to who will give most; but they will not forget to use all the means they can,
to know their estates, friends, and quality, and the better they find you, the
worse they will use you, till you do agree to pay such a ransom, as they will
impose upon you; therefore many great persons have ^ndured much misery to
conceal themselves, because their ransomes areso intolerable: their best hope
is of some Christian Agent, that many times comes to redeem slaves, either
with money, or man for man; those Agents knowing so well the extreme
covetousness of the Tartars, do use to bribe some Jew or Merchant, that
feigning they will sell them again to some other nation, are often redeemed for
a very small ransom.

How the Chan does serve the great Turk.
But to this Tartarian Army, when the Turk commands, he goes with some small
artillery; and the Nagagians, Perecopens, Crimes, Osovens, and Cersessians, are
his tributaries; but the Petigorves, Oczaconians, Byalogordens, and Dobrucen
Tartars, the Turk by covenant commands to follow him, so that from all those
Tartars he has had an Army of an hundred and twenty thousand excellent, swift,
stomackfull Tartarian horse, for foot they have none. Now the Chan, his
Sultaines and nobility, use Turkish, Caramanian, Arabian, Parthian, and other
strange Tartarian horses; the swiftest they esteem the best; seldom they
feed any more at home, than they have present use for; but upon their plains
is a short wodde like heath, in some countries like gaile, full of berries,
far much better than any grass.

Their Arms.
Their Arms are such as they have surprised or got from the Christians or
Persians, both brest-plates, swords, semiteres, and helmets; bows and arrows
they make most themselves, also their bridles and saddles are indifferent, but
the nobility are very handsome, and well armed like the Turks, in whom
consists their greatest glory; the ordinary sort have little armor, some a
plain young pole unshaven, headed with a piece of iron for a lance; some an
old Christian pike, or a Turks cavatine; yet those tattertimallions will have
two or three horses, some four or five, as well for service, as for to eat;
which makes their Armies seem thrice so many as there are soldiers. The Chan
himself has about his person ten thousand chosen Tartars and Ianizaries, some
small Ordnance, and a white mares tail, with a piece of green taffity on a
great Pike, is carried before him for a standard; because they hold no beast so
precious as a white mare, whose milk is only for the King and nobility, and
to sacrifice to their Idols; but the rest have ensigns of dive^s colors.

For all this miserable knowledge, furniture, and equipage, the mischief they
do in Christendom is wonderful, by reason of their hardness of life and
constitution, obedience, agilitie, and their Emperors bounty, honors, grace,
and dignities he ever bestows upon those, that have done him any memorable
service in the face of his enemies.

The Caspian Sea, A description of the Caspian Sea.
most men agree that have passed it, to be in length about 200. leagues, and in
breadth an hundred and fifty, environed to the East, with the great deserts of
the Tartars of Turkamane; to the West, by the Circasses, and the mountain
Caucasus; to the North, by the river Volga, and the land of Nagay; and to the
South, by Media, and Persia: this sea is fresh water in many places, in others
as salt as the great Ocean; it has many great rivers which fall into it, as
the mighty river of Volga, which is like a sea, running near two thousand
miles, through many great and large Countries, that send into it many other
great rivers; also out of Saberya, Yaick, and Yem, out of the great mountain
Caucasus, the river Sirus, Arash, and diverse others, yet no Sea nearer it than
the black Sea, which is at least an hundred leagues distant: in which Country
live the Georgians, now part Armenians, part Nestorians; it is neither found to
increase or diminish, or empty it self any way, except it be under ground, and
in some places they can find no ground at two hundred fadome.

Many other most strange and wonderful things are in the land of Cathay
toward the North-east, and Chyna toward the South-east, where are many of the
most famous Kingdoms in the world; where most arts, plenty, and curiosities
are in such abundance, as might seem incredible, which hereafter I will
relate, as I have briefly gathered from such authors as have lived there.

CHAP. XVII.
How captain Smith escaped his captivity; slew the Bashaw of Nalbrits in
Cambia; his passage to Russia, Transylvania, and the midst of Europe to
Africa.

ALL the hope he had ever to be delivered from this thraldom, How Smith es^^*
his captivity.
was only the love of Tragabigzanda, who surely was ignorant of his bad usage;
for although he had often debated the matter with some Christians, that had
been there a long time slaves, they could not find how to make an escape, by
any reason or possibility; but God beyond man's expectation or imagination
helps his servants when they least think of help, as it happened to him. So
long he lived in this miserable estate, as he became a thresher at a grange in
a great field, more than a league from the Tymors house; the Bashaw as he ost
used to visit his granges, visited him, and rock occasion so to beat, spurn,
and revile him, that forgetting all reason, he beat out the Tymors brains with
his threshing bat, for they have no flailes; and seeing his estate could be no
worse than it was, clothed himself in his clothes, hid his body under the
straw, filled his knapsacke with corn, shut the doors, mounted his horse, and
ran into the desert at all adventure; two or three days thus fearfully
wandering he knew not whither, and well it was he met not any to ask the way;
being even as taking l^ave of this miserable world, God did direct him to the
great way or Castragan, as they call it, which does cross these large
territories, and generally known among them by these marks.

Their guides in those Countries.
In every crossing of this great way is planted a post, and in it so many bobs
with broad ends, as there be ways, and every bob the figure painted on it,
that demonstrateth to what part that way lead^th; as that which points
toward the Cryms Country, is marked with a half Monne, if toward the
Georgians and Persia, a black man, full of white spots, if toward China, the
picture of the Sun, if toward Muscovia, the sign of a Cross, if toward
the habitation of any other Prince, the figure whereby his standard is known.
To his dying spirits thus God added some comfort in this melancholy journey,
wherein if he had met any of that vilde generation, they had made him their
slave, or knowing the figure engraven in the iron about his neck, (as all
slaves have) he had been sent back again to his master; sixteen days he
traveled in this fear and torment, after the Cross, till he arrived at
Aecopolis, upon the river Don, a garrison of the Muscovites. The governor
after due examination of those his hard events, took off his irons, and so
kindly used him, he thought himself new risen from death, and the good Lady
Callamata, largely supplied all his wants.

The description of Ca^bia, This is as much as he could learn of those wild
Countries, and his passage to R^ssia.
that the Country of Cambia is two days journey from the head of the great
river Bruapo, which springs from many places of the mountains of Innagachi,
that join themselves together in the Poole Kerkas; which they account for the
head, and falls into the Sea Dissabacca, called by some the lake Meotis,
which receives also the river Tanais, and all the rivers that fall from the
great Countries of the Circassi, the Cartaches, and many from the Tauricaes,
Precopes, Cummani, Cossunka, and the Crime; through which Sea he sailed, and up
the river Bruapo to Nalbrits, and thence through the deserts of Circassi to
Aecoplis, as is related; where he stayed with the Governor, till the Convoy
went to Coraguaw; then with his certificate how he found him, and had examined
with his friendly letters sent him by Zumalacke to Caragnaw, whose Governor in
like manner so kindly use him, that by this means he went with a safe conduct
to Letch, and Donka, in Cologoske, and thence to Berniske, and Newgrod in
Seberia, by Rezechica, upon the river Niper, in the confines of Littuania; from
whence with as much kindness he was convoyed in like manner by Coroski,
Duberesko, Duzihell, Drohobus, and Ostroge in Volonis; Saslaw and Lasco in
Podolia; Halico and Collonia in Polonia; and so to Hermonstat in Transylvania.
In all his life he seldom met with more resp^ct, mirth, content, and
entertainment; and not any Governor where he came, but gave him somewhat as a
present, besides his charges; seeing themselves as subject to the like
calamity. His observations in his journey to Transylvania, through the midst of
Europ^.
Through those poor continually forraged Countries there is no passage, but
with the Carravans or Convoyes; for they are Countries rather to be pitied,
than envied; and it is a wonder any should make wars for them. The Villages
are only here and there a few houses of straight Fur trees, laid heads and
points above one another, made fast by notches at the ends more than a man's
height, and with broad split boards, pinned together with wooden pinnes, as
thatched for coverture. In ten Villages you shall scarce find ten iron nails,
except it be in some extraordinary man's house. For their Towns, Aecopolis,
Letch, and D^nko, have rampires made of that wooden walled fashion, double,
and betwixt them earth and stones, but so latched with cross timber, they are
very strong against any thing but fire; and about them a deep ditch, and a
Palizado of young Fur trees: but most of the rest have only a great ditch
cast about them, and the ditches earth is all their rampire; but round well
environed with Palizadoes. Some have some few small pieces of small Ordnance,
and slings, calievers, and muskets, but their generallest weapons are the Russe
bows and arrows; you shall find pavements over bogges, only of young Fur
trees laid cross one over another, for two or three hours journey, or as the
passage requires, and yet in two days travel you shall scarce see six
habitations. Notwithstanding to see how their Lords, Governors, and Captains
are civilized, well attired and acoutred with Jewels, Sables, and Horses, and
after their manner with curious furniture, it is wonderful; but they are all
Lords or slaves, which makes them so subject to every invasion.

In Transylvania he found so many good friends, that but to see, and rejoice
himself (after all those encounters) in his native Country, he would ever
hardly have left them, though the mirror of virtue their Prince was absent.
Being thus glutted with content, and near drowned with joy, he passed high
Hungaria by Fileck, Tocka, Cassovia, and Vnderoroway, by Vlmicht in Moravia, to
Prague in Bohemia; at last he found the most gracious Prince Sigismundus, with
his Colonel at Lipswick in Misenland, who gave him his Pass, intimating the
service he had done, and the honors he had received, with fifteen hundred
ducats of gold to repair his losses: with this he spent some time to visit the
fair Cities and Countries of Drasdon in Saxony, Magdaburgh and Brunswicke;
Cassell in Hessen; Wittenberg, Vilum, and Minikin in Bavaria; Aughsbrough, and
her Universities; Hama, Franckford, Mentz, the Palatinate; Worms, Speyre, and
Strausborough; passing Nancie in Loraine, and France by Paris to Orleans, he
went down the river of Loyer, to Angiers, and embarked himself at Nantz in
Britanny, for Bilbao in Biskay, to see Burgos-Valiadolid, the admired
monastery of the Escuriall, Madrill, Teledo, Cordua, Cuedyriall, Civil,
Cheryes, Cales, and Saint Lucas in Spain.

CHAP. XVIII.
The observations of Captain Smith; Mr. Henry Archer and others in Barbary.

BEing thus satisfied with Europe and Asia, understanding of the wa^res in
Barbary, he went from Gibralter to Guta and Tanger, thence to Saffee, where
growing into acquaintance with a French man of war, the Captain and some
twelve more went to Morocco, to see the ancient monuments of that large
renowned City: it was once the principal City in Barbary, situated in a
goodly plain Country, 14. miles from the great Mount Atlas, and sixty miles
from the Atlanticke Sea; The three golden Bals of Affr^ca.
but now little remaining, but the Kings Palace, which is like a City of it
self, and the Christian Church, on whose flat square steeple is a great brouch
of iron, whereon is placed the three golden Bals of Africa: the first is near
three Else in circumference, the next above it somewhat less, the uppermost
the least over them, at it were an half Ball, and over all a pretty gilded
Pyramides. Against those golden Bals has been shot many a shot, their weight
is recorded 700. weight of pure gold, hollow within, yet no shot did ever hit
them, nor could ever any Conspirator attain that honor as to get them down.
They report the Prince of Morocco betrothed himself to the Kings Daughter of
Aethiopia, he dying before their marriage, she caused those three golden Balls
to be set up for his Monument, The description of Morocco.
and vowed virginity all her life. The Alfantica is also a place of note,
because it is environed with a great wall, wherein lie the goods of all the
Merchants securely guarded. The Iuderea is also (as it were) a City of it
self, where dwell the Jews: the rest for the most part is defaced: but by the
many pinnacles and towers, with Balls on their tops, has much appearance of
much sumptuousness and curiosity. There have been many famous Universities,
which are now but stables for Fowls and Beasts, and the houses in most parts
lie tumbled one above another; the walls of Earth are with the great fresh
floods washed to the ground; nor is there any village in it, but tents for
Strangers, Larbes and Moors. Strange tales they will tell of a great Garden,
wherein were all sorts of Bi^ds, Fishes, Beasts, Fruits and Fountains, which
for beauty, Art and pleasure, exceeded any place known in the world, though
now nothing but dung-hils, Pigeon-houses, shrubs and bushes. There are yet many
excellent fountains adorned with marble, and many arches, pillars, towers,
ports and Temples, but most only relics of lamentable ruins and sad
desolation.

A bloody ^mpresle.
When Mully Hamet reigned in Barbary, he had three sons, Mully Shecke,
Mully Sidan, and Mully Befferres, be a most good and noble King, that governed
well with peace and plenty, till his Empress, more cruel than any beast in
Africa, poisoned him, her own daughter, Mully Shecke his eldest son borne
of a Portugal Lady, and his daughter, to bring Mully Sidan to the Crown now
reigning, which was the cause of all those brawles and wars that followed
betwixt those Brothers, their children, and a Saint that start up, but he
played the Devil.

King Mully Ha^et, ^t the Great Ze^ss of Barbar^e.
King Mully Hamet was not black, as many suppose, but Molata, or tawnie, as
are the most of his subjects; every way noble, kind and friendly, very rich
and pompous in Sta^e and Majesty, though he sits not upon a Throne nor
Chair of Estate, but cross legged upon a rich Carpet, as does the Turk,
whose Religion of Mahomet, with an incredible miserable curiosity they
observe. His Ordinary Guard is at least 5000 but in progress he goes not
with less than 20000. horsemen, himself as rich in all his Equipage, as any
Prince in Christendom, and yet a Contributor to the Turk. His great love to
English m^n.
In all his Kingdom were so few good Artificers, that he entertained from
England, Goldsmiths, Plummers, Carvers, and Polishers of stone, and
Watch-makers, so much he delighted in the reformation of workmanship, he
allowed each of them ten shillings a day standing fee, linen, woollen, silks;
and what they would for diet and apparel, and custome-free to transport, or
import what they would; for there were scarce any of those qualities in his
Kingdoms, but those, of which there are diverse of them living at this present
in London. Amongst the rest, one M^. Henry Archer, a Watch-maker, walking in
Morocco, from the Alfantica to the Iuredea, the way being very foul, met a
great Priest, or a Sante (as they call all great Clergymen) who would have
thrust him into the dirt for the way; but Archer, not knowing what he was, gave
him a box on the ear, presently he was apprehended and condemned to have his
tongue cut out, and his hand cut off: but no sooner it was known at the Kings
Court, but 300. of his Guard came, and broke open the Prison, and delivered
him, although the fact was next degree to Treason.

Concerning this Archer, there is one thing more worth noting: The strange love
of a Lion.
Not far from Mount Atlas, a great Lioness in the heat of the day, did use
to bathe her self, and teach her young Puppies to swim in the river Cauzeff,
of a good breadth; yet she would carry them one after another over the river;
which some Moors perceiving watched their opportunity, and when the river was
between her and them, stole four of her whelps, which she perceiving, with
all the speed she could passed the river, and coming near them they let fall
a whelpe (and fled with the rest) which she took in her mouth, and so returned
to the rest: a Male and a Female of those they gave Mr. Archer, who kept them
in the Kings Garden, till the Male killed the Female, then he brought, it up as
a Puppy-dog lying upon his bed, till it grew so great as a Mastiffe, and no dog
more tame or gentle to them he knew: but being to return for England, at
Saffee he gave him to a Merchant of Marsellis, that presented him to the French
King, who sent him to King James, where it was kept in the Tower seven years:
After one Mr. John Bull, then servant to Mr. Archer, with diverse of his
friends, went to see the Lions, not knowing any thing at all of him; yet this
rare beast smelled him before he saw him, whining, groaning, and tumbling,
with such an expression of acquaintance, that being informed by the Keepers
how-hee came thither; Mr. Bull so prevailed, the Keeper opened the grate, and
Bull went in: But no Dog could fawn more on his Master, than the Lion on
him, licking his feet, hands, and face, skipping and tumbling to and fro, to
the wonder of all the beholders; being satisfied with his acquaintance, he made
shift to get out of the grate. But when the Lion saw his friend gone, no beast
by bellowing, roaring, scratching, and howling, could express more rage and
sorrow, nor in four days after would he either eat or drink.

Another kind Lion in Morocco.
In Morocco, the Kings Lions are all together in a Court, environed with a
great high wall; to those they put a young Puppy-dogge: the greatest Lion had a
sore upon his neck, which this Dog so licked that he was healed: the Lion
defended him from the fury of all the rest, nor durst they eat till the Dog
and he had fed; this Dog grew great, and lived amongst them many years after.

The description of Fez.
Fez also is a most large and plentiful Country, the chief City is called
Fez, divided into two parts; old Fez, containing about 80. thousand households,
the other 4000. pleasantly situated upon a River in the heart of Barbary, part
upon hills, part upon plains, full of people, and all sorts of Merchandise. The
great Temple is called Carucen, in breadth seventeene Arches, in length 120.
borne up with 2500. white marble pillars: under the chief Arch, where the
Tribunal is kept, hangs a most huge lamp, compassed with 110. lesser, under
the other also hang great lamps, and about some are burning fifteen hundred
lights. They say they were all made of the bells the Arabians brought from
Spain. It has three gates of notable height, Priests and Officers so many,
that the circuit of the Church, the Yard, and other houses, is little less
than a mile and an half in compass; there are in this City 200. Schools,
200. Innes, 400. water-mils, 600. water-Conduits, 700. Temples and Oratories;
but fifty of them most stately and richly furnished. Their Alcazer or Burse is
walled about, it has twelve gates, and fifteen walks covered with tents, to
keep the Sun from the Merchants, and them that come there. The Kings Palace,
both for strength and beauty is excellent, and the Citizens have many great
privileges. Those two Countries of Fez and Morocco, are the best part of all
Barbary, abounding with people, cattle, and all good necessaries for man's
use. For the rest, as the Larbes, or Mountainers, the Kingdoms of Cocow,
Algier, Tripoly, Tunis, and Egypt; there are many large histories of them in
diverse languages, A brief description of the most unknowen parts of Africa.
especially that writ by that most excellent Statesman, John de Leo, who
afterward turned Christian. The unknowen Countries of Ginny and Binne, this six
and twenty years have been frequented with a few English ships only to
trade, especially the river of Senaga, by Captain Brimstead, Captain Brockit,
Mr. Crump* and diverse others. Also the great river of Gambra, by Captain
Iobson, who is returned in thither again in the year 1626. with Mr. William
Grent, and thirteen or fourteen others, to stay in the Country, to discover
some way to those rich mines of Gago or Tumbatu, from whence is supposed the
Moors of Barbary have their gold, and the certainty of those supposed
descriptions and relations of those interior parts, which daily the more they
are sought into, the more they are corrected. For surely, those interior parts
of Africa are little known to either English, French, or Dutch, though they
use much the Coast; therefore we will make a little bold with the observations
of the Portugalls.

CHAP. XIX.
The strange discoveries and observations of the Portugalls in Africa.

THe Portugalls on those pars have the glory, How the Portugalls coasted to
the East Ind^es.
who first coasting along this Western shore of Africa, to find passage to
the East Indies, within this hundred and fifty years, even from the Streights
of Gibralter, about the Cape of Bone Esperance to the Persian Gulf, and thence
all along the Asian Coast to the Moluccas, have subjected many great Kingdoms,
erected many Commonwealths, built many great and strong Cities; and where is
it they have not been by trade or force? no not so much as Cape de Verd, and
Sermleone; but most Bays or Rivers, where there is any trade to be had,
especially gold, or conveniencie for refreshment, but they are scattered;
living so amongst those Blacks, by time and cunning they seem to be
naturalized amongst them. As for the Isles of the Canaries, they have fair
Towns, many Villages, and many thousands of people rich in commodities.

Ordoardo Lopez, a noble Portugal, Anno Dom. 1578. Or Edward.
imbarquing himself for Congo to trade, where he found such entertainment,
finding the King much oppressed with enemies, he found means to bring in the
Portugalls to assist him, whereby he planted there Christian Religion, and
spent m^st of his life to bring those Countries to the Crown of Portugal,
which he describes in this manner.

The Kingdom of Congo is about 600. miles diameter any way, The Kingdom: of
Congo.
the chief City called St. Savadore, seated upon an exceeding high mountain,
150. miles from the Sea, very fertile, and inhabited with more than 100000.
persons, where is an excellent prospect over all the plain Countries about
it, well watered, lying (as it were) in the Center of this Kingdom, over all
which the Portugalls now command, though but an handful in comparison of
Negroes. They have flesh and fruits very plentiful of diverse sorts. Wild
Elephants.


This Kingdom is divided into five Provinces, viz. Bamba, Sundi Pango, Batta
and Pembo; but Bamba is the principal, and can afford 400000. men of war.
Elephants are bred over all those Provinces, and of wonderful greatness;
though some report they cannot kneel, nor lie down, they can do both, and
have their joints as other creatures for use: with their fore-seet they will
leap upon trees to pull down the boughs, and are of that strength, they will
shake a great Cocar tree for the nuts, and pull down a good tree with their
ruskes, to get the leaves to eat, as well as sedge and long grass, Cocar nuts
and berries, etc. which with their trunk they put in their mouth, and chew it
with their smaller teeth; in most of those Provinces, are many rich mines, but
the Negars opposed the Portugalls for working in them.

The Kingdom of Angola.
The Kingdom of Angola is wonderful populous, and rich in mines of silver,
copper, and most other mettalls; fruitful in all manner of food, and sundry
sorts of cattle, but dogs flesh they love better than any other meat; they
use few clothes, and no Armor; bows, arrows, and clubs, are their weapons.
But the Portugalls are well armed against those engines, and do buy yearly of
those Blacks more than five thousand sl^ves, and many are people exceeding well
proportioned.

The Kingdom of Anchicos.
The Anchicos are a most valiant nation, but most strange to all about them.
Their Arms are Bows, short and small, wrapped about with serpents skins, of
diverse colors, but so smooth you would think them all one with the wood, and
it makes them very strong; their strings little twigs, but exceeding tough and
flexible; their arrow^s short, which they shoot with an incredible quic^nesse.
They have short axes of brass and copper for swords; wonderful loyal and
faithful, and exceeding simple, yet so active, they skip amongst the rocks
like goats. They trade with them of Nubea, A st^ange money.
and Congo, for Lamache, which is a small kind of shell fish, of an excellent
azure color, male and female, but the female they hold most pure; they value
them at diverse prices, because they are of diverse sorts, and those they use for
coin, to buy and sell, as we do gold and silver; nor will they have any other
money in all those Countries, for which they give Elephants teeth; and slaves
for salt, silk, linen cloth, glasse-beads, and such like Portugal
commodities.

A snambles of man's flesh.
They circumcise themselves, and mark their faces with sundry flashes from
their infancy. They keep a shambles of man's flesh, as if it were beef, or
other victual; for when they cannot have a good market for their slaves; or
their enemies they take, they kill, and sell them in this manner; some are so
resolute, in showing how much they scorn death, they will offer themselves and
slaves, to this butchery to their Prince and friends; and though there be many
nations will eat their enemies, in America and Asia, yet none but those are
known to be so mad, as to cat their slaves and friends also.

Their religions and Idols.
Religions and idols they have as many, as nations and humors; but the devil
has the greatest part of their devotions, whom all those Blacks do say is
white; for there are no Saints but Blacks.

Diverse nations yet unknown, and the wonders of Africa.
But besides those great Kingdoms of Congo, Angola, and Azichi, in those
unfrequented parts are the kingdoms of Lango, Matania, Buttua, ^ofola,
Mozambeche, Quivola, the Isle of Saint Lawrence, Mombaza, Meli^da, the Empires
of Monomatopa, Monemugi, and Presbiter John, with whom they have a kind of
trade, and their rites, customs, climates, temperatures, and commodities by
relation. Also of great Lakes, that deserve the names of Seas, and huge
mountains of diverse sorts, as some scorched with heat, some covered with snow;
the mountains of the Sun also of the Moon, some of crystal, some of iron,
some of silver, and mountains of gold, with the original of Nilus; likewise
sundry forts of cattle, fishes, Fowls, strange beasts, and monstrous
serpents; for Africa was always noted to be a fruitful mother of such
terrible creatures; who meeting at their watering places, which are but Ponds
in desert places, in regard of the heat of the Country, and their extremities
of nature, make strange copulations, and so engender those extraordinary
monsters. Of all these you may read in the history of this Edward Lopez,
translated into English by Abraham Hartwell, and dedicated to John Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, 1597. But because the particul^rs are most concerning
the conversion of those Pagans, by a good poor Priest, that first converted a
Noble man, to convert the King, and the rest of the Nobility; sent for so many
Priests and ornaments into Portugal, to solemnize their baptismes with such
magnificence, which was performed with such strange curiosities, that those
poor Negros adored them as Gods, till the P^iests grew to that wealth, a
Bishop was sent to rule over them, which they would not endure, which
endangered to spoil all before they could be reconciled. But not to trouble
you too long with those rarities of uncertainties; let us return again to
Barbary, where the wars being ended, and Befferres possessed of Morocco, and
his fathers treasure, a new bruit arose amongst them, that Muly Sidan, was
raising an Army against him, who after took his brother Befferres prisoner;
but by reason of the uncertainty, and the perfidious, treacherous, bloody
murders rather than war, amongst those perfidious, barbarous Moors, Smith
returned with Merham, and the rest to Saffe, and so aboard his Ship, to try
some other conclusions at Sea.

CHAP. XX.
A brave Sea fight betwixt two Spanish men of war, and Captain Merham, with
Smith.

MErham a captain of a man of war then in the Road, invited captain Smith,
and two or three more of them aboard with him, where he spared not any thing he
had to express his kindness, to bid them welcome, till it was too late to go
on shore, so that necessity constrained them to stay aboard; a fairer Evening
could not be, yet ere midnight such a storm did arise, they were forced to
let slip Cable, and Anchor, and put to Sea; spooning before the wind, till they
were driven to the Canaries; in the calmes they accommodated themselves, hoping
this strange accident might yet produce some good event; not long it was before
they took a small Bark coming from Teneryf, loaded with Wine; three or four
more they chased, two they took, but found little in them, save a few
passengers, that told them of five Dutch men of war, about the Isles, so that
they stood for Boyadora, upon the Affrican shore, betwixt which and Cape Noa,
they descried to sail. Merham intending to know what they were, hailed them;
very civilly they dansed their topsailes, and desired the man of war to come
aboard them, and take what he would, for they were buttwo poor distressed
Bi^kiners. But Merham the old fox, seeing himself in the lions paws, sprung
his loufe, the other tacked after him, and came close up to his nether quarter,
gave his broad side, and so loufed up to windward; the Vice Admiral did the
like, and at the next bout, the Admiral with a noise of Trumpets, and all his
Ordnance, murderers, and muskets, boorded him on his broad side; the other in
like manner on his ley quarter, that it was so dark, there was little light,
but fire and smoke; long he stayed not, before he fell off, leaving 4. or 5.
of his men sprawling over the grating; after they had battered Merham about an
hour, they boorded him again as before; and threw four kedgers or grapnalls
in iron chains, then shearing off they thought so to have torn down the
grating; but the Admiralls yard was so entangled in their shrouds, Merham had
time to discharge two cross bar shot amongst them, and diverse bolts of iron
made for that purpose, against his bow, that made such a breach, he feared they
both should have sunk for company; so that the Spaniard was as yare in
slipping his chained Grapnalls, as Merham was in cutting the tackling, kept
fast their yards in his shrouds; the Vice Admiral presently cleared himself,
but spared neither his Ordnance nor Muskets to keep Merham from getting away,
till the Admiral had repaired his leake; from twelve at noone, till six at
night, they thus interchanged one volly for another; then the Vice Admiral
fell on starne, staying for the Admiral that came up again to him, and all
that night stood after Merham, that shaped his course for Mamora, but such
small way they made, the next morning they were not three leagues off from Cape
Noa. The two Spanish men of war, for so they were, and well appointed, taking
it in scorn as it seemed, with their chase, broad side, and starne, the one
after the other, within Musket shot, plying their ordnance; and after an hours
work commanded, Merham a maine for the King of Spain upon fair quarter;
Merham drank to them, and so discharged his quarter pieces: which pride the
Spaniard to revenge, boorded him again, and many of them were got to the top
to unsling the maine sail, which the Master and some others from the round
house, caused to their cost to come tumbling down; about the round house the
Spaniards so pestered, that they were forced to the great Cablen and blew it
up; the smoke and fire was so vehement, as they thought the Ship on fire; they
in the fore castle were no less assaulted, that blew up a piece of the
grating, with a great many of Spaniards more; then they cleared themselves with
all speed, and Merham with as much expedition to quench the fire with w^t
clothes and water, which began to grow too fast. The Spaniard still playing
upon him with all the shot they could; the open places presently they covered
with old sails, and prepared themselves to fight to the last man. The angry
Spaniard seeing the fire quenched, hung out a flagge of truce to have but a
parley; but that desperate Merham knew there was but one way with him, and
would have none, but the report of his Ordnance, which he did know well how to
use for his best advantage. Thus they spent the next afternoon, and half
that night, when the Spaniards either lost them, or left them. Seven and
twenty men Merham had slain, and sixteen wounded, and could find they had
received 140. great shot. A wounded Spanyard they kept alive confessed, they
had lost 100. men in the Admiral, which they did fear would sink, ere she
could recover a Port. Thus reaccommodating their sails, they sailed for Sancta
Cruse, Cape Goa, and Magadore, ti^l they came again to Saffee, and then he
returned into England.

CHAP. XXI.
The continuation of the general History of Virginia; the Summer Isles; and
New England; with their present estate from 1624. to this present 1629.

COncerning these Countries, I would be sorry to trouble you with repeating
one thing twice, as with their Maps, Commodities, People, Government and
Religion yet known, the beginning of those plantations, their numbers and
names, with the names of the Adventurers, the yearly proceedings of every
Governor both here and there. As for them misprisions, neglect, grievances,
and the causes of all those rumors, losses and crosses that have happened; I
refer you to the General History, where you shall find all this at large;
especially to those pages, where you may read my letter of advice to the
Council and Company, what of necessity must be done, or lose all and leave
the Country, page 70. what commodities I sent home, page 163. my opinion and
offer to the Company, to feed and defend the Colonies, page 150. my account to
them here of my actions there, page 163. my seven answers to his Majesty's
Commissioners: seven questions what has hindered Virginia, and the remedy,
page 165. How those noble Gentlemen spent near two years in perusing all
letters came from thence; and the differences betwixt many factions, both here
and there, with their complaints; especially about the Sallerie, which should
have been a new office in London, for the well ordering the sale of Tobacco,
that 2500. pounds should yearly have been raised out of it, to pay four or
five hundred pounds yearly to the Governor of that Company; two or three
hundred to his Deputy; the rest into stipends of thirty or fifty pounds
yearly for their Clerks and under Officers which were never there, page 153.
but not one hundred pounds for all them in Virginia, nor any thing for the most
part of the Adventurers in England, except the undertakers for the Lotteries,
Setters out of ships, Adventurers of commodities, also their Factors and many
other Officers, there employed only by friendship to raise their fortunes out
of the labors of the true industrious planters by the title of their office,
who under the color of sincerity, did pillage and deceive all the rest most
cunningly: For more than 150000. pounds have been spent out of the common
stock, besides many thousands have been there consumed, and near 7000.
people that there died, only for want of good order and government, otherwise
long ere this there would have been more than 20000. people, wh^re after
twenty years spent only in complement, and trying new conclusions, was
remaining scarce 1500. with some few cattle.

Then the Company dissolved, but no account of any thing; so that his Majesty
appointed Commissioners to oversee, and give order for their proceedings. Being
thus in a manner left to themselves, since then within these four years, you
shall see how wonderfully they have increased beyond expectation; but so
exactly as I desired, I cannot relate unto you: For although I have tired my
self in seeking and discoursing with those returned thence, more than would a
voyage to Virginia; few can tell me any thing, but of that place or places they
have inhabited, and he is a great traveller that has gone up and down the
river of James Town, been at Pamaunke, Smiths Isles, or Accomack; wherein for
the most part they keep one tune of their now particular abundance, and their
former wants, having been there, some sixteen years, some twelve, some six,
some near twenty, etc. But of their general estate, or any thing of worth,
the most of them does know very little to any purpose.

Now the most I could understand in general, Their estate 1^27.
was from the relation of Mr. Nathaniel Cawsey, that lived there with me, and
returned Anno Dom. 1627. and some others affirm; Sir George Yerley was
Governor, Captain Francis West, Doctor John Poot, Captain Roger Smith,
Captain Matthewes, Captain Tucker, Mr. Clabourne, and Mr. Farrer of the
Council: their habitations many. The Governor, with two or three of the
Council, are for most part at James Town, the rest repair thither as there
is occasion; but every three months they have a general meeting, to consider
of their public affairs.

Their numbers then were about 1500. Their numbers.
some say rather 2000. divided into seventeene or eighteen several
Plantations; the greatest part thereof toward the falls, are so enclosed with
Pallizadoes they regard not the Salvages; and amongst those Plantations above
James Town, they have now found means to take plenty of fish, as well with
lines, as nets, and where the waters are the largest, having means, they need
not want. Their condition with the Salvages.


Upon this River they seldom see any Salvages, but in the woods, many times
their fires: yet some few there are, that upon their opportunity have slain
some few stragglers, which have been revenged with the death of so many of
themselves; but no other attempt has been made upon them this two or three
years.

Their Cattle, Their increase of Cattle and Poultrie.
namely Oxen, Kine, Bulls, they imagine to be about 2000. Goats great store and
great increase; the wild Hogs, which were infinite, are destroyed and eaten by
the Salvages: but no family is so poor, that has not tame Swine sufficient;
and for Poultrie, he is a very bad husband breeds not an hundred in a year,
and the richer sort does daily feed on them.

For bread they have plenty, and so good, Plenty of Corn.
that those that make it well, better cannot be: diverse have much English
corn, especially Mr. Abraham Perce, which prepared this year to sow two
hundred acres of English wheat, and as much with barley, feeding daily about
the number of sixty persons at his own charges.

For drink, some malt the Indian corn, others barley, Their drink.
of which they make good Ale, both strong and small, and such plenty thereof,
few of the upper Planters drink any water: but the better sort are well
furnished with Sack, Aquavitae, and good English Beer.

Their servants commonly feed upon Milk Homini, Their servants diet.
which is bruized Indian corn pounded, and boiled thick, and milk for the
sauce; but boiled with milk, the best of all will often feed on it, and leave
their flesh; with milk, butter and cheese; with fish, Bulls flesh, for they
seldom kill any other, etc. And every one is so applied to his labor about
Tobacco and Corn, which does yield them them such profit, they never regard
any food from the Salvages, nor have they any trade or conference with them,
but upon mere accidents and defiances: and now the Merchants have left it,
there have gone so many voluntary ships within this two years, as have
furnished them with Apparel, Sack, Aquavitae, and all necessaries, much
better than ever before.

For Arms, there is scarce any man but he is furnished with a Piece, Their
Arms and exercise.
a Jack, a Coat of Maile, a Sword, or Rapier; and every Holy Day, every
Plantation does exercise their men in Arms, by which means, hunting and
fowling, the most part of them are most excellent markmen.

For Discoveries they have made none, Their health and discoveries.
nor any other commodity than Tobacco do they apply themselves unto, though
never any was planted at first. And whereas the Country was heretofore held
most intemperate and contagious by many, now they have houses, lodgings and
victual, and the Sun has power to exhale up the moist vapors of the earth,
where they have cut down the wood, which before it could not, being covered
with spreading tops of high trees; they find it much more healthful than
before; nor for their numbers, few Countries are less troubled with death,
sickness, or any other disease, nor where overgrowne women become more
fruitful.

Since this, Sir George Yerley died 1628. Captain West succeeded him; The
present estate of Virginia, 1629.
but about a year after returned for England: Now Doctor Poot is Governor,
and the rest of the Council as before: James Town is yet their chief seat,
most of the wood destroyed, little corn there planted, but all converted into
pasture and gardens, wherein does grow all manner of herbs and roots we have in
England in abundance, and as good grass as can be. Here most of their Cattle
do feed, their Owners being most some one way, some another, about their
plantations, and return again when they please, or any shipping comes in to
trade. Here in winter they have hay for their Cattle, but in other places they
browze upon wood, and the great husks of their corn, with some corn in them,
Mas^^r Hat^hins.
does keep them well Mr. Hutchins says, the^ h^ve 2000.C^^^le, and about
5000. people; but Master Flond, John Davis, William Emerson, and diverse others,
Five ^ho^s^nd p^^^le.
say, about five thousand people, and five t^ousand kine, ^ive thou^^nd ca^e^^.
calves, ox^n, and bull^; for goa^s, hogs, and poult^y; corn, fish, dear, and
many sorts of other wild be^sts; and foul in their season, they have so much
more than they spend, G^a^s, Ho^^and Poult^y ^is^^ce.
they are able to feed thr^e or four hundred men more than they have; and do
often much releeve many ships, both there, and for their return; and this last
year was there at least two or th^ee and twenty sail. They have often much salt
fi^h from New England, but fresh fish enough, when they will take it; Peaches
in abundance at Kecoughtan; Apples, Pears, Apricocks, Vines, figs, and other
fruits some have planted, that prosper^d ^xceedin^ly, but their diligence about
Tobacco, left them to be spoiled by the c^ttell, yet now they begin to
revive; Mistress Pearce, an honest indus^rious woman, has been there near
twenty years, and now returned, sait^, she has a Garden at James town,
Good Hospitality.
containing three ^r some a^^e^, where in one year she has gathered near an
hundred b^shels of ^x^ellent figs; and that of her own provision she can
keep a b^tter house in Virginia, than here in London for 3. or 400. pounds a
year, yet went thither with little or nothing. They have some tame geese,
ducks, and turkies. The masters now do so train up their servants and youth in
shooting dear, and foul, that the youths will kill them as well as their
Mast^^s. They have two brew-houses, but they find the Indian corn so much
better than ours, they begin to leave sow^^g it. Their Cities and Towns are
only scattered houses, they call plantations, as are our Country Villages, but
no Ordnance mounted. The Forts Captain Smith left a building, so ruined, there
is scarce mention where they were; no discoveries of any thing more, than the
curing of Tobacco, by which hitherto, being so present a commodity of gain, it
has brought them to this abundance; but that they are so disjoynted, and every
one commander of himself, to plant what he will: they are now so well
provided, that they are able to subsist; and if they would join together,
Commod^ties worth making, Bla^ke Walnut Ash for P^^es, Oak for planks, knees
for Ships, Cip^esse for Chests, etc.
now to work upon Sope-ashes, Iron, R^pe-oile, Mader, Pitch and Tar, Flax
and Hemp; as for their Tobacco, there comes from many places such abundance,
and the charge so great, it is not worth the bringing home.

There is gone, and now a going, diverse Ships, as Captain Perse, Captain
Prine, with Sir John Harvy to be their governor, with two or three hundred
people; there is also some Bristow, and other parts of the West Country a
preparing, which I heartily pray to God to bless, and send them a happy and
prosperous, voyage.

Nathaniel Causie, Master Hutchins, Master Flood, John Davis, William Emerson,
Master William Barnet, Master Cooper, and others,

CHAP. XXII.
The proceedings and present estate of the Summer Isles, from An. Dom. 1624 to
this present 1629.

FRom the Summer Isles, Master Ireland, and diverse others report, their Forts,
O^dnance, and proceedings, are much as they were in the year 1622. as you may
read in the general History, page 199. Captain Woodhouse governor. There are
few sorts of any fruits in the West Indies, but they grow there in abundance;
yet the fertility of the soil in many places decays, being planted every
year; for their Plantaines, which is a most delicate fruit, they have lately
found a way, by pickling, or drying them, to bring them over into England,
there beinq no such fruit in Europe, and wonderful for increase. For fish,
flesh, figs, wine, and all sorts of most excellent herbs, fruits, and roots
they have in abundance. In this Governors time, a kind of Whale, or rather a
Iubarta, was driven on shore in Southampton tr^be from the west, over an
infinite number of rocks, so bruised, that the water in the Bay where she lay;
was all oily, and the rocks about it all bedasht with Parmacitty, congealed
like ice, a good quantity we gathered, with which we commonly cured any byle,
hurt, or bruise; some burnt it in their lamps, which blowing out, the very
snuff will burn, so long as there is any of the oil remaining, for two or
three days together.

The next Governor, was Captain Philip Bell, The present estate of the Summer
Iler. 1629.
whose time being expired, Captain Roger Wodd possessed his place, a worthy
Gentleman of good desert, and has lived a long time in the Country; their
numbers are about two or three thousand, men, women, and children, who increase
there exceedingly; their greatest complaint, is want of apparel, and too much
custom, and too many officers; the pity is, there, are more men than women,
yet no great mischief, because there is so much less pride: the cattle they
have increase exceedingly; their forts are well maintained by the Merchants
here, and Planters there; to be brief, this I Will is an excellent bit, to rule
great horse.

All the Cohow birds and Egbirds are gone; seldom any wild cats seen; no
Rats to speak of; but the worms are yet very troublesome; the people very
healthful; and the Ravens gone; fish enough, but not so near, the shore as it
used, by the much beating it; it is an I Will that has such a rampire and a
ditch, and for the quantity so manned, victualled, and fortified, as few in the
world do exceed it, or is like it.

The 22. of March, two ships came from thence; An evil mischance.
the Peter-Bonaventure, near two hundred tons, and sixteen pieces of
Ordnance; the Captain, Thomas Sherwin; The Master, Master Edward Some, like
him in condition, a goodly, lusty, proper valiant man: the Lydia, wherein was
Master Anthony Thorn, a smaller ship; were chased by eleven ships of Dunkerk;
being thus overmatched, Captain Sherwin was taken by them in Turbay, only his
valiant Master was slain; the ship with about seventy English men, they
carried betwixt Dover and Callis, to Dunk^rk; but the Lydia safely recovered
Dartmouth.

These noble adventurers for all those losses, patiently do bear them; but
they hope the King and state will understand it is worth keeping, though it
afford nothing but Tobacco, and that now worth little or nothing, custom and
fraught paid, yet it is worth keeping, and not supplanting; though great men
feel not those losses, yet Gardiners, Carpenters, and Smiths do pay for it.

From the relation of Robert Chesteven, and others.

Chap. XXIII.
The proceedings and present estate of New England, Since 1614. to this present
1629.

WHen I went first to the North part of Virginia, where the Westerly Colony had
been planted, it had dissolved it self within a year, and there was not one
Christian in all the land. I was set forth at the sole charge of four
Merchants of London; the Country being then reputed by your westerlings, a most
rockie, barren, desolate desert; but the good return I brought from thence,
Considerations about the loss of ^ime.
with the maps and relations I made of the Country, which I made so manifest,
some of them did believe me, and they were well embraced, both by the
Londoners, and Westerlings, for whom I had promised to undertake it, thinking
to have joined them all together, but that might well have become a work for
Hercules. Betwixt them long there was much contention; the Londoners indeed
went bravely forward; but in three or four years, I and my friends consumed
many hundred pounds amongst the Plimothians, who only sed me but with delays,
promises, and excuses, but no performance of any thing to any purpose. In the
interim, many particular ships went thither, and finding my relations true, and
that I had not taken that I brought home from the French men, as had been
reported; yet further for my pains to discredit me, and my calling it New
England, they obscured it, and shadowed it, with the title of Cannada, till at
my humble suit, it pleased our most Royal King Charles, whom God long keep,
bless, and preserve, then Prince of Wales, to confirm it with my map and
book, by the the title of New England; the gain thence returning did make the
same thereof so increase, that thirty, forty, or fifty sail, went yearly only
to trade and fish; but nothing would be done for a plantation, till about some
hundred, of your Brownists of England, Amsterdam, and Leyden, went to New
Plymouth, whose humorous ignorances, caused them for more than a year, to
endure a wonderful deal of misery, The effect of niggardliness.
with an infinite patience; saying my books and maps were much better cheap to
teach them, than my self; many other have used the like good husbandry, that
have paid soundly in trying their selfewilled conclusions; but those in time
doing well, diverse others have in small handfulls undertaken to go there, to
be several Lords and Kings of themselves, but most vanished to nothing;
notwithstanding the fishing ships, made such good returns, at last it was
engrossed by twenty Pattenties, that divided my map into twenty parts, and cast
lots for their shares; but money not coming in as they expected, procured a
Proclamation, none should go thither without their licenses to fish; but for
every thirty tons of shipping, to pay them five pounds; besides, upon great
penalties, neither to trade with the natives, cut down wood for their stages,
without giving satisfaction, though all the Country is nothing but wood, and
none to make use of it, with many such other pretenses, for to make this
Country plant it self, by its own wealth: hereupon most men grew so
discontented, that few or none would go; so that the Pattenties, who never one
of them had been there, seeing those projects would not prevail, have since
not hindered any to go that would, that within these few last years, more have
gone thither than ever.

Now this year 1629. a great company of people of good rank, A new plan^a^^on
1629
zeal, means, and quality, have made a great stock, and with six good ships
in the months of April and May, they set sail from Thames, for the Bay of
the Massachuselts, otherwise called Charles River; viz. the George Bonaventure,
of twenty pieces of Ordnance, the Talbot nineteen, the Lions-whelpe eight, the
May-flower fourteen, the Four Sisters, fourteen, the Pilgrim four, with
three hundred and fifty men, women, and children; also an hundred and fifteen
head of Cattle, as horse, mares, and neat beast; one and forty goats, some
Conies, with all provision for household, and apparel; six pieces of great
Ordnance for a Fort, with Muskets, Pikes, Corselets, Drums, Colors, with all
provisions necessary for a plantation, for the good of man; other particulars I
understand of no more, than is writ in the general history of those Countries.

But you are to understand that the noble Lord chief Justice Popham, Judge
Doderege; the Right Honorable Earls of Pembroke, Southampton, Salesbury, and
the rest, as I take it, they did all think, as I and them went with me, did;
That had those two Countries been planted, as it was intended, that no other
nation should come plant betwixt us. If ever the King of Spain and we should
fall foul, those Countries being so capable of all materials for shipping, by
this might have been owners of a good Fleet of ships, and to have releeved a
whole Navy from England upon occasion; yea, and to have furnished England with
the most Easterly commodities; and now since, seeing how conveniently the
Summer Isles fell to our shares, so near the West Indies, we might with much
more facility than the Dutchmen have invaded the West Indies, that does now put
in practice, what so long has been advised on, by many an honest English
Statesman. Notes of inconvenience.


Those Countries Ca^taine Smith often times used to call his children that never
had mother; and well he might, for few fathers ever paid dearer for so little
consent; and for those that would truly understand, how many strange accidents
has befallen them and him; how often up, how often down, sometimes near
desperate, and ere long flourishing, cannot but conceive Gods infinite mercies
and favors toward them. Had his designs been to have persuaded men to a
mine of gold, though few does conceive either the charge or pains in refining
it, nor the power nor care to defend it; or some new Invention to pass to the
South Sea; or some strange plot to invade some strange Monastery: or some
portable Country; or some chargeable Fleet to take some rich Carocks in the
East Indies; or Letters of Mart to rob some poor Merchants; what multitudes of
both people and money, would contend to be first employed: but in those noble
endeavors (now) how few of quality, unless it be to beg some Monopoly; and
those seldom seek the common good, but the commons goods; as you may read at
large in his general history, page 217, 218, 219. his general observations
and reasons for this plantation; for yet those Countries are not so forward but
they may become as miserable as ever, if better courses be not taken than is;
as this Smith will plainly demonstrate to his Majesty; or any other noble
person of ability, liable generously to undertake it; how within a short time
to make Virginia able to resist any enemy, that as yet lies open to all; and
yield the King more custom within these few years, in certain staple
commodities, than ever it did in Tobacco; which now not being worth bringing
home, the custom will be as uncertain to the King, as dangerous to the
plantations.

CHAP. XXIIII.
A brief discourse of diverse voyages made unto the goodly Country of Guiana,
and the great River of the Amazons; relating also the present Plantation there.

IT is not unknowen how that most industrious and honorable Knight Sir Walter
Rauleigh, in the year of our Lord 1595. taking the I Will of Trinidado, fell with
the Coast of Guiana Northward of the Line ten degrees, and coasted the Coast;
and searched up the River Oranoca: where understanding that twenty several
voyages had been made by the Spaniards, in discovering this Coast and River;
to find a passage to the great City of Mano, called by them the Eldorado, or
the Golden City: he did his utmost to have found some better satisfaction than
relations: But means failing him, Sparrow left to seek the great City of
Mano.
he left his trusty servant Francis Sparrow to seek it, who wandering up and
down those Countries, some fourteen or fifteen years, unexpectedly
returned: I have heard him say, he was led blinded into this City by Indians;
but little, discourse of any purpose touching the largeness of the report of
it; his body seeming as a man of an uncurable consumption, short^^ dyed here
after in England. There are above thirty fair rivers that fall into the Sea,
between the River of Amazons and Oranoca, which are some nine degrees asunder.

In the year 1605. Captain Ley, brother to that noble Knight S^r Oliver Ley,
C^p^^ine (...) L^y.
with diverse others, planted himself in the River Weapoco, wherein I should
have been a party; but he dyed, and there lies ^urie^, and the supply
miscarrying, the rest escaped as they could.

S^r Thomas Roe, well k^ow^n to be a most noble Gentleman, Sir Th^m^^ R^e
before he went Lord Ambassador to the Great Mogoll, or the Great Turk. spent
a year or two upon this Coast, and about the River of the Amazones, wherein he
most employed Captain Matthew Morton, Cap^a^n M^^^^^
an expert Seaman in the discovery of this famous River, a Gentleman that was
the first shot and mortally supposed wounded to death, with me in Virginia, yet
si^ce h^th been twice with command in the East Indies; Also Captain William
White, Capta^ne Wh^^e.
and diverse others worthy and industrious Gentlemen, both before and since,
has spent much time and charge to discover it more perfitly, but nothing more
effected for a Plantation, t^^^ic was undertaken by Captain Robert Harcote,
1609.

This worthy Gentleman, Cap^ain H^ne^.
after he had by Commission made a discovery to his mind, left his brother
Michael Harcote, with some fifty or sixty m^n in the River Weapoco, and so
presently returned to England, where he obtained by the favor of Prince
Henry, a large Patent for all that Coast called Guiana, together with the
famous River of Amazones, to him and his heirs: but so many troubles here
surprised him, though he did his best to supply them, he was not able, only
some few he sent over as passengers with certain Du^ch-men, but to small
purpose. Thus this business lay dead for diverse years, till Sir Walter
Rauleigh, accompanied with many valiant Soldiers and brave Gentlemen, went his
last voyage to Guiana, amongst the which was Captain Roger North, brother to
the Right Honorable the Lord Dudley North, who upon this voyage having stayed
and seen diverse Rivers upon this Coast, took such a liking to those
Countries, having had before this voyage more perf^ct and particular
information of the excellency of the great River of the Amazones, above any of
the rest, by certain Englishmen returned so rich from thence in good
commodities, they would not go with Sir Walter Rauleigh in search of gold;
that after his return for England, he end^voured by his best abilities to
interest his Country and st^te in those f^re Regions, which by the way of
Lette^s Patents unto diverse Noblemen and Gentlemen of quality, erected into a
company and perpetu^tie for trade and plantation, not knowing of the Interest
of Captain Harcote.

Where upon accompanied with 120. Gentlemen and others, with a ship, Captain
Roger North.
a pi^nace and two sh^llops, to remain in the Country, he set sail from
Plymouth the last of April 1620, and within seven weeks after he arrived well
in the Amazones, only with the loss of one old man: some hundred leagues they
ran up the River to settle his men, where the sight of the Country and people
so contented them, that never men thought themselves, more happy: Some English
and Irish that had lived there some eight years, on^y supplied by the Dutch,
he reduced to his company and to leave the Dutch: having made a good voyage,
to the value of more than the charge, he returned to Englangd with diverse good
commodities besides Tobacco: So that it may well be conceived, that if this
action had not been thus crossed, the Ge^eralitie of England had by this time
been won and encouraged therein. But the time was not yet come, that God
would have this great business effected, by reason of the great power the Lord
Gundamore, Amb^ssadour for the King of Spain, had in England, to cross and
ruin those proceedings, and so unfortunate Captain North was in this
business, he was twice committed prisoner to the Tower, and the goods
detained, till they were spoiled, who beyond all others was by much the
greatest Adventurer and Loser.

Nota ben^.
Notwithstanding all this, those that he had left in the Amazons would not
abandon the Country. Captain Thomas Painton, a worthy Gentleman, his
Lieutenant dead. Captain Charles Parker, brother to the Right Honorable the
Lord Morley, lived there six years after; Mr. John Christmas, five years, so
well, they would not return, although they might, with diverse either Gentlemen
of quality and others: all thus destitute of any supplies from England. But
all authority being d^ssolved, want of government did more wrong their
proceedings, than all other crosses whatsoever. Some relief they had sometime
from the Dutch, who knowing their estates, gave what they pleased and took
what they list. Two brothers Gentlemen, Thomas and William Hixon, who stayed
three years there, are now gone to stay in the Amazons, in the ships lately
sent thither.

The business thus remaining in this sort, three private men left of that
Company, named Mr Thomas Warriner, John Rhodes, and Robert Bims, having lived
there about two years, came for England, and to be free from the disorders
that did grow in the Amazons for want of Government amongst their Contrymen,
and to be quiet amongst themselves, made means to set themselves out for St.
Christophers; their whole number being but fifteen persons, that paid for
their passage in a ship going for Virginia, where they remained a year before
they were supplied, and then that was but four or five men. Thus this I Will, by
this small beginning, having no interruption by their own Country, has now
got the start of the Continent and maine Land of Guiana, which has been laid
apart and let alone until that Captain North, ever watching his best
opportunity and advantage of time in the state, has now again pursued and
set on foot his former design. Captain Harco^e being now willing to surrender
his grant, and to join with Captain North, in passing a new Patent, and to
erect a company for trade and plantation in the Amazons, and all the Coast and
Country of Guiana for ever. Whereupon, they have sent this present year in
January, and since 1628. four ships with near two hundred persons; the first
ship with 112. men, not one miscarried; that rest went since, not yet heard of,
and are preparing another with their best expedition: and since January is
gone from Holland, 100. English and Irish, conducted by the old Planters.

This great River lies under the Line, the two chief head lands North and
South, are about three degrees asunder, the mouth of it is so full of many
great and small Isles, it is an easy matter for an unexperienced Pilot to lose
his way. It is held one of the greatest rivers in America, and as most men
think, in the world: and comes down with such a fresh, it makes the Sea
fresh more than thirty miles from the shore. Captain North having seated his
men about an hundred leagues in the Maine, sent Captain William White, with
th^rtie Gentlemen and others, in a pinuace of thirty tun, to discover further,
which they did some two hundred leagues, where they found the River to divide
it self in two parts, till then all full of Islands, and a Country most
healthful, pleasant and fruitful; for they found food enough, and all
returned safe and in good health: In this discovery they saw many Towns well
inhabited, some with three hundred people, some with five, six, or seven
hundred; and of some they understood to be of so many thousands, most differing
very much, especially in their languages: whereof they suppose by those
Indians, they understand are many hundreds more, unfrequented till then by any
Christian, most of them stark naked, both men, women and children, but they
saw not any such giant-like women as the Rivers name imports. But for those
where Captain North has feated his company, it is not known where Indians
were ever so kind to any Nation, not sparing any pains, danger or labor, to
feed and maintain them. The English following their buildings, fortifications
and sugar-workes; for which they have sent most expert men, and with them all
things necessary for that purpose; to effect which, they want not the help of
those kind Indians to produce; and many other good commodities, which (God
willing) will ere long make plain and apparent to this Kingdom, and all the
Adventurers and Well-willers to this Plantation, to be well worthy the
cherishing and following with all alacrity.

CHAP. XXV.
The beginning and proceedings of the new plantation of St. Christopher by
Captain Warner.

MAster Ralfe Merifield and others, 1623.
having furnished this worhty industrious Gentleman, he arrived at St.
Christophers, as is said, with fifteen men, the 28. of January, 1623. viz.
William Tested, John Rhodes, Robert Bims, Mr. Benifield, Sergeant Jones, Mr.
Ware, William Royle, Rowland Grascocke, Mr. Bond, Mr. Langley, Mr. Weaver,
Edward Warner their Captains son, and now Deputy Governor till his fathers
return, Sergeant Aplon, one Sailor and a Cook: At their arrival they found
three Frenchmen, who sought to oppose Captain Warner, and to set the Indians
upon us; but at last we all became friends, and lived with the Indians a
month, then we built a Fort, and a house, and planting fruits, by September we
made a crop of Tobacco; but upon the nineteenth of September came a Hericano
and blew it away, A Hericano
all this while we lived upon Cassada bread, Potatoes, Plantines, Pines,
Turtels, Guanes, and fish plenty; for drink we h^d Nicnobbie.

^^24.
The 18. of March 1624. arrived Captain Iefferson with three men passengers in
the Hope-well of London, with some trade for the Indians, and then we had
another crop of Tobacco, in the mean time the French had planted themselves in
the other end of the I Will; with this crop Captain Warner returned for England
in September, 1625.

^^^5.
In his absence came in a French pinnace, under the command of Monsieur de
Nombe, that told us, the Indians had slain some Frenchmen in other of the
Charybes Isles, and that there were six Peryagoes, which are huge great trees
formed as your Canowes, but so laid out on the sides with boords, (...) ^^^^^h
^^e (...) Ind^^^^.
they will seem like a little Gally: six of those, with about sour or five
hundred strange Indians came unto us, we bade them be gone, but they would not;
whereupon we and the French joined together, and upon the fifth of November set
upon them, and put them to flight: upon New-yeares Even they came again, found
three English going about the I Will, whom they slew.

1625
Until the fourth of August, we stood upon our guard, living upon the spoil
and did nothing. But now Captain Warner arriving again with near an hundred
people, then we fell to work and planting as before; (...)
but upon the fourth of September, came such a Hericano, as blew down all our
houses, Tobacco, and two Drums into the air we know not whither, drove two
ships on shore that were both split; all our provision thus lost, we were very
miserable, living only on what we could get in the wild woods, (...) ^^en^h
^^^^ne.
we made a small party of French and English to go aboard for provision, but
in their returning home, eight French men were slain in the harbor.

162^
Thus we continued till near June that the Tortels came in, 1627. but the
French being like to starve, sought to surprise us, and all the Cassado,
Potatos, and Tobacco we had planted, but we did prevent them. The 26. of
October, came in Captain William Smith, in the Hope-well, with some Ordnance,
shot and powder, from the Earl of Carlisle; with Captain Pelham and thirty
men, about that time also came the Plow; also a small ship of Bristow, with
Captain Warners wife, and six or seven women more. T^^ce (...)


Upon the 25. of November, the Indians set upon the French, for some injury
about their women, and slew six and twenty French men, five English, and three
Indians. Their weapons are bows and arrows; their bows are never bent, but
the string lies flat to the bow; their arrows a small reed, four or five foot
long, headed some with the poisoned sting of the tail of a Stingray, some with
iron, some with wood, but all so poisoned, The arrival of many English ^^^p^.
that if they draw but blood, the hurt is incurable.

The next day came in Captain Charles Saltonstall, a young Gentleman, son of
Sir Samuel Saltonstall, who brought with him good store of all commodities to
releeve the plantation; but by reason some Hollanders, and others, had bin
there lately before him, who carried away with them all the Tobacco, he was
forced to put away all his commodities upon trust till the next crop; in the
mean time he resolved there to stay, and employ himself and his company in
planting Tobacco, hoping thereby to make a voyage, but before he could be ready
to return for England, a Hericano h^pu^^g, his ship was split, to his great
loss, being sol^ Merc^ant and owner himself, notwithstand^ng forced to pay to
the Governor, the filt part of his Tobacco, and for fraught to England, three
pence a pound, and nine pence a pound custom, which amounts together to more
than thre^score pound in the hundred pound, to the great d^scouragement of him
and many others, that intended well to those plantations. Nevertheless he is
gone again this present year 1629. with a ship of about three hundred tons,
and very near two hundred people, with Sir William Tuffton Govenour for the
Barbados, and diverse gentlemen, and all manner of commodities fit for a
plantation.

Captain Prinne, Captain Stone, and diverse others, came in about Christmas;
so that this last year there has been about thirty sail of English,
French, and Dutch ships, and all the Indians forced out of the I Will, for they
had done much mischief amongst the French, in cutting their throats, burning
their houses, and spoiling their Tobacco; amongst: the rest Tegramund, a little
child the Kings son, his parents being slain, or fled, was by great chance
saved, and carefully brought to England by Master Merifield, who brought him
from thence and brings him up as his own children.

It lies seventeene degrees Northward of the line, The description of the lie.
about an hundred and twenty leagues from the Cape de tres Puntas, the nearest
maine land in America, it is about eight leagues in length, and four in
breadth; an Island amongst 100. Isles in the West Indies, called the Caribes,
where ordinarily all them that frequent the West Indies, refresh themselves;
those most of them are rocky, little, and mountainous, yet frequented with the
Canibals; many of them inhabited, as Saint Domingo, Saint Mattalin, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent, Granada, and Margarita, to the Southward; Northward, none
but Saint Christophers, and it but lat^ly, yet they will be ranging
Marigalanta, Guardalupo, Deceado, Monserat, Antigua, Mevis, Bernardo, Saint
Martin, and Saint Bartholomew, but the worst of the four Isles possessed by the
Spanyard, as Portorico or Iamica, is better than them all; as for Hispaniola,
and Cuba, they are worthy the title of two rich Kingdoms, the rest not
respected by the Spaniards, for want of harbors, and their better choice of
good land, and profit in the maine. But Captain Warner, having been very
familiar with Captain Painton, in the Amazon, hearing his information of this
St. Christophers; and having made a years trial, as it is said, returned for
England, joining with Master Merifield, and his friends, got Letters Pattents,
from King James, to plant and possess it. Since then, the Right Honorable the
Earl of Carlisle, has got Letters Pattents also, not only of that, but all the
Caribes Isles about it, who is now chief Lord of them, and the English his
tenants, that do possess them; over whom he appoints such Governors and
Officers, as their affairs require; and although there be a great custom
imposed upon them, considering their other charges, both to feed and maintain
themselves; yet there is there, and now a going, near upon the number of three
thousand people; where by reason of the rockinesse and thickness of the woods
in the I Will, it is difficult to pass, and such a snuff of the Sea goes on the
shore, ten may better defend, The springs, temper, and seasons.
than fifty assault. In this I Will are many springs, but yet water is scarce
again in many places; the valleys and sides of the hills very fertile, but
the mountains harsh, and of a sulphurous composition; all overgrowne with
Palmetas, Cotton trees, Lignum vitae, and diverse other sorts, but none like any
in Christendom, except those carried thither; the air very pleasant and
healthful, but exceeding ^ot, yet so tempered with cool breaths, it seems
very temperate to them, that are a little used to it; the trees being always
green, the days and nights always very near equal in length, always
Summer; only they have in their seasons great gusts and raines, and sometimes a
Hericano, which is an overgrowne, and a most violent storm.

A strange hat^hung of eg^es ^or b^^sts.
In some of those Isles, are cattle, goats, and hogs, but here none but what
they must carry; Gwanes they have, which is a little harmless beast, like a
Crokadell, or Aligator, very fat and good meat, she lays eggs in the sand, as
does the land Crabs, which live here in abundance, like Conies in Boroughs,
unless about May, when they come down to the Sea side, to lay in the sand, as
the other; and all their eggs are hatched by the heat of the Sun.

fish.
From May to September they have good store of Tortasses, that come out of the
Sea to lay their eggs in the sand, and are hatched as the other; they will lay
half a pecke at a time, and near a bushel ere they have done; and are round
like Tenis-balls: this fish is like veale in taste, the fat of a brownish
color, very good and wholesome. We seek them in the nights, where we find
them on shore, we turn them upon their backs, till the next day we fetch them
home, for they can never return themselves, being so hard a cart may go over
them; and so big, one will suffice forty or fifty men to dinner. Diverse sorts
of other fish they have in abundance, and Prawnes most great and excellent, but
none will keep sweet scarce twelve hours.

^^^ds.
The best and greatest is a Passer Flaminga, which walking at her length is as
tall as a man; Pigeons, and Turtle Doves in abundance; some Parrots, wild
Hawks, but diverse other sorts of good Sea foul, whose names we know not.

Roots.
Cassado is a root planted in the ground, of a wonderful increase, and will
make very good white bread, but the Juice rank poison, yet boiled, better than
wine; Potatos, Cabbages and Radish plenty.

Fruits
Mayes, like the Virginia wheat; we have Pine-apples, near so big as an
Hartichocke, but the most daintiest taste of any fruit; Plantnais, an
excellent, and a most increasing fruit; Apples, Prickell Pears, and Pease, but
differing all from ours. There is Pepper that grows in a little red husk, as
big as a Walnut, about four inches in length, but the long cods are small,
and much stronger, and better for use, than that from the East Indies. There is
two sorts of Cotton, the silk Cotton as in the East Indies, grows upon a
small stalk, as good for beds as down; the other upon a shrub, and bears a
cod bigger than a Walnut, full of Cotton wool: Anotto also grows upon a
shrub, with a cod like the other, and nine or ten on a bunch, full of Anotto,
very good for Dyers, though wild; Sugar Canes, not tame, 4. or 5. foot high;
also Mast^cke, and Locus trees; great and hard timber, Gourds, Musk Melons,
Water Melons, Lettice, P^rsly; all places naturally bear pursl^ine of it
self; Sope-berries like a Musket bullet, that washes as white as Soap; in the
middle of the root is a thing like a sedge, a very good f^uit, we call
Pengromes; a Pappaw is as great as an apple, colored like an Orange, and good
to eat; a small hard nut, like a hazell nut, grows close to the ground, and
like this grows on the Palmetas, which we call a Mucca nut; Mustard Seed will
grow to a great tree, but bears no seed, yet the leaves will make good
mustard; the Mancinell tree the fruit is poison; good figs in abundance; but
the Palmeta serves to build Forts and houses, the leaves to cover them, and
many other uses; the juice we draw from them, till we suck them to death, (is
held restorative) and the top for meat does serve us as Cabbage; but often we
want poudered Beef, and Bacon, and many other needful necessaries.

by Thomas Simons, Rowland Grascocke, Nicholas Burgh, and others.

CHAP. XXVI.
The first planting of the Barbados.

THe Barbados lies South-west and by South, an hundred leagues from Saint
Christophers, threescore leagues West and South from Trinidado, and some
fourscore leagues from Cape de Salinos, the next part of the maine. The first
planters brought thither by Captain Henry Powel, were forty English, with
seven or eight Negros; then he went to Disacuba in the maine, where he got
thirty Indians, men, women, and children, of the Arawacos, enemies both to the
Caribes, A ^eseripu^n^^ the l^^.
and the Spaniards. The I Will is most like a triangle, each side forty or fifty
miles square, some exceeding great rocks, but the most part exceeding good
ground; abounding with an infinite number of Swine, some Turtles, and many
sorts of excellent fish; many great ponds wherein is Ducke and Mallard;
excellent clay for pots, wood and stone for building, and a spring near the
midst of the I Will of Bitume, which is a liquid mixture like Tar, that by the
great raines falls from the tops of the mountains, it floats upon the water in
such abundance, that drying up, it remains like great rocks of pitch, and as
good as pitch for any use.

The Mancinell apple, is of a most pleasant sweet smell, Fruits and tree.
of the bigness of a Crab, but rank poison, yet the Swine and Birds have wit
to shun it; great store of exceeding great Locus trees, two or three fadome
about, of a great height, that bears a cod full of meal, will m^ke bread in
time of necessity. A tree like a Pine, bears a fruit so great as a Musk
Melon, which has always ripe fruit, flowers, or green fruit, which will
refresh two or three men, and very comfortable; Plumb trees many, the fruit
great and yellow, which but strained into water in four and twenty hours will
be very good drink; wild fig trees there are many; all those fruits do fat
the hogs, yet at some times of the year they are so lean, as carrion; Gwane
trees bear a fruit so big as a Pear, good and wholesome; Palmetaes of three
several f^rrs; Papawes, Prickle Pears good to eat or make drink; Cedar trees
very tall and great; Fusticke trees are very great and the wood yellow, good
for dying; soap berries, the kernel so big as a sloe, and good to eat;
Pumpeons in abundance; Goads so great as will make good great bottles, and cut
in two pieces good dishes and platters; many small brooks of very good water;
Ginni wheat, Cassado, Pines and Plantaines; all things we there plant do grow
exceedingly, so well as Tobacco; the corn, pease, and beans, cut but away the
stalk, young sprigs will grow, and so bear fruit for many years together,
without any more planting; the I Will is overgrowne with wod or great reeds, those
wods which are soft are exceeding light and full of pitch, and those that are
hard, are so hard and great, they are as hard to cut as stone.

Their numbers.
Master John Powell came thither the fourth of August 1627. with forty five
men, where we stayed three weeks, and then returning, left behind us about an
hundred people, and his son John Powell for his Deputy, as Governor; but
there have been so many factions amongst them, I cannot from so many variable
relations give you any certainty for their orderly Government: for all those
plenties, much misery they have endured, in regard of their weakness at their
landing, and long st^y without supplies; therefore those that go thither, it
were good they carry good provision with them; but the I Will is most healthful,
and all things planted do increase abundantly: and by this time there is, and
now a going, about the number of fifteen or sixteen hundred people.

Sir William Curtine, and Captain John Powell, were the first and chief
adventurers to the planting this fortunate I Will; which had been often frequented
by men of War to refresh themselves, and set up their shallops; being so
far remote from the rest of the Isles, they never were troubled with any of
the Indies. Harbors they have none, but exceeding good Rodes, which with a
small charge might be very well fortified; it does ebb and flow four or five
foot, and they cannot perceive there has ever been any Hericano in that I Will.

From the relations of Captain John White, and Captain Wolverstone.

CHAP. XXVII.
The first plantation of the I Will of Mevis.

BEcause I have ranged and lived amongst those Islands, what my authors cannot
tell me, The description of the I Will.
I think it no great error in helping them to tell it my self. In this
little I Will of Mevis, more than twenty years ago, I have remained a good time
together, to wod, and water and refresh my men; it is all woddy, but by the Sea
side Southward there are sands like downs, where a thousand men may quarter
themselves conveniently; but in most places the wod grows close to the water
side, at a high water mark, and in some places so thick of a soft spungy wood
like a wild fig tree, you cannot get through it, but by m^king your w^y with
hatchets, or fauchions: whether it was the dew of those trees, or of some
others, I am not certain, but many of our men became so to^mented with a
burning sw^lling all over their bodies, they seemed like se^ld^d men, and near
mad with pain; here we found a great Poole, The Man.
wherein bathing themselves, they found much ease; and fi^ding it fed with a
pleasant small stream that came out of the woods, we found the head half a
m^le within the land, distilling from a many of rocks, by which they were well
cured in two or three days. Such factions here we had, as commonly attend such
voyages, that a pair of gallows was m^de, but Captain Smith, for whom they
were intended, could not be persuaded to use them; but not any one of the
inventers, but their lives by justice fell into his power, to determine of at
his pleasure, whom with much mercy he favored, that most basely and u^justly
would have betrayed him.

The last year, 1628. Master Littleton, A gr^^t mispr^^^^^
with some others got a Pattent of the Earl of Carlisle, to plant the I Will
called the Barbados, thirty leagues Northward of Saint Christophers; which by
report of their informers, and undertakers, for the excellency and
pleasantness thereof, they called Dulcina, but when they came there, they
found it such a ba^ren rock, they left it; although they were told as much
before, they would not believe it, persuading themselves, those contradicters
would get it for themselves, was thus by their cunning opinion, the deceiver of
themselves; for seeing it lie conveniently for their purpose in a map, they had
not patience to know the goodness or badnesse, the inconvenience nor
probabilities of the quality, nor quantity; which error does predominate in
most of our homebred adventurers, that will have all things as they conceit and
would have it; and the more they are contradicted, the more hot they are; but
you may see by many examples in the general history, how difficult a matter it
is, to gather the truth from amongst so many foreign and several relations,
except you have exceeding good experience both of the Countries, people, and
their conditions; and those ignorant undertakings, have been the great^st
hind^rance of all those plantations. Their numbers.


At last because they would be absolute, they came to Mevis, a little I Will by
Saint Christophers; where they seated themselv^s, well furnished with all
necessaries, being about the number of an hundred, and since increased to an
hundred and fifty persons, whereof many were old planters of Saint
Christophers, especially Master Anthony Hinton, and Master Edward Tompson. But
because all those Isles for most part are so capable to produce, and in nature
like each other, let this discourse serve for the description of them all. Thus
much concerning those plantations, which now after all this time, loss, and
charge, should they be abandoned, suppressed, and dissolved, were most
lamentable; and surely seeing they all strive so much about this Tobacco, and
that the fraught thereof, and other charges are so great, and so open to any
enemy, by that commodity they cannot long subsist.

And it is a wonder to me to see such miracles of mischiefs in men; how
greedily they pursue to dispossess the planters of the Name of Christ Jesus,
yet say they are Christians, when so much of the world is unpossessed; yea, and
better land than they so much strive for, murdering so many Christians,
burning and spoiling so many cities, villages, and Countries, and subverting so
many kingdoms, when so much lies vast, or only possessed by a few poor
Savages, that more serve the Devil for fear, than God for love; whose
ignorance we pretend to reform, but covetousness, humors, ambition, faction,
and pride, has so many instruments, we perform very little to any purpose;
nor is there either honor or profit to be got by any that are so vile, to
undertake the subversion, or hinderance of any honest intended christian
plantation.

Now to conclude the travels and adventures of Captain Smith; (...).
how first he planted Virginia, and was set ashore with about an hundred men in
the wild woods; how he was taken prisoner by the Savages, by the King of
Pamaunke tied to a tree to be shot to death, led up and down their Country to
be showed for a wonder; fatted as he thought, for a sacrifice for their Idol,
before whom they conjured him three days, with strange dances and invocations
then brought him before their Emperor Powhatan, that commanded him to be
slain; how his daughter Pocahontas saved his life, returned him to James
town, releeved him and his famished company, which was but eight and thirty to
possess those large dominions; how he discovered all the several nations,
upon the rivers falling into the Bay of Chisapeacke; stung near to death with
a most poisoned tail of a fish called Stingray: how Powhatan out of his
Country took the kings of Pamaunke and Paspahegh prisoners, forced thirty nine
of those kings to pay him contribution, subjected all the Savages: how Smith
was blown up with gunpowder, and returned for England to be cured.

Also how he brought our new England to the subjection of the kingdom of
great Britain; his fights with the Pirates, left alone amongst a many French
men of War, and his ship ran from him; his Sea Fights for the French against
the Spaniards; their bad usage of him; how in France in a little boat he
escaped them; was adrift all such a stormy night at Sea by himself, when
thirteen French Ships were split, or driven on shore by the I Will of Ree, the
general and most of his men drowned, when God to whom be all honor and
praise, brought him safe on shore to all their admirations that escaped; you
may read at large in his general history of Virginia, the Summer Isles, and New
England.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The bad life, qualities and conditions of Pirates; and how they taught the
Turks and Moors to become men of war.

AS in all lands where there are many people, there are some thieves, so in all
Seas much frequented, there are some pirates; the most ancient within the memory
of threescore years was one Callis, who most refreshed himself upon the Coast
of Wales; Clinton and Pursser his companions, who grew famous, till Queen
Elizabeth of blessed memory, hanged them at Wapping; Flemming was as expert and
as much sought for as they, yet such a friend to his Country, that discovering
the Spanish Armado, he voluntarily came to Plymouth, yielded himself freely to
my Lord Admiral, and gave him notice of the Spaniards coming; which good
warning came so happily and unexpectedly, that he had his pardon, and a good
reward; some few Pirates there then remained; notwithstanding it is incredible
how many great and rich pr^zes the little barques of the West Country daily
brought home, in regard of their small charge; The d^s^cul^es of a great Navy.
for there are so many difficulties in a great N^vy, by wind and weather,
victual, sickness, losing and finding one another, they seldom defray half
the charge: but for the grace, state, and defense of the Coast and narrow Seas,
a great Navy is most necessary, but not to attempt any far voyage, except
there be such a competent stock, they want not wherewith to furnish and supply
all things with expedition; but to the purpose.

After the death of our most gracious Queen Elizabeth, What ocasioneth Pirates.
of blessed memory, our Royal King James, who from his infancy had reigned in
peace with all Nations; had no employment for those men of war, so that those
that were rich rested with that they had; those that were poor and had nothing
but from hand to mouth, turned Pirates; some, because they became slighted of
those for whom they had got much wealth; some, for that they could nor get
their due; some, that had lived bravely, would not abase themselves to poverty;
some vainly, only to get a name; others for revenge, covetousness, or as ill;
and as they found themselves more and more oppressed, their passions increasing
with discontent, made them turn Pirates.

Now because they grew hateful to all Christian Princes, Their chief
randevouz.
they retired to Barbary, where although there be not many good Harbors, but
Tunis, Argier, Sally, Mamora, and Tituane, there are many convenient Rodes, or
the open Sea, which is their chief Lordship: For their best harbors
Massalqueber, the towns of Oran, Mellila, Tanger, and Cuta, within the
Streights, are possessed by the Spaniards; without the Streights they have also
Arzella, and Mazagan; Mamora likewise they have lately taken, and fortified.
Ward a poor English sailer, and Dansker a Dutchman, made first here their
Marts, when the Moors knew scarce how to sail a ship; Bishop was Ancient, and
did little hurt; but Easton got so much, as made himself a Marquess in Savoy;
and Ward lived like a Bashaw in Barbary; those were the first that taught the
Moors to be men of war. Gennings, Harris, Tompson, and diverse others, were
taken in Ireland, a Coast they much frequented, and died at Wapping. Hewes,
Bough, Smith, Walsingam, Ellis, Collins, Sawkwell, Wollistone, Barrow, Wilson,
Sayres, and diverse others, all these were Captains amongst the Pirates, whom
King James mercifully pardoned; and was it not strange, a few of these should
command the Seas. Notwithstanding the Malteses, the Pope, Florentines,
Genoeses, French, Dutch, and English, Galleys, and Men of War, they would rob
before their faces, and even at their own Ports, yet seldom more than three,
four, five or six in a Fleet: many times they had very good ships, and well
manned, Their conditions.
but commonly in such factions amongst themselves, and so riotous, quarrellous,
treacherous, blasphemous, and villainous, it is more than a wonder they could so
long continue, to do so much mischief; and all they got, they basely consumed
it amongst Jews, Turks, Moors, and whores.

The best was, they would seldom go to Sea, so long as they could possibly
live on shore, being comp^led of English, French, Dutch, and Moors, (but very
few Spaniards, or Italians) commonly running one from another, till they became
so disjoynted, disordered, debawched, and miserable, that the Turks and Moors
began to command them as slaves, and force them to instruct them in their
best skill, which many an accursed runnagado, or Christian turned Turk did,
till they have made those Sally men, or Moors of Barbary so powerful as they
be, R^nna^^d^.
to the terror of all the Straights, and many times they take purchase in the
maine Ocean, yea sometimes even in the narrow Seas in England, and those are
the most cruel villains in Turkey, or Barbary; whose natives are very noble,
and of good natures, in comparison of them.

Advertisement for wild heads.
To conclude, the misery of a Pirate (although many are as sufficient Seamen as
any) yet in regard of his superflu^ty, you shall find it such, that any wise
man would rather live amongst wild beasts, than them; therefore let all
unadvised persons take heed, how they entertain that quality; and I could wish
Merchants, Gentlemen, and all setters forth of ships, not to be sparing of a
competent pay, nor true payment; for neither Sould^ers nor Seamen can live
without means, but necessity will force them to steal; and when they are once
entered into that trade, they are hardly reclaimed. Those titles of Seamen and
Soldiers, have been most worthily honored and esteemed, but now regarded for
most part, but as the scumme of the world; regaine therefore your wonted
reputations, and endeavor rather to adventure to those fair plantations of our
English Nation; which however in the beginning were scorned and contemned, yet
now you see how many rich and gallant people come from thence, who went thither
as poor as any Soldier or Sailer, and gets more in one year, than you by
Piracie in seven. I entreat you therefore to consider, how many thousands
yearly go thither; also how many Ships and Sailers are employed to transport
them, and what custom they yearly pay to our most Royal King Charles, whose
prosperity and his Kingdoms good, I humbly beseech the immortal God ever to
preserve and increase.

FINIS.
Part of the Travels of Capt JOHN SMITH amongst TVRKES, TARTARS and others
extracted out of the HISTORY by JOHN PAIN
Capt. SMITH thrown into the Sea, got safe to Shoree, and was relieved Chap 2

How he relieved OLVMPAGH by a stratagem of Lights Chap. 4

The Siege of REGAL in Transiluania Chap. 7

His three single Combats Chap. 7. His Encounter with TVRBASHAW Chap. 7.

His Combat with GRVALGO. Capt of three hundred horsemen. Chap. 7.

How he slew BONNY: MVLGRO. Chap. 7.

Capt SMITH led Captive to the BASHAW of NALBRITS in TARTARIA. Chap. 12.

Three TVRKS heads in a banner given him for Arms. Chap. ^. How he was
presented to Prince SIGISMVNDVS. Chap. 8.

Capt SMITH Kills the BASHAW of Nalbrits and on his horse escapes. Chap. 17.




